<doc id="211584" wikidata="Q296718" url="?curid=211584" title="Lázaro Cárdenas">
<text>Lázaro Cárdenas del Río (; 21 May 1895 – 19 October 1970) was a Mexican army officer and politician who served as president of Mexico from 1934 to 1940. Previously, he served as a general in the Constitutional Army during the Mexican Revolution and as Governor of Michoacán and President of the Institutional Revolutionary Party. He later served as the Secretary of National Defence. During his presidency, which is considered the end of the Maximato, he implemented massive land reform programs, led the expropriation of the country&#x27;s oil industry, and implemented many key social reforms.

Born in Jiquilpan, Michoacán, to a working-class family, Cárdenas joined the Mexican Revolution and became a general in the Constitutionalist Army. Although he was not from the state of Sonora, whose revolutionary generals dominated Mexican politics in the 1920s, Cárdenas was hand-picked by Plutarco Elías Calles, Sonoran general and former president of Mexico, as a presidential candidate and won in the 1934 general election.

After founding the National Revolutionary Party (PNR) in the wake of the assassination of president-elect Álvaro Obregón, Plutarco Elías Calles had unofficially remained in power during the Maximato (1928–1934) and expected to maintain that role when Cárdenas took office. Cárdenas, however, out-maneuvered him politically and forced Calles into exile. He established the structure of the National Revolutionary Party, eventually renamed the Party of the Mexican Revolution (PRM), on the sectoral representation of peasant leagues, labor union confederations, and the Mexican Army. Cárdenas&#x27;s incorporation of the army into the party structure was a deliberate move to diminish the power of the military and prevent their intervention in politics through coups d&#x27;état.

A left-wing economic nationalist, Cárdenas led the expropriation of the Mexican oil industry and the creation of the state-owned oil company Pemex in 1938. He implemented large-scale land reform programs in Mexico, redistributing large estates to smallholders in lands termed &quot;ejidos&quot;. He created the National Polytechnic Institute (IPN) and El Colegio de México (Colmex). His foreign policy supported and gave asylum to Republicans during the Spanish Civil War. An achievement of Cárdenas was his complete surrender of power in December 1940 to his successor, Manuel Ávila Camacho, who was a political moderate without a distinguished military record.

Cárdenas has been praised as &quot;the greatest constructive radical of the Mexican Revolution&quot;, for implementing its ideals, but has also been criticized as an &quot;authoritarian populist&quot;. He was the first Mexican president to serve for a &quot;sexenio,&quot; a practice that continues today. According to numerous opinion polls and analysts, Cárdenas is the most popular Mexican president of the 20th century.

== Early life and career ==
Lázaro Cárdenas del Río was born on 21 May 1895, one of eight children in a lower-middle-class family in the village of Jiquilpan, Michoacán, where his father owned a billiard hall. His family was of prominent Purépecha ancestry. After the death of his father, from the age of 16, Cárdenas supported his family (including his mother and seven younger siblings). By the time he reached 18, he had worked as a tax collector, a printer&#x27;s devil, and a jail keeper. Although he left school when he was eleven, he used every opportunity to educate himself and read widely throughout his life, especially works of history.

=== Military career ===
Cárdenas set his sights on becoming a teacher but was drawn into the military during the Mexican Revolution after Victoriano Huerta overthrew President Francisco Madero in February 1913, although Michoacán was far from the revolutionary action that had brought Madero to the Mexican presidency. After Huerta&#x27;s coup and Madero&#x27;s assassination, Cárdenas joined a group of Zapatistas, but Huerta&#x27;s forces scattered the group, where Cárdenas had served as captain and paymaster. Given that revolutionary forces were voluntary organizations, his position of leadership points to his skills and his being a paymaster to the perception that he would be honest in financial matters. Both characteristics followed him through his subsequent career. He escaped the Federal forces in Michoacán and moved north, where he served initially with Álvaro Obregón, then Pancho Villa, and after 1915 when Villa was defeated by Obregón to Plutarco Elías Calles, who served Constitutionalist leader Venustiano Carranza. Although Cárdenas was from the southern state of Michoacán, his key experiences in the Revolution were with Constitutionalist northerners, whose faction won. In particular, he served under Calles, who tasked him with military operations against Yaqui Indians and against Zapatistas in Michoacán and Jalisco, during which time he rose to a field command as general. In 1920, after Carranza was overthrown by northern generals, Cárdenas was given the rank of brigadier general at the age of 25. Cárdenas was appointed provisional governor of his home state of Michoacán under the brief presidency of Adolfo de la Huerta.

===Service under President Calles===
Cárdenas was a political protégé of Calles, but his ideological mentor was revolutionary General Francisco J. Múgica, a strongly anticlerical, secular socialist. President Calles appointed Cárdenas Chief of Military Operations in the Huasteca, an oil-producing region on the Gulf Coast. Cárdenas saw first-hand the operations of foreign oil companies. In the Huasteca, U.S. oil companies extracted oil, avoided taxes owed to the Mexican government, and treated the region as “conquered territory.” Múgica also was posted to the Huasteca and he and Cárdenas became close. During their time in the Huasteca, Múgica told Cárdenas that “socialism [is] the appropriate doctrine for resolving conflicts in Mexico.”

=== Governor of Michoacán, 1928–1932 ===
Cárdenas was appointed governor of his home state of Michoacán in 1928, which was undergoing the political conflict between state and Church, known as the Cristero War. His ideological mentor Múgica had previously served as the state&#x27;s governor and had attempted to counter the power of the Catholic Church in Mexico through laws. He mobilized groups to support his positions, creating “political shock troops,” consisting of public school teachers and members of a disbanded agrarian league, forming the &quot;Confederación Revolucionaria Michoacana del Trabajo&quot;, under the slogan of “Union, Land, Work.” The organization was funded by the state government, although not listed as an official expenditure. It became the single-most powerful organization representing both workers and peasants. Mobilizing worker and peasant support and controlling the organization to which they belonged became the model for Cárdenas when he became president.

====Land reform====
As governor, Cárdenas also prioritized land reform at a time when President Calles was disillusioned by the program. He expropriated haciendas and created &quot;ejidos&quot;, collectively held, state-controlled landholdings. Ejiditarios, members of the ejido, worked individual plots of land but did not hold title to it as private property. Opposition to the program came from estate owners (&quot;hacendados&quot;), the clergy, and in some cases, tenant farmers, but Cárdenas continued land reform programs in his state.

During his four years as governor, Cárdenas initiated a modest re-distribution of land at the state level, encouraged the growth of peasant and labor organizations, and improved education at a time when it was neglected by the federal government. Cárdenas ensured teachers were paid on time, personally inspected schools, and opened one hundred new rural schools. Due to his grassroots style of governing, Cárdenas made important policy decisions based on direct information received from the public rather than on the advice of his confidants.

====Promotion of tourism, art, and indigenous culture====

During his term as governor, Cárdenas sought to bring peace to the state, unite its population divided by the on-going Cristero War, and make Michoacán, especially the historic town of Pátzcuaro into a tourist destination. Once he was president of Mexico, he continued to devote government funding to the project. Cárdenas built a house in Pátzcuaro when he became governor of the state, naming it &quot;La Quinta Eréndira,&quot; after the Purépecha princess, who has been identified as Mexico&#x27;s first anticolonial heroine for her resistance to the Spanish conquest, and a contrasting figure to Malinche, Cortés&#x27;s cultural translator. Eréndira became a popular historical figure under Cárdenas. At his estate, he commissioned murals for the house, which are now lost, but it is known from historical sources that they had indigenous themes, particularly the rise and fall of the Purépecha Empire at the time of the Spanish conquest. The murals and the texts &quot;appropriate national historical narratives in order to supplant the national myths and locate Mexico&#x27;s ideal foundations in Michoacán.&quot;

== Presidential election of 1934 ==

Calles tapped Cárdenas to be the party&#x27;s president. Of the revolutionary generals, Cárdenas was considered &quot;honest, able, anti-clerical, and politically astute,&quot; He had come from a poor and marginal state of Mexico, but had risen to political prominence by his military skills on the battlefield but importantly he had chosen the correct side of decisive splits since 1913. When he was chosen as the presidential candidate in 1934, no one expected him to be anything other than being loyal to Calles, the &quot;Jefe Máximo&quot;, and power behind the presidency since 1929.

As the PNR&#x27;s candidate, Cárdenas&#x27;s election was a foregone conclusion. It was politically impossible for his patron, Calles, to serve as president again, but he continued to dominate Mexico after his presidency (1924–28) through &quot;puppet administrations&quot; in a period known as the Maximato. After two of his hand-picked men held office, the PNR balked in 1932 at supporting his first choice, Manuel Pérez Treviño. Instead, they selected Cárdenas as the presidential candidate. Calles agreed, believing he could control Cárdenas as he had controlled his predecessors. Not only had Cárdenas been associated with Calles for two decades, but he had prospered politically with Calles&#x27; patronage. Cárdenas resigned as secretary of war and the navy on May 15, 1933, and he accepted the PNR&#x27;s nomination on June 5.

=== Six-Year Plan and presidential campaign ===
Cárdenas ran on the Six Year Plan for social and political reform that the party drafted under Calles&#x27;s direction. Such a multiyear program was patterned after the just-completed Five Year Plan of the Soviet Union. The Six-Year Plan (to span the presidential term 1934–40) was a patchwork of proposals from a variety of participants, but the driving force behind it was Calles, who had given a speech in May 1933, saying that the &quot;Mexican Revolution had failed in most of its important objectives,&quot; and that a plan needed to implement its objectives. Interim President Abelardo L. Rodríguez did not get his cabinet&#x27;s approval for the plan in 1933 so Calles&#x27;s next move was to present it in draft form to the party convention. &quot;Rather than a blueprint, the Six-Year Plan was a sales prospectus,&quot; and a &quot;hopeless jumble&quot; filled with compromises and contradictions, as well as utopian aspirations. But the direction of the plan was toward renewed reform.

The plan called for
*destruction of the hacienda economy and creation of a collective system of &quot;ejidos&quot; (common lands) under government control;
*modern secular schools and eradication of the influence of the Catholic Church; and
*workers&#x27; cooperatives to oppose the excesses of industrial capitalism.

Assured of the backing of the powerful Calles and a presidential victory, Cárdenas took the opportunity to actively campaign in many parts of Mexico rather than remaining in Mexico City. His 25,000-kilometer campaign accomplished several things, including making direct contact with regions and constituents who had never seen a presidential candidate before and thus building Cárdenas a personal power base. The campaign also allowed him to refine and articulate for popular consumption what he considered the important elements of the Six Year Plan. On the campaign trail, he acted more like someone already in office than a candidate, settling disputes between groups. He reached out to Mexican workers, as well as peasants, to whom he promised land reform. Cárdenas promised indigenous peoples schools and educational opportunities, and urged them to join with workers against exploitative practices.

As expected, Cárdenas won handily, officially winning over 98 percent of the vote, or 2,268,507 votes.

== Presidency, 1934–1940 ==
=== Presidential style ===

Cárdenas was inaugurated on December 1, 1934. His first action after taking office was to have his presidential salary cut in half. He became the first occupant of the official presidential residence of Los Pinos, seized from the Martínez del Río family. He had the previous residence, the ostentatious Chapultepec Castle, turned into the National Museum of History. In a move that struck at the financial interests of his patron Calles&#x27;s cronies, Cárdenas closed down their gambling casinos and brothels, where &quot;prominent Callistas had invested their profits from bribery and industrial activities.&quot; Cárdenas did not use armored cars or bodyguards to protect himself. In the presidential campaign of 1934, he traveled through much of the rural areas by auto and horseback, accompanied only by Rafael M. Pedrajo, a chauffeur and an aide-de-camp. His fearlessness generated widespread respect for Cárdenas, who had demonstrated his bravery and leadership as a revolutionary general.

===Cabinet===
Cárdenas&#x27;s cabinet when he was first in office included Calles family members, his oldest son Rodolfo at the Secretariat of Communications and Public Works (1934–1935); Aarón Sáenz Garza, the brother-in-law of Calles&#x27;s second son, Plutarco Jr. (&quot;Aco&quot;), was appointed the administrator for Mexico City (1934–1935), a cabinet-level position. Others with loyalty to Calles were radical Tomás Garrido Canabal at the Secretariat of Agriculture and Development (1934–1935); Marxist Narciso Bassols held the post of Secretary of Finance and Public Credit (1934–1935); Emilio Portes Gil, who had been interim president of Mexico following the assassination of Obregón but not chosen as the PNR presidential candidate in 1929, held the position of Foreign Secretary (1934–1935). Cárdenas chose his comrade-in-arms and mentor General Francisco José Múgica as Secretary of the National Economy (1934–1935). As Cárdenas began to chart his course and outflank Calles politically, he replaced Calles loyalists in 1935 with his own men.

===Cárdenas and the military===

As a revolutionary general, Cárdenas followed in the tradition of his immediate predecessors in the presidency who had standing as military leaders but sought to curb the power of the military. Obregón and Calles sought to downsize and professionalize the Mexican military and make it subordinate to the civilian government. Cárdenas&#x27;s election had not triggered revolts by disgruntled military men with ambitions to the presidency, as had happened in 1923, 1928, and 1929. Much of the military remained loyal to Calles, but Cárdenas had supporters among the army leadership as well. Cárdenas sought to serve as president in his own right, not be a puppet of Calles, and to do that he needed to broaden his base of support. Cárdenas sought to arm the peasantry as a counterpoise to the army, a move that disturbed the more conservative generals. Cárdenas cultivated the loyalty of the junior officer corps, providing better housing, pensions, and schooling for their children.

=== Cárdenas and the Catholic Church ===
Cárdenas repealed the Calles Law soon after he became president in 1934. Cárdenas earned respect from Pope Pius XI and had a close friendship with Mexican Archbishop Luis María Martínez, a major figure in Mexico&#x27;s Catholic Church who successfully persuaded Mexicans to obey the government&#x27;s laws peacefully. However, he also implemented educational reforms, particularly socialist education and the elimination of religious schooling. Nevertheless, the Cárdenas administration bridged a gap between church and state, developed a working and friendly relationship with the church, and helped subdue the bitter animosity between Catholics and leftists that had lingered since the Mexican Revolution, with the Holy See eventually supporting Cárdenas in comparison to condemning the militant atheism of Calles. The attempts to make peace with the Catholic Church came in spite of the fact that Cardenas himself was an atheist who even once reportedly said &quot;Man should not put his hope in the supernatural. Every moment spent on ones knees is a moment stolen from humanity.&quot;

=== Land reform and the peasantry===

During Cárdenas&#x27; presidency, the government enacted land reform that was &quot;sweeping, rapid, and, in some respects, innovative&quot;. He redistributed large commercial haciendas, some 180,000 km2 of land to peasants. With the powers of Article 27 of the Mexican constitution, he created agrarian collectives, or ejidos, which in early twentieth-century Mexico were an atypical form of landholding. Two high-profile regions of expropriation for Cárdenas&#x27;s agrarian reform were in the productive cotton-growing region in northern Mexico, known as La Laguna, and in Yucatán, where the economy was dominated by henequen production. Other areas that saw significant land reform were Baja California and Sonora in northern Mexico, his home state of Michoacán and Chiapas in southern Mexico.
In 1937, Cárdenas invited Andrés Molina Enríquez, intellectual father of Article 27 of the 1917 Constitution, to accompany him to Yucatán to implement the land reform, even though Molina Enríquez was not a big supporter of the collective ejido system. Although he could not go due to ill health, he defended Cárdenas&#x27;s action against Luis Cabrera, who argued that the Ejidal Bank that Cárdenas established when he embarked on his sweeping redistribution of land was, in fact, making the Mexican state the new hacienda owner. For Molina Enríquez, the Yucatecan henequen plantations were an &quot;evil legacy&quot; and &quot;hellholes&quot; for the Maya. As a lifelong supporter of land reform, Molina Enríquez&#x27;s support of Cárdenas&#x27;s &quot;glorious crusade&quot; was important.

Cárdenas knew that peasant support was important and as a presidential candidate in 1933, he reached out to an autonomous peasant organization, the &quot;Liga Nacional Campesina&quot; (National Peasant League) and promised to integrate it into the party structure. The Liga split over this question, but one element was integrated into the Partido Nacional Revolucionario. Cárdenas expanded the peasant league&#x27;s base in 1938 into the Confederación Nacional Campesina (CNC). Cárdenas &quot;believed that an organized peasantry would represent a political force capable of confronting the established landholding elite, as well as providing a critical voting block for the new Mexican state.&quot; Scholars differ as to Cárdenas&#x27;s intent for the CNC, with some viewing it as an autonomous organization that would advocate for peasants regarding land tenure, rural projects, and peasant political interests, while others see the CNC as in patron-client relationship with the state, restricting its autonomy. The CNC was created with the idea of &quot;peasant unification&quot; and was controlled by the government. Peasants&#x27; rights were acknowledged, but peasants were to be responsible allies of the political regime. The radical Confederation of Mexican Workers (CTM) and the Mexican Communist Party (PCM) sought to organize peasants, but Cárdenas asserted the government&#x27;s right to do that since it was in charge of land reform and warned that their attempting to organize the peasantry would sow dissension.

Cárdenas further strengthened the government&#x27;s role by creating rural militias or reserves, which armed some 60,000 peasants by 1940, which were under the control of the army. The armed peasantry helped promote political stability against regional strongmen (caudillos). They could ensure that government land reform was accomplished. Peasant reserves could protect recipients of reform against estate owners and break rural strikes that threatened government control.

Agrarian reform took place in a patchwork fashion with uneven results. Over years, many regions had experienced peasant mobilization in the face of repression and &quot;low intensity agrarian warfare.&quot; The peasant movement in Morelos had mobilized before the Mexican Revolution and had success under Emiliano Zapata&#x27;s leadership extinguished the hacienda system in that state. In Cárdenas&#x27;s agrarian reform, with the revolutionary regime consolidated and agrarian problems still unresolved, the president courted mobilized agraristas, who now found the state attentive to their issue. Land reform, with some exceptions such as in Yucatán, took place in areas of previous mobilization. Peasants themselves pushed for agrarian reform and to the extent it was accomplished, they were integral agents not merely the recipients of top-down state largesse. However, the peasantry was under the control of the national government with no outlet for independent organization or the formation of alliances with Mexican urban workers.

=== Labor ===

The other key sector of reform was industrial labor. Article 123 of the 1917 Constitution had empowered workers in an unprecedented way, guaranteeing human rights such as the minimum wage, an eight-hour workday and the right to strike and form trade unions, but in a more comprehensive fashion, Article 123 signaled that the Mexican state was firmly on the side of workers. A labor organization already existed when Cárdenas took office, the CROM union of Luis Morones. Morones was forced out of his cabinet post in Calles&#x27;s government and the CROM declined in power and influence, with major defections of Mexico City unions, one of which was led by socialist Vicente Lombardo Toledano. Cárdenas promoted Toledano&#x27;s &quot;purified&quot; Confederation of Mexican Workers, which evolved into the Mexican Confederation of Workers or CTM. The CTM&#x27;s alliance with Cárdenas was tactical and conditional, seeing their interests being forwarded by Cárdenas, but not controlled by him. As with the agrarian sector with mobilized peasants, mobilized and organized workers had long agitated and fought for their interests. Article 123 of the Constitution was a tangible result of their participation in the Mexican Revolution on the Constitutionalist side. In fact, workers organized by the Casa del Obrero Mundial, a radical labor organization, fought in the Red Battalions against the peasant revolutionaries led by Emiliano Zapata. Lombardo Toledano and the CTM supported Cárdenas&#x27;s exile of Calles and in the same stroke Cárdenas also exiled CROM&#x27;s discredited leader, Luis Napoleón Morones.

Cárdenas nationalized the railway system creating the Ferrocarriles Nacionales de México in 1938 and put under a &quot;workers&#x27; administration.&quot; His most sweeping nationalization was that of the petroleum industry in 1938.

Various measures affecting labor were also introduced under Cárdenas. A decree was issued “giving binding force throughout the Republic to a collective agreement which establishes a maximum working week of 48 hours for persons employed in sugar-cane plantations, sugar factories (including by-products), and all similar undertakings.” In addition, the Factory Inspection Service was instructed by the Federal authorities “to make arrangements to secure regular and effective supervision of working hours and to prevent infringements of the 8-hour day.” Under an Act of 20 February 1936 that concerned the payment of wages for the weekly rest day, the State authorities “are free to allow for the special circumstances and needs of each locality when promulgating administrative regulations.” An enquiry made by the Department of Labour into silicosis in mines and byssinosis in the cotton industry “led to the adoption of measures to ensure notification and compensation of these diseases.”Regulations dealing with general industrial hygiene were issued on the 6th of June 1936. Dust-exhaust apparatus and respirators “were made compulsory for factories using certain raw materials (wool, padding, etc.), and the Federal Department of Public Health issued regulations for the protection of the health of workers in the woollen industry.” The Industrial Hygiene Regulations of 6 June 1936 “make it compulsory for factories to establish a medical service.” Regulations for the inspection of boilers were laid down on 30 August 1936, while regulations of 25 June 1936 “concerning industrial hygiene provide that the Department of Health must determine the cases in which industrial undertakings are to establish crêches and day nurseries for the children of their workers.” The Government also undertook to give effect to Article 123 of the Constitution, which provides “that all agricultural, industrial and mining undertakings shall supply comfortable and healthy living accommodation for their employees.” Under an Act of 27 September 1938, which was promulgated on 5 December 1938, “laying down the Federal Civil Servants&#x27; Statute, hours of work and other conditions of employment are regulated for all Federal civil servants other than those employed in a confidential capacity.” On 21 March 1939, regulations for a maritime inspection service were promulgated.

=== Education ===

During the Calles Maximato, Mexican education policies were directed at curtailing the cultural influence of the Catholic Church by introducing sex education and leftist ideology via socialist education, and generally aiming to create a national civic culture. Cárdenas as a presidential candidate, under the patronage of fierce anticlerical Calles, was in favor of such policies. The opposition to socialist education by the Catholic Church as an institution and rural Catholics in such strongholds as Michoacán, Jalisco, and Durango saw the revival of armed peasant opposition, sometimes known as the Second Cristiada. The extent of the opposition was significant and Cárdenas chose to step back from implementing the radical educational policies, particularly as he became engaged with undermining Calles&#x27;s power. Cárdenas gained support from the Catholic Church when he distanced himself from anticlerical policies.

An important addition to higher education in Mexico was when Cárdenas established the &quot;Instituto Politécnico Nacional&quot; (IPN), a technical university in Mexico City, in the wake of the 1938 oil expropriation to train engineers and scientists.

A basic Act on Education, which contained detailed provisions on technical and professional training and education, was promulgated on 30 December 1939.

=== Indigenismo ===

Cárdenas created the new cabinet-level Department of Indigenous Affairs (&quot;Departamento de Asuntos Indígenas&quot;) in 1936, with Graciano Sánchez, an &quot;agrarista&quot; leader in charge. After a controversy at the DAI, Sánchez was replaced by a scholar, Prof. Luis Chávez Orozco. Cárdenas was influenced by an advocate of indigenismo, Moisés Sáenz, who earned a doctorate in education from Columbia University and had held a position in the Calles administration in the Secretariat of Public Education (SEP). Although initially an assimilationist for Mexico&#x27;s indigenous, he shifted his perspective after a period of residence in a Purépecha village, which he published as &quot;Carapan: Bosquejo de una experiencia&quot;. He came to see indigenous culture as having value. Sáenz advocated for educational and economic reforms that would better the indigenous, and this became the aim of the department Cárdenas created.

The official 1940 government report on the Cárdenas administration states that “the indigenous problem is one of the most serious that the revolutionary government has had to confront.” The aim of the department was to study fundamental problems concerning Mexico&#x27;s indigenous, particularly economic and social conditions, and then propose measures to the executive power for coordinated action to promote and manage measures considered to be in the interests of centers of indigenous populations. Most indigenous people were found in Veracruz, Oaxaca, Chiapas, and Yucatán, according to the 1930 national census. In 1936 and 1937, the department had approximately 100 employees and a budget of $750,000 pesos, but as with other aspects of the Cárdenas regime, 1938 marked a significant increase personnel and budget; 350 employees in 1938 and a budget of $2.77 million pesos and in 1939, the high point in the department&#x27;s budget, there were 850 employees with a budget of $3.75 million pesos. In 1940, the budget remained robust at $3 million pesos, with 650 employees.

The function of the department was primarily economic and educational. Specifically it was tasked with defending indigenous villages and communities, holders of ejidos (&quot;ejidatarios&quot;) and indigenous citizens from persecution and abuse that could be committed by any type of authority. It defended ejido officials (&quot;comisariados ejidales&quot;) and agricultural cooperatives. The goals that the department worked toward were primarily economic and education, with cultural actions second. Social measures and public health/sanitation were less important in terms of action for this department.

The department promoted a series of national indigenous congresses, bringing together different indigenous groups to meet as indigenous and discuss common issues. The government&#x27;s aim in doing this was to have them move in concert toward the “integral liberation” (&quot;liberación integral&quot;), with their rights respected by the primary goal was to incorporate indigenous into the larger, national population on an equal basis. Initially in 1936 and 1937, there was one annual conference. The first one drew approximately 300 pueblos, while the second only 75. In 1938, there were two conferences with 950 pueblos represented. The last two years of the Cárdenas &quot;sexenio&quot; there were two congresses each year, but sparser attendance at around 200 pueblos each. The government attempted to engage the active participation of the indigenous pueblos, seeing that such engagement was the key to success, but the fall-off in the last two years indicates decreased mobilization. The department published 12 edited books with a total publication run of 350 as well as 170 tape recorded materials in indigenous languages.

In February 1940, the department established a separate medical/sanitary section with 4 clinics in Chihuahua and one in Sonora, but the largest number were in central in southern Mexico.

In 1940, the first Interamerican Indigenista Congress met in Pátzcuaro, Michoacán, with Cárdenas giving a plenary address to the participants.

=== Women&#x27;s suffrage ===
Cárdenas had pushed for women&#x27;s suffrage in Mexico, responding to the pressure from women activists and from the political climate that emphasized equality of citizens. Mexico was not alone in Latin America in not enfranchising women, but in 1932, both Brazil and Uruguay had extended suffrage to women, and Ecuador had also done so. Women had made a significant contribution to the Mexican Revolution, but had not made gains in the postrevolutionary phase. Women who were members of the National Peasants Confederation (&quot;Confederación Nacional Campesina&quot;) or the Confederation of Mexican Workers (&quot;Confederación de Trabajadores Mexicanos&quot;) were, by virtue of their membership umbrella organizations, also members of Cárdenas&#x27;s reorganized party, the Party of the Mexican Revolution or PRM, done in 1938. In practice, however, women were marginalized from power. Women could not stand for national or local governmental elections or vote. The Constitution of 1917 did not explicitly address women&#x27;s rights and so to enfranchise women required a constitutional amendment. The amendment itself was simple and brief, specifying that &quot;mexicanos&quot; referred to both women and men.

Many PNR congressmen and senators gave supportive speeches for the amendment, but there was opposition. Cárdenas&#x27;s impending reorganization of the party, which took place in 1938, was a factor in changing some opponents into supporters. In the end, it passed unanimously and was sent to the states to ratify it. Despite the speeches and the ratifications, opponents used a loophole to block the amendment&#x27;s implementation by refusing to publish notice of the change in the &quot;Diario official&quot;. Skeptics of women&#x27;s suffrage were suspicious that conservative Catholic women would take instructions on voting from priests and so undermine the progressive gains of the Revolution. Conservative Catholic women had mobilized during the church-state conflict of the late 1920s, the Cristero Rebellion, giving material aid to Cristero armies, and even forming a secret society, Feminine Brigades of St. Joan of Arc.

The concern about Mexican women taking advice from priests on voting had some foundation in the example of the leftist Spanish Republic of the 1930s. Many Spanish women indeed supported the position of the Catholic Church which was opposed to the republic&#x27;s anticlerical policies. The Spanish Civil War (1936–1939) was for Mexico a cautionary tale, the failure of a leftist regime after a military coup.

Cárdenas was unable to overcome opposition to women&#x27;s suffrage although he personally was committed to the cause. Women did not get the vote in Mexico until 1953, when the Mexican government was pursuing economic policies friendlier to business and there was a modus vivendi with the Catholic Church in Mexico.
=== Legalization of drugs ===
During the last years of his mandate, Cárdenas impulsed groundbreaking drug policy reforms in the country, assisted by Leopoldo Salazar Viniegra who was head of the Drugs authority in the Department of Public Health (departamento de salubridad pública). Salazar&#x27;s scientific investigations and writings served as the intellectual foundation for Lázaro Cárdenas&#x27; Reglamento Federal de Toxicomanías (), signed into law on January 5, 1940

The law decriminalized sales and purchases of small quantities of drugs, eliminating former punishments for drug offenses. In addition, drug users jailed for small criminal drug offenses were released. The law also in effect created a legal way of access to psychoactive drugs for non-medical purposes, and attempted to guarantee medical attention to people addicted to drugs by authorizing medical professionals to prescribe and administer narcotic drugs. The government allocated funds to create a special budget for clinics or dispensaries to open up in order to effectively treat patients by administering controlled doses of low-cost, safe, quality drugs. Patients were required to officially register with clinics in order to receive treatment. Around six clinics were set up around Mexico City. Around 200 people—as many as 1,000, according to some estimates—attended the clinics daily. The state-controlled monopoly on drugs made it so they could provide high quality drugs at a low cost, and much lower and safer than what was sold on the streets of Mexico City at the time.

The law was in effect for about 5 months when, on July 3, 1940, the Mexican government repealed the Reglamento in a decree published in the &quot;Diario Oficial de la Federación&quot;. The formal government explanation attributed this decision to a shortage of resources and the inability to purchase drugs from Europe due to World War II. Not mentioned in the official declaration were the increasing economic and political pressures from the U.S. to repeal the law.

=== Partido de la Revolución Mexicana ===
The Partido de la Revolución Mexicana (PRM) came into being on March 30, 1938, after the party founded in 1929 by Calles, the Partido Nacional Revolucionario (PNR), was dissolved. Cárdenas&#x27;s PRM was reorganized again in 1946 as the Institutional Revolutionary Party. Calles founded the PNR in the wake of President-elect Obregón&#x27;s assassination in order to create some way for revolutionary leaders to maintain order and power. Calles could not be re-elected as president, but did hold power through the newly created party. Often called the &quot;official party&quot;, it &quot;was created as a cartel to control localized political machines and interests.&quot;

When Cárdenas ran as the candidate of the PNR in 1934, Calles had expected to continue to be the real power in Mexico. Cárdenas might have been one of the short-term, powerless presidents of the years 1929–1934, but instead he built a large and mobilized base of support of industrial workers and peasants and forced Calles into exile in 1935. Cárdenas further consolidated power by dissolving the PNR and creating a new party with a completely different kind of organization.

Although Congress was dominated by Callistas early in his term, Cárdenas persuaded congressmen to his side, “to the point that he commanded a majority in the Chamber.” As noted by one study, “when Calles began to criticize agrarian and labor agitation and pressure the government to moderate its policies in mid-1935, Cardenas purged his cabinet of Calles’s most loyal supporters. This action demonstrated that the power of the Jefe Máximo was more apparent than real. In its wake, Cardenistas took over the PNR, Congress, and the governments of 14 states.” 
As noted by another study, “Calles left the country and the Cardenista blocs in the Union Congress became the majority.”

The PRM was organized in four sectors, industrial labor, peasants, a middle class sector (composed largely of government workers), and the military. This organization was a resurrection of corporatism, essentially organization by estates or interest groups. Each sector of the party had a parallel organization, so that the labor sector was composed of the Confederation of Mexican Workers (CTM), the peasant sector by the National Confederation of Campesinos, (CNC); and the middle class sector by the Federation of Unions of Workers in Service to the State (FSTSE), created in 1938. The old Federal Army had been destroyed in the Revolution and the post-revolutionary military had increasingly been transformed from a collection of veteran revolutionary fighters into a military organized along more traditional lines of hierarchy and control.
The military had in most of Latin America in the post-independence period viewed itself as the arbiter of power and intervened in politics by force or the threat of force. In the post-revolutionary period, presidents of Mexico, including Cárdenas, were former generals in the revolutionary army. Curbing the power of the military was instigated by Álvaro Obregón and Calles, but the threat of revolt and undermining of the state remained, as the Cristero Rebellion showed in the late 1920s, led by a former revolutionary general, Enrique Gorostieta. Cárdenas aimed to undermine the military&#x27;s potential to dominate politics by making it a sector of the official party. Although some critics questioned the military&#x27;s incorporation into the party, Cárdenas saw it as a way to assert civilian control. He is quoted as saying, &quot;We did not put the Army in politics. It was already there. In fact it had been dominating the situation, and we did well to reduce its voice to one in four.&quot; Cárdenas had already mobilized workers and peasants into a counterweight to the &quot;military&#x27;s domination of politics.&quot;

These groups often had different interests, but rather than creating a pluralist system in which the groups competed, the corporatist model placed the President as the arbiter of interests. Thus, the organization of different interest groups with formal representation in the party gave them access to largesse from the State, but also limited their ability to act autonomously since they were dependents of the new system.

The corporatist model is most often associated with fascism, whose rise in Germany and Italy in the 1930s coincided with Cárdenas&#x27;s presidency. Cárdenas was emphatically opposed to fascism, but created the PRM and organized the Mexican state on authoritarian lines. That reorganization can be seen as the enduring legacy of the Cárdenas presidency. Although the PRM was reorganized into the Institutional Revolutionary Party in 1946, the basic structure was retained. Cárdenas&#x27;s calculation that the military&#x27;s incorporation into the PRM would undermine its power was essentially correct, since it disappeared as a separate sector of the party, but was absorbed into the &quot;popular&quot; sector.

=== 1938 oil expropriation ===

Cárdenas had had dealings with the oil industry in the Huasteca in his capacity as a military commander. Ongoing issues with the foreign-owned companies and the Mexican petroleum workers&#x27; organization became increasingly tense. Early in his presidency, he declared that a previous agreement between companies and the government &quot;was not in harmony with the basic principle of Article 27 of the Constitution.&quot; In 1936, the 18,000-member oil workers&#x27; union forced oil companies to sign the first-ever collective bargaining agreement. The union demanded 26 million pesos, the companies offered 12 million. Giving more force to Mexican workers&#x27; demands, Cárdenas set up the National Oil Administration and the government&#x27;s Council of Conciliation and Arbitration took jurisdiction over the wage dispute. The Council supported the workers&#x27; demands, which the companies refused to pay. To put even more force into the government&#x27;s position, it cancelled oil concessions dating to the Porfirato. This move was unprecedented in the history of foreign oil in Mexico. Management and high-skilled workers were all foreigners, so the companies thought that nationalization would be a rash move for Mexico. The companies appealed the government&#x27;s decision to force companies to pay their wages to the Mexican Supreme Court, which ruled against them on 1 March 1938. Cárdenas was ready to act. Cárdenas tasked his old ally, Francisco J. Múgica, with writing the declaration to the nation about expropriation. On 18 March 1938, Cárdenas nationalized Mexico&#x27;s petroleum reserves and expropriated the equipment of the foreign oil companies in Mexico. The announcement inspired a spontaneous six-hour parade in Mexico City; it was followed by a national fundraising campaign to compensate the private companies.

The legislation for nationalization provided compensation for the expropriated assets, but Cárdenas&#x27; action angered the international business community and Western governments, especially the United Kingdom. The Mexican government was more worried about the lack of technical expertise within the nation to run the refineries. Before leaving, the oil companies had ensured they left nothing of value behind, hoping to force Cárdenas to accept their conditions.

Mexico was eventually able to restart the oil fields and refineries, but production did not rise to pre-nationalization levels until 1942, after the entry of the United States into World War II. The US sent technical advisers to Mexico to ensure production could support the overall Allied war effort.

In 1938, the British severed diplomatic relations with Cárdenas&#x27; government, and boycotted Mexican oil and other goods. An international court ruled that Mexico had the authority for nationalization. With the outbreak of World War II, oil became a highly sought-after commodity. The company that Cárdenas founded, Petróleos Mexicanos (or Pemex), later served as a model for other nations seeking greater control over their oil and natural gas resources. In the early 21st century, its revenues continued to be the most important source of income for the country, despite weakening finances. Cárdenas founded the National Polytechnic Institute to ensure the education and training of people to run the oil industry.

=== Spanish Civil War and refugees in Mexico ===
Cárdenas supported the Republican government of Spain against right-wing general Francisco Franco&#x27;s forces during the Spanish Civil War. Franco was given support by Germany and Italy. Mexico&#x27;s support of the Republican government was &quot;by selling arms to the Republican army, underwriting arms purchases from third parties, supporting the Republic in the League of Nations, providing food, shelter and education for children orphaned during the Spanish Civil War.&quot; 
Although Mexico&#x27;s efforts in the Spanish Civil War were not enough to save the Spanish Republic, it did provide a place of exile for as many as 20,000-40,000 Spanish refugees. Among those who reached Mexico were distinguished intellectuals who left a lasting imprint on Mexican cultural life. The range of refugees may be seen from an analysis of the 4,559 passengers arriving in Mexico in 1939 on board the ships &quot;Sinaia, Ipanema&quot; and &quot;Mexique&quot;; the largest groups were technicians and qualified workers (32%), farmers and ranchers (20%), along with professionals, technicians, workers, business people students and merchants, who represented 43% of the total. The &quot;Casa de España&quot;, founded with Mexican government support in the early 1930s, was an organization to provide a haven for Spanish loyalist intellectuals and artists. It became the Colegio de México in October 1940, an elite institution of higher education in Mexico, with the support of Cárdenas&#x27;s government.

In 1936, Cárdenas allowed Russian exile Leon Trotsky to settle in Mexico, reportedly to counter accusations that Cárdenas was a Stalinist. Cárdenas was not as left-wing as Leon Trotsky and other socialists would wish, but Trotsky described his government as the only honest one in the world.

=== Relations with Latin America ===
Mexico&#x27;s most important relations with foreign countries during the Cárdenas presidency was the United States, but Cárdenas attempted to influence fellow Latin American nations viable formal diplomatic efforts in Cuba, Chile, Colombia, and Peru, especially in the cultural sphere. Mexico sent artists, engineers, and athletes as goodwill efforts. No Latin American country emulated Cárdenas&#x27;s radical policies in the agrarian sector, education, or economic nationalism.

=== Other presidential actions ===
The development bank Nacional Financiera was founded during his term as president. Although not extensively active during that period, in the post-World War II era of the Mexican Miracle, the bank was an important tool in government industrialization projects.

Cárdenas became known for his progressive program of building roads and schools and promoting education, gaining Congressional approval to allocate twice as much federal money to rural education as all his predecessors combined.

Cárdenas ended capital punishment (in Mexico, usually in the form of a firing squad). Capital punishment has been banned in Mexico since that time. The control of the republic by Cárdenas and the PRI (Partido Revolucionario Institucional) predecessor &quot;Partido de la Revolución Mexicana&quot; without widespread bloodshed effectively signaled the end of rebellions that began with the 1910 Mexican Revolution. Despite Cárdenas&#x27; policy of socialist education, he also improved relations with the Roman Catholic Church during his administration.

=== Failed Saturnino Cedillo revolt, 1938–1939 ===

The last military major revolt in Mexico was that of Saturnino Cedillo, a regional caudillo and former revolutionary general whose power base was in the state of San Luis Potosí. Cedillo was a supporter of Calles and had participated in the formation of the Partido Nacional Revolucionario. He was a &quot;paradigmatic figure,&quot; acting as a strongman in his region and mediating between the federal government and his local power base. As a powerbroker with demonstrated military and political skills, he had a great deal of autonomy in San Luis Potosí, serving a term as governor (1927–32), but then modeling Calles&#x27;s Maximato was the power behind the governorship. Cedillo supported Cárdenas in his power struggle with Calles. However, relations between Cedillo and Cárdenas soured, particularly as Cárdenas&#x27;s new political system was consolidated and undermined the autonomous power of local caciques.

Cárdenas was ideologically more radical than Cedillo, and Cedillo became a major figure in right-wing opposition to Cárdenas. Groups around him included the fascist “Gold Shirts”, seen as a force capable of ousting Cárdenas. Cedillo rose in revolt in 1938 against Cárdenas, but the federal government had clear military superiority and crushed the uprising. In 1939, Cedillo, members of his family, and a number of supporters were killed, Cedillo himself was betrayed by a follower while he was in hiding. He was “the last of the great military caciques of the Mexican Revolution who maintained his own quasi-private army,” and who constructed “his campesino fiefdom.” Cárdenas&#x27;s victory over Cedillo showed the power and consolidation of the newly reorganized Mexican state, but also a showdown between two former revolutionary generals in the political sphere.

=== Other political opposition to Cárdenas ===
There was more organized and ideological opposition to Cárdenas. Right-wing political groups opposed Cárdenas&#x27;s policies, including the National Synarchist Union (UNS), a popular, pro-Catholic, quasi-fascist movement founded in 1937 that opposed his &quot;atheism&quot; and collectivism. Catholic, pro-business conservatives founded the National Action Party (PAN) in 1939, which became the principal opposition party in later years and won the presidency in 2000.

=== Presidential election of 1940 ===

In the elections of 1940, Cárdenas, hoping to prevent another uprising or even &quot;an outright counter-revolution throughout the Republic&quot; by those opposed to his leftist policies, endorsed the PRM nominee Manuel Ávila Camacho, a moderate conservative. &quot;Obregonista&quot; Francisco Múgica would have been Cárdenas&#x27;s ideological heir, and he had played an important role in the Revolution, the leader of the left-wing faction that successfully placed key language in the Constitution of 1917, guaranteeing the rights of labor. Múgica had known Cárdenas personally since 1926 when the two were working in Veracruz. Múgica had served in Cárdenas&#x27;s cabinet as Secretary of the National Economy and as Secretary of the Ministry of Communications and Public Works. In those positions, Múgica made sure the federal government pursued social goals; Múgica was considered &quot;the social conscience of Cardenismo.&quot; Múgica resigned his cabinet post to be a candidate for the 1940 presidential election.

However, the political system was not one of open competition among candidates, although the PRM&#x27;s rules required an open convention to select the candidate. Cárdenas established the unwritten rule that the president chose his successor. Cárdenas chose political unknown Manuel Ávila Camacho, far more centrist than Múgica, as the PRM&#x27;s official candidate. He was &quot;known as a conciliator rather than a leader&quot; and later derided as &quot;the unknown soldier.&quot; Múgica withdrew, realizing his personal ambitions would not be satisfied, and went on to hold other posts in the government. Cárdenas may well have hoped Ávila Camacho would salvage some of his progressive policies and be a compromise candidate compared to his conservative opponent, General Juan Andreu Almazán. Cárdenas is said to have secured the support of the CTM and the CNC for Ávila Camacho by personally guaranteeing their interests would be respected. Cárdenas&#x27;s followers maintained a degree of representation in the new government, with Camacho naming Cardenistas “to head the ministries that mattered most to Mexican workers and to leftist ideologues.”

The campaign and elections were marked by violent incidents; on election-day the opposing parties hijacked numerous polling places and each issued their own &quot;election results&quot;. Cárdenas himself was unable to vote on election day because the polling place closed early to prevent supporters of Almazán from voting. Since the government controlled the electoral process, the official results declared Ávila Camacho as winner; Almazán cried fraud and threatened revolt, trying to set up a parallel government and congress. Ávila Camacho crushed Almazán&#x27;s forces and assumed office on December 1, 1940. His inauguration was attended by US Vice President-elect Henry A. Wallace, who was appointed by the U.S. as a &quot;special representative with the rank of Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary&quot; for Mexico, indicating that the U.S. recognized the legitimacy of the election results. Almazán also attended Ávila Camacho&#x27;s inauguration.

Much to the surprise of Mexicans who expected that Cárdenas might follow the example of Calles and remain the power behind the presidency—particularly since Ávila Camacho did not appear to have major leadership skills at a time that the conflict in Europe and domestic turmoil were in evidence—he set the important precedent of leaving the presidency and its powers to his successor.

== Post-presidency ==

After his presidential term that ended 1 December 1940, Cárdenas served as Mexico&#x27;s Minister of War 1942–1945, when Mexico was a solid participant in World War II, which reassured Mexican nationalists concerned about a close alliance with the United States.

It has been said that Cárdenas was the only president associated with the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) who did not use the office to make himself wealthy. He retired to a modest home by Lake Pátzcuaro, Michoacán, and worked the rest of his life supervising irrigation projects and promoting free medical clinics and education for the nation&#x27;s poor. He also continued to speak out about international political issues and in favor of greater democracy and human rights in Latin America and elsewhere. For example, he was one of the participants in the Russell Tribunal for investigating war crimes in Vietnam. 

Although Cárdenas did not play the role that Calles had as the power behind the presidency, Cárdenas did exert influence on the PRI and in Mexican politics. He opposed the candidacy of Miguel Alemán Valdés for president in 1946, opposed the Vietnam War, and supported the 1959 Cuban Revolution, even making an appearance in Havana with Cuban leader Fidel Castro in July 1959. In 1951, Alemán Valdés, nearing the end of his six-year term, expressed his desire to have the Constitution amended to allow him to be re-elected. Cárdenas and Ávila Camacho had former President Abelardo Rodríguez give a statement that they didn&#x27;t &quot;think extension of the presidential term or re-election is convenient for the country.&quot; This allowed for the transfer of power to President Adolfo Ruiz Cortines in 1952.

Cárdenas was not happy with the rightward shift of Mexican presidents, starting with the presidency of Miguel Alemán (1946-1952). During the presidency of Adolfo López Mateos (1958-1964), Cárdenas emerged from retirement and pressed the president toward leftist stances. With the victory of the Cuban Revolution in January 1959, Cárdenas among others in Latin America saw the hope of young revolution. Mexico was run by a party that claimed the legacy of the Mexican Revolution but had turned away from revolutionary ideals. Cárdenas went to Cuba in July 1959 and was with Castro at a huge rally where the former guerrilla leader declared himself premier of Cuba. Cárdenas returned to Mexico with the hope that the ideals of the Mexican Revolution could be revived, with land reform, support for agriculture, and an expansion of education and health services to Mexicans. He also directly appealed to López Mateos to free jailed union leaders. López Mateos became increasingly hostile to Cárdenas, who was explicitly and implicitly rebuking him. To Cárdenas he said, &quot;They say the Communists are weaving a dangerous web around you.&quot; The pressure on López Mateos had an impact, and he began implementing reforms in land, education, and the creation of social programs that emulated those under Cárdenas. Cárdenas withdrew his public challenge to the PRI&#x27;s policies and supported López Mateos&#x27;s designated successor in 1964, Gustavo Díaz Ordaz, his Minister of the Interior. In 1964, he attended Díaz Ordaz&#x27;s inauguration.
In 1968, Cárdenas did not anticipate the draconian crackdown by Díaz Ordaz in the run-up to the Mexico City Summer Olympics. That summer saw the emergence of the Mexican Movement of 1968, which mobilized tens of thousands of students and middle class supporters during the summer and early fall 1968. The movement ended in the bloody Tlatelolco massacre on 2 October 1968. During the troubles that summer, one of Cárdenas&#x27;s long-time friends, Heberto Castillo, a professor of mechanical engineering at the National University, actively participated in the movement and was pursued by Díaz Ordaz&#x27;s secret police. Cárdenas hosted a meeting at his residence in the Polanco section of Mexico City with Castillo and some student leaders. Cárdenas was increasingly concerned about the impact on the movement on the political peace that had been built by the party. Despite the National University being a center of the movement, Cárdenas did not think that the government would violate the university&#x27;s autonomy and take over the campus. It did, with tanks rolling into campus on 18 September. Castillo had a harrowing escape. In October government troops fired on demonstrators at the Plaza of the Three Cultures in Tlatelolco, someone who had been there made his way to Cárdenas&#x27;s house to tell him in tears what happened. Cárdenas&#x27;s wife Amalia reportedly said, &quot;And I believe that the General shed some tears too.&quot;

Cárdenas died of lung cancer in Mexico City on 19 October 1970 at the age of 75. He is buried in the Monument to the Revolution in Mexico City, sharing his final resting place with Venustiano Carranza, Pancho Villa, and Plutarco Elias Calles. Cárdenas&#x27;s son Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas and his grandson Lázaro Cárdenas Batel have been prominent Mexican politicians.

==Honors==
In his honor, his name was given to a number of cities, towns, and a municipality in Mexico, including Lázaro Cárdenas, Michoacán, the municipality of Lázaro Cárdenas, Quintana Roo, Lázaro Cárdenas, Jalisco, and other smaller communities. A major dam project on the Nazas River named for him was inaugurated in 1946. There are also many streets that have been named after him, including the &quot;Eje Central Lázaro Cárdenas&quot; in Mexico City and highways in Guadalajara, Monterrey and Mexicali. &quot;Šetalište Lazaro Kardenasa&quot; (&quot;Lázaro Cárdenas promenade&quot;) in Belgrade, Serbia, is also named after him, as is a street in Barcelona, Spain, and a monument in a park in Madrid dedicated to his memory for his role in admitting defeated Spanish Republicans to Mexico after the Civil War in that country. In Chicago, Lazaro Cardenas K-8 School in the Mexican neighborhood of Little Village. Under the Chicago Public Schools administration. 

In 1955, Lázaro Cárdenas was one of several recipients that year of the Stalin Peace Prize, awarded to foreigners politically sympathetic to the Soviet Union. The prize was later renamed for Lenin as part of de-Stalinization.

A station in the Mexico City Metro was named after him.

== Legacy ==
President Cárdenas and his administration are credited with land reform that broke the back of the hacienda system, put resources toward rural education, press reform of the labor movement, helping unify it but also controlling it. He enacted significant reforms without antagonizing the Catholic Church. Although accused of being a communist, the charge did not stick; he was instead a leftist Mexican nationalist. He opened Mexico to refugees of the Spanish Civil War, who included many intellectuals who enriched the life of Mexico. His choice of his close associate Manuel Ávila Camacho, a moderate revolutionary rather than his old leftist ally Francisco Múgica marked the end of an era. Having chosen his party&#x27;s candidate in the 1940 election and using the political machinery he created to make sure Ávila Camacho won the flawed election, Cárdenas left power to his successor. This set an important precedent. &quot;When he concluded his mandate [in 1940] marked the full institutionalization of the post-revolutionary Mexican state&quot;. The party that Cárdenas founded, the Partido de la Revolución Mexicana (PRM), established the basic structure of sectoral representation of important groups, a structure retained by its successor in 1946, the PRI. The PRI stayed in power continuously until 2000.

In his 1969 &quot;Political Testament&quot;, he acknowledged that his regime had failed to make the changes in distribution of political power and corruption that were the basis for his presidency and the revolution. He expressed his dismay in the fact that some people and groups were making themselves rich to the detriment of the mainly poor majority.

Cárdenas lived another 30 years after he left the presidency and remained an influential figure in Mexico. In the assessment of historian Enrique Krauze, Cárdenas in his post-presidency became &quot;an icon, a kind of moral &quot;Jefe Máximo&quot;, the only true living Mexican Revolutionary, the moral conscience of the Revolution.&quot;

Another Mexican scholar summed up Cárdenas&#x27;s particular importance:
Cárdenas is a mysterious president. He announces no plans, reveals no projects, travels without a detailed itinerary, delivers marvelous speeches when least expected, solves conflicts with the most surprising audacity, and what redeems him, what excuses all his errors, is the fact that he does not kill, does not imprison, fabricates no conspiracies, needs no collaborators willing to confess crimes.

== See also ==

*History of Mexico
*List of heads of state of Mexico
*Monument to Lázaro Cárdenas
*Lázaro Cárdenas Park, Puerto Vallarta, Mexico
*Statue of Lázaro Cárdenas (Madrid)

== References ==
===Bibliography===

== Further reading ==
=== In English ===

*Ashby, Joe C. &quot;Organized Labor and the Mexican Revolution under Lázaro Cárdenas&quot;. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press 1963.
*Bantjes, Adrian A. &quot;Cardenismo: Interpretations&quot; in &quot;Encyclopedia of Mexico&quot;, vol. 1. pp. 195–199. Chicago: Fitzroy and Dearborn 1997.
*Bantjies,Adrian. &quot;As if Jesus Walked the Earth: Cardenismo, Sonora, and the Mexican Revolution&quot;. Wilmington: Scholarly Resources 1998.,
*Becker, Marjorie (1995). &quot;Setting the Virgin on Fire: Lázaro Cárdenas, Michoacán Peasants, and the Redemption of the Mexican Revolution&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press. .
*Cárdenas, Enrique. &quot;The Great Depression and Industrialization: The Case of Mexico&quot; in Rosemary Thorp, ed. &quot;Latin America in the 1930s: The Role of the Periphery in World Crisis&quot;. London 1984, pp. 222–41.
*Cline, Howard F. &quot;The United States and Mexico&quot;, second edition, Chapter 11, &quot;The Cárdenas Upheaval&quot;, pp. 215–238. Cambridge: Harvard University Press 1961.
*Dulles, John W. F. &quot;Yesterday in Mexico: A Chronicle of the Revolution 1919–1936&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press 1961.
*Dwyer, John. &quot;Diplomatic Weapons of the Weak: Mexican Policymaking during the U.S.-Mexican Agrarian Dispute, 1934–1941,&quot;Diplomatic History,&quot; 26:3 (2002): 375
*Fallaw, Ben. &quot;Cárdenas Compromised: The Failure of Reform in Post-Revolutionary Yucatán&quot;. Duke University Press 2001.
*Hamilton, Nora. &quot;The Limits of State Authority: Post-Revolutionary Mexico&quot;. Princeton: Princeton University Press 1982.
*Hamilton, Nora. &quot;Lázaro Cárdenas&quot; in &quot;Encyclopedia of Mexico&quot;, vol. 1, pp. 192–195. Chicago: Fitzroy and Dearborn 1997.
*Jolly, Jennifer. &quot;Creating Pátzcuaro, Creating Mexico: Art, Tourism, and Nation Building Under Lázaro Cárdenas&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press 2018. 
*Kiddle, Amelia, and María L.O. Muñoz, eds. &quot;Populism in Twentieth-Century Mexico: The Presidencies of Lázaro Cárdenas and Luis Echeverría&quot;. Tucson: University of Arizona Press 2010.
*Knight, Alan. &quot;Cardenismo: Juggernaut or Jalopy?&quot; &quot;Journal of Latin American Studies&quot; 26 (1994).
*Knight, Alan. &quot;The Rise and Fall of Cardenismo&quot; in &quot;Mexico Since Independence&quot;, Leslie Bethell, ed. New York: Cambridge University Press 1991, pp. 241–320, 417–422.
*Krauze, Enrique, &quot;Mexico: Biography of Power&quot;. New York: HarperCollins 1997. 
*Leonard, Thomas M.; Rankin, Monica; Smith, Joseph; Bratzel, John (ed.) (September 2006). &quot;Latin America during World War II&quot;. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman &amp; Littlefield. .
*Lucas, Jeffrey Kent (2010). &quot;The Rightward Drift of Mexico&#x27;s Former Revolutionaries: The Case of Antonio Díaz Soto y Gama&quot;. Lewiston, New York: Edwin Mellen Press. .
*Michaels, Albert L. &quot;The Crisis of Cardenismo,&quot; &quot;Journal of Latin American Studies&quot; vol. 2 (May 1970): 51–79.
*Powell, T.G. &quot;Mexico and the Spanish Civil War&quot;. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press 1981.
*Riding, Alan (1986). &quot;Distant Neighbors&quot;. New York City: Vintage Books. .
*Schuler, Friedrich E. &quot;Mexico Between Hitler and Roosevelt:Mexican Foreign Relations in the Age of Lázaro Cárdenas, 1934-1940&quot;. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press 1998.
* Townsend, William Cameron. &quot;Lázaro Cárdenas, Mexican Democrat&quot;. Ann Arbor 1952.
* Weston, Jr., Charles H.; &quot;The Political Legacy of Lázaro Cárdenas&quot;, &quot;The Americas&quot;, Vol. 39, No. 3 (Jan., 1983), pp. 383–405 Published by: Academy of American Franciscan History Stable, URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/981231 Accessed: February 26, 2009 14:16
* Whetten, Nathan L. &quot;Rural Mexico&quot;. Chicago 1948.
* Weston, Charles H. &quot;The Political Legacy of Lázaro Cárdenas.&quot; The Americas, Vol. 39, No. 3 (Jan., 1983), pp. 383–405 Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/981231
* Weyl, Nathaniel and Sylvia Weyl. &quot;The Reconquest of Mexico: The Years of Lázaro Cárdenas&quot;. London 1939.
=== In Spanish ===

*Anguiano, Arturo. &quot;El Estado y la política obrera del cardenismo&quot;. Mexico City: Era 1975.
*Benítez, Fernando. &quot;Lázaro Cárdenas y la revolución mexicana&quot;, vol. 3 &quot;Historia de la revolución mexicana&quot;. Colegio de México 1978.
*Córdova, Arnaldo. &quot;La política de masas del cardenismo&quot;. Mexico City: Era 1974.
*Gilly, Adolfo. &quot;El cardenismo, una utopía mexicana&quot;. Mexico City: Cal y Arena 1994.
*González, Luis. &quot;Los Artífices del Cardenismo: Historia de la Revolución Mexicana&quot;. vol. 14. Mexico City: El Colegio de México 1979.
*Hernández Chávez, Alicia. &quot;La mecánica cardenista: Histora de la Revolución Mexicana&quot;. vol. 16. Mexico City: Colegio de México 1979.
*Krauze, Enrique. &quot;Lázaro Cárdenas: General misionero&quot;. Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Económico 1987.
*Lanni, Octavio. &quot;El estado capitalista en la época de Cárdenas&quot;. Mexico 1977.
*León, Samuel and Ignacio Marván. &quot;En el cardenismo (1934–1940)&quot;. Mexico 1985.
*Medin, Tzvi. &quot;Ideología y praxis política de Lázaro Cárdenas&quot;. Mexico City: Siglo XXI 1972, 13th edition 1986.
*Salvador Novo, &quot;La vida en México en el periodo presidencial de Lázaro Cárdenas&quot;, Mexico City: Empresas Editoriales 1964
*Suárez Valles, Manuel. &quot;Lázaro Cárdenas: una vida fecunda al servicio de México&quot; (Mexico City, 1971).
*Viscaíno, Rogelio. &quot;Cárdenas y la izquierda mexicana&quot;. Mexico 1975.
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q296718" start="0" end="23" title="Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Lázaro Cárdenas del Río"/>
<link wikidata="Q628004" start="114" end="133" title="president of Mexico" label="president of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929386" start="195" end="214" title="Constitutional Army" label="Constitutional Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="226" end="244" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589681" start="252" end="273" title="Governor of Michoacán" label="Governor of Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241328" start="278" end="328" title="President of the Institutional Revolutionary Party" label="President of the Institutional Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q179861" start="353" end="382" title="Secretariat of National Defense (Mexico)" label="Secretary of National Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128892" start="442" end="450" title="Maximato" label="Maximato"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693764" start="475" end="495" title="Land reform in Mexico" label="land reform programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161196" start="505" end="553" title="Mexican oil expropriation" label="expropriation of the country&amp;#x27;s oil industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333867" start="605" end="614" title="Jiquilpan, Michoacán" label="Jiquilpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79861" start="616" end="625" title="Michoacán" label="Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="674" end="692" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929386" start="721" end="743" title="Constitutional Army" label="Constitutionalist Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="783" end="789" title="Sonora" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q315066" start="889" end="910" title="Plutarco Elías Calles" label="Plutarco Elías Calles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826033" start="1003" end="1024" title="1934 Mexican general election" label="1934 general election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1046" end="1074" title="Institutional Revolutionary Party#PNR (1929–1938)" label="National Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q217498" start="1133" end="1147" title="Álvaro Obregón" label="Álvaro Obregón"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128892" start="1217" end="1225" title="Maximato" label="Maximato"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="1469" end="1500" title="Institutional Revolutionary Party" label="Party of the Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q387282" start="1559" end="1585" title="Confederation of Mexican Workers" label="labor union confederations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862975" start="1595" end="1607" title="Mexican Army" label="Mexican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="1809" end="1818" title="Left-wing politics" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q555887" start="1819" end="1839" title="Economic nationalism" label="economic nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161196" start="1858" end="1899" title="Mexican oil expropriation" label="expropriation of the Mexican oil industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q871308" start="1948" end="1953" title="Pemex" label="Pemex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693764" start="1990" end="2020" title="Land reform in Mexico" label="land reform programs in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321919" start="2083" end="2101" title="ejido" label="&amp;quot;ejidos&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539696" start="2118" end="2148" title="Instituto Politécnico Nacional" label="National Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324001" start="2159" end="2179" title="El Colegio de México" label="El Colegio de México"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456351" start="2238" end="2249" title="Republican faction (Spanish Civil War)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="2261" end="2278" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q315626" start="2378" end="2398" title="Manuel Ávila Camacho" label="Manuel Ávila Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353590" start="2729" end="2736" title="Sexenio (Mexico)" label="sexenio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333867" start="3044" end="3053" title="Jiquilpan" label="Jiquilpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79861" start="3055" end="3064" title="Michoacán" label="Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911824" start="3091" end="3104" title="billiard hall" label="billiard hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q45009" start="3134" end="3143" title="Purépecha" label="Purépecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139055" start="3332" end="3345" title="tax collector" label="tax collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245291" start="3349" end="3369" title="printer&amp;#x27;s devil" label="printer&amp;#x27;s devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="3659" end="3677" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q299168" start="3684" end="3701" title="Victoriano Huerta" label="Victoriano Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187198" start="3702" end="3711" title="Ten Tragic Days" label="overthrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q216766" start="3722" end="3738" title="Francisco Madero" label="Francisco Madero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865323" start="3950" end="3960" title="Liberation Army of the South" label="Zapatistas"/>
<link wikidata="Q217498" start="4416" end="4430" title="Álvaro Obregón" label="Álvaro Obregón"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="4437" end="4449" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q315066" start="4504" end="4525" title="Plutarco Elías Calles" label="Plutarco Elías Calles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194747" start="4538" end="4555" title="Constitutionalist" label="Constitutionalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q313122" start="4563" end="4582" title="Venustiano Carranza" label="Venustiano Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q428575" start="4829" end="4834" title="Yaqui" label="Yaqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q137865" start="5182" end="5201" title="Adolfo de la Huerta" label="Adolfo de la Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399948" start="5338" end="5357" title="Francisco J. Múgica" label="Francisco J. Múgica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853415" start="5475" end="5483" title="Huasteca" label="Huasteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q279662" start="6147" end="6159" title="Cristero War" label="Cristero War"/>
<link wikidata="Q979079" start="6288" end="6313" title="Catholic Church in Mexico" label="Catholic Church in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693764" start="7007" end="7018" title="Land reform in Mexico" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321919" start="7129" end="7134" title="ejido" label="ejido"/>
<link wikidata="Q917730" start="7367" end="7377" title="Hacienda" label="hacendados"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021051" start="8282" end="8291" title="Pátzcuaro" label="Pátzcuaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199806" start="8533" end="8555" title="Princess Eréndira" label="the Purépecha princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q230314" start="8697" end="8705" title="Malinche" label="Malinche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128892" start="10144" end="10152" title="Maximato" label="Maximato"/>
<link wikidata="Q466541" start="10255" end="10275" title="Manuel Pérez Treviño" label="Manuel Pérez Treviño"/>
<link wikidata="Q749461" start="10580" end="10609" title="Secretariat of the Navy" label="secretary of war and the navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q115328" start="11313" end="11334" title="Abelardo L. Rodríguez" label="Abelardo L. Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321919" start="11829" end="11834" title="ejido" label="ejido"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826033" start="12998" end="13033" title="1934 Mexican general election" label="winning over 98 percent of the vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418266" start="13315" end="13324" title="Los Pinos" label="Los Pinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072510" start="13415" end="13433" title="Chapultepec Castle" label="Chapultepec Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760567" start="13749" end="13761" title="armored car (VIP)" label="armored cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q216541" start="13942" end="13951" title="chauffeur" label="chauffeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="13959" end="13971" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14124" end="14147" title=":es:Anexo:Gabinete de Lro Cárdenas del Río" label="Cárdenas&amp;#x27;s cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101172" start="14298" end="14315" title="Aarón Sáenz Garza" label="Aarón Sáenz Garza"/>
<link wikidata="Q366050" start="14527" end="14548" title="Tomás Garrido Canabal" label="Tomás Garrido Canabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q973929" start="14620" end="14635" title="Narciso Bassols" label="Narciso Bassols"/>
<link wikidata="Q380982" start="14705" end="14722" title="Emilio Portes Gil" label="Emilio Portes Gil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399948" start="14968" end="14989" title="Francisco José Múgica" label="Francisco José Múgica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185046" start="15485" end="15523" title="Civilian control of the military" label="subordinate to the civilian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829717" start="16246" end="16256" title="Calles Law" label="Calles Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="16326" end="16338" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978200" start="16390" end="16409" title="Luis María Martínez" label="Luis María Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="16941" end="16949" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="17148" end="17155" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321919" start="17673" end="17678" title="ejido" label="ejido"/>
<link wikidata="Q136120" start="17973" end="17981" title="henequen" label="henequen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235212" start="18177" end="18199" title="Andrés Molina Enríquez" label="Andrés Molina Enríquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700395" start="18490" end="18502" title="Luis Cabrera Lobato" label="Luis Cabrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q387282" start="20187" end="20219" title="Confederation of Mexican Workers" label="Confederation of Mexican Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054610" start="20234" end="20257" title="Mexican Communist Party" label="Mexican Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q973658" start="20738" end="20747" title="caudillos" label="caudillos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41718" start="21254" end="21269" title="Emiliano Zapata" label="Emiliano Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21487" end="21496" title="agrarista" label="agrarista"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885002" start="22447" end="22451" title="Regional Confederation of Mexican Workers" label="CROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316247" start="22461" end="22473" title="Luis Napoleón Morones" label="Luis Morones"/>
<link wikidata="Q741341" start="22671" end="22696" title="Vicente Lombardo Toledano" label="Vicente Lombardo Toledano"/>
<link wikidata="Q387282" start="22753" end="22785" title="Confederation of Mexican Workers" label="Confederation of Mexican Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755529" start="23301" end="23324" title="Casa del Obrero Mundial" label="Casa del Obrero Mundial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2229867" start="23370" end="23384" title="Red Battalions" label="Red Battalions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069734" start="23671" end="23705" title="Ferrocarriles Nacionales de México" label="Ferrocarriles Nacionales de México"/>
<link wikidata="Q279662" start="26850" end="26859" title="Cristero War" label="Cristiada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539696" start="27258" end="27288" title="Instituto Politécnico Nacional" label="Instituto Politécnico Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602008" start="27924" end="27935" title="indigenismo" label="indigenismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020747" start="27937" end="27949" title="Moisés Sáenz" label="Moisés Sáenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q45009" start="28239" end="28248" title="Purépecha" label="Purépecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q279662" start="33735" end="33753" title="Cristero Rebellion" label="Cristero Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5733961" start="33830" end="33866" title="Feminine Brigades of St. Joan of Arc" label="Feminine Brigades of St. Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q979079" start="34568" end="34593" title="Catholic Church in Mexico" label="Catholic Church in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638361" start="34696" end="34715" title="Drug liberalization" label="drug policy reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q117470157" start="34744" end="34769" title="Leopoldo Salazar Viniegra" label="Leopoldo Salazar Viniegra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34997" end="35031" title="Reglamento Federal de Toxicomanías" label="Reglamento Federal de Toxicomanías"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="36483" end="36495" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="36905" end="36938" title="Institutional Revolutionary Party" label="Institutional Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q192886" start="38691" end="38702" title="corporatism" label="corporatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q657326" start="38732" end="38739" title="estates of the realm" label="estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q387282" start="38859" end="38891" title="Confederation of Mexican Workers" label="Confederation of Mexican Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q279662" start="39794" end="39812" title="Cristero Rebellion" label="Cristero Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083675" start="39878" end="39896" title="Enrique Gorostieta" label="Enrique Gorostieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="40961" end="40968" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853415" start="41711" end="41719" title="Huasteca" label="Huasteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="43399" end="43410" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="43699" end="43713" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q871308" start="44591" end="44610" title="Pemex" label="Petróleos Mexicanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q871308" start="44615" end="44620" title="Pemex" label="Pemex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539696" start="44889" end="44919" title="National Polytechnic Institute" label="National Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="45123" end="45139" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="45165" end="45182" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324001" start="46407" end="46424" title="Colegio de México" label="Colegio de México"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="46583" end="46595" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="46671" end="46680" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="47091" end="47095" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="47097" end="47102" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="47104" end="47112" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="47118" end="47122" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266746" start="47393" end="47409" title="Development finance institution" label="development bank"/>
<link wikidata="" start="47410" end="47429" title=":es:Nacional Financiera (México)" label="Nacional Financiera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323822" start="47560" end="47575" title="Mexican Miracle" label="Mexican Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="48275" end="48293" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210237" start="48540" end="48557" title="Saturnino Cedillo" label="Saturnino Cedillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q973658" start="48570" end="48578" title="Latin American Caudillos" label="caudillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q78980" start="48649" end="48664" title="San Luis Potosí" label="San Luis Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="49564" end="49571" title="Fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236662" start="50464" end="50489" title="National Synarchist Union" label="National Synarchist Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q851087" start="50665" end="50686" title="National Action Party (Mexico)" label="National Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q315626" start="51046" end="51066" title="Manuel Ávila Camacho" label="Manuel Ávila Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170072" start="51320" end="51340" title="Constitution of 1917" label="Constitution of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349562" start="52631" end="52650" title="Juan Andreu Almazán" label="Juan Andreu Almazán"/>
<link wikidata="Q251666" start="53682" end="53698" title="Henry A. Wallace" label="Henry A. Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="54541" end="54553" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="54724" end="54757" title="Institutional Revolutionary Party" label="Institutional Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352646" start="54847" end="54861" title="Lake Pátzcuaro" label="Lake Pátzcuaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688021" start="55217" end="55233" title="Russell Tribunal" label="Russell Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="55266" end="55273" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q315615" start="55462" end="55482" title="Miguel Alemán Valdés" label="Miguel Alemán Valdés"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264" start="55554" end="55570" title="Cuban Revolution" label="Cuban Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="55626" end="55638" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170072" start="55748" end="55760" title="Constitution of Mexico" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q327920" start="56057" end="56077" title="Adolfo Ruiz Cortines" label="Adolfo Ruiz Cortines"/>
<link wikidata="Q335533" start="56243" end="56262" title="Adolfo López Mateos" label="Adolfo López Mateos"/>
<link wikidata="Q315637" start="57531" end="57549" title="Gustavo Díaz Ordaz" label="Gustavo Díaz Ordaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8429" start="57730" end="57757" title="1968 Summer Olympics" label="Mexico City Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006981" start="57796" end="57820" title="Mexican Movement of 1968" label="Mexican Movement of 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q909737" start="57968" end="57987" title="Tlatelolco massacre" label="Tlatelolco massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525496" start="58082" end="58098" title="Heberto Castillo" label="Heberto Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q222738" start="58145" end="58164" title="National Autonomous University of Mexico" label="National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960481" start="58994" end="59000" title="Amalia Solórzano" label="Amalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="59100" end="59111" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389520" start="59184" end="59210" title="Monumento a la Revolución" label="Monument to the Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q313122" start="59264" end="59283" title="Venustiano Carranza" label="Venustiano Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="59285" end="59297" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q315066" start="59303" end="59324" title="Plutarco Elias Calles" label="Plutarco Elias Calles"/>
<link wikidata="Q922837" start="59346" end="59365" title="Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas" label="Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938773" start="59383" end="59404" title="Lázaro Cárdenas Batel" label="Lázaro Cárdenas Batel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785340" start="59561" end="59587" title="Lázaro Cárdenas, Michoacán" label="Lázaro Cárdenas, Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660184" start="59609" end="59638" title="Lázaro Cárdenas, Quintana Roo" label="Lázaro Cárdenas, Quintana Roo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6710802" start="59640" end="59664" title="Lázaro Cárdenas, Jalisco" label="Lázaro Cárdenas, Jalisco"/>
<link wikidata="" start="59705" end="59716" title=":es:Presa Lázaro Cárdenas" label="dam project"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328855" start="59724" end="59735" title="Nazas River" label="Nazas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q9022" start="59920" end="59931" title="Guadalajara" label="Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q81033" start="59933" end="59942" title="Monterrey" label="Monterrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q199440" start="59947" end="59955" title="Mexicali" label="Mexicali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="60039" end="60047" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="60049" end="60055" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="60100" end="60109" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="60146" end="60152" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="60252" end="60261" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q308907" start="60488" end="60506" title="Stalin Peace Prize" label="Stalin Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q277560" start="60624" end="60640" title="de-Stalinization" label="de-Stalinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824617" start="60645" end="60652" title="Lázaro Cárdenas metro station (Mexico City)" label="station"/>
<link wikidata="Q735042" start="60660" end="60677" title="Mexico City Metro" label="Mexico City Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="61975" end="61978" title="Institutional Revolutionary Party" label="PRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q212763" start="63219" end="63236" title="History of Mexico" label="History of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q8310435" start="63238" end="63270" title="List of heads of state of Mexico" label="List of heads of state of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q59152461" start="63272" end="63299" title="Monument to Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Monument to Lázaro Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q108502059" start="63301" end="63321" title="Lázaro Cárdenas Park" label="Lázaro Cárdenas Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q56241043" start="63348" end="63382" title="Statue of Lázaro Cárdenas (Madrid)" label="Statue of Lázaro Cárdenas (Madrid)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27948799" start="64333" end="64349" title="Howard F. Cline" label="Cline, Howard F."/>
<link wikidata="Q4707081" start="65578" end="65590" title="Alan Knight (historian)" label="Knight, Alan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9021890" start="65796" end="65810" title="Leslie Bethell" label="Leslie Bethell"/>
<link wikidata="Q528185" start="65882" end="65897" title="Enrique Krauze" label="Krauze, Enrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217563" start="66107" end="66123" title="Lanham, Maryland" label="Lanham, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372254" start="66125" end="66149" title="Rowman &amp;amp; Littlefield" label="Rowman &amp;amp; Littlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6295426" start="66400" end="66433" title="Journal of Latin American Studies" label="Journal of Latin American Studies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211586" wikidata="Q324400" url="?curid=211586" title="Dead Can Dance">
<text>Dead Can Dance are an Australian world music and darkwave band from Melbourne. Currently composed of Lisa Gerrard and Brendan Perry, the group formed in 1981. They relocated to London the following year. Australian music historian Ian McFarlane described Dead Can Dance&#x27;s style as &quot;constructed soundscapes of mesmerising grandeur and solemn beauty; African polyrhythms, Gaelic folk, Gregorian chant, Middle Eastern music, mantras, and art rock.&quot;

Having temporarily disbanded in 1998, they reunited in 2005 for a world tour, and again in 2011 to release and tour the album &quot;Anastasis&quot;. They released their most recent album, &quot;Dionysus&quot;, in 2018, and toured Europe in 2022.

==Career==
===Formation and early years===
Dead Can Dance were formed in Melbourne, Australia, in August 1981 with Paul Erikson on bass guitar, Lisa Gerrard (ex-Microfilm) on vocals and percussion, Simon Monroe (Marching Girls) on drums and Brendan Perry (also of Marching Girls) on vocals and guitar. Gerrard and Perry were a couple who met as members of Melbourne&#x27;s Little Band scene. Dead Can Dance soon became headliners at Melbourne&#x27;s main post-punk venue, the Crystal Ballroom in St Kilda, and played an Australian farewell show there in May 1982 before moving to London, England, where they signed with alternative music label 4AD. With the duo, the initial United Kingdom line-up were Paul Erikson and Peter Ulrich.

The group&#x27;s debut album, &quot;Dead Can Dance&quot;, was released in February 1984. The artwork, which depicts a ritual mask from New Guinea, &quot;provide[s] a visual reinterpretation of the meaning of the name Dead Can Dance&quot;, set in a faux Greek typeface. The album featured &quot;drum-driven, ambient guitar music with chanting, singing and howling&quot;, and fit in with the ethereal wave style of label mates Cocteau Twins. They followed with a four-track extended play (EP), &quot;Garden of the Arcane Delights&quot; in August. AllMusic described their early work as &quot;as goth as it gets&quot; (despite the group themselves rejecting the label), while the EP saw them &quot;plunging into a wider range of music and style&quot;.

For their second album, &quot;Spleen and Ideal&quot;, the group comprised the core duo of Gerrard and Perry with cello, trombone and tympani added in by session musicians. Released in November 1985, it was co-produced by the duo and John A. Rivers. Raggett describes it as &quot;a consciously medieval European sound [...] like it was recorded in an immense cathedral&quot;. The group built a following in Europe, and the album reached No. 2 on the UK indie charts. In 1989, Gerrard and Perry separated domestically – Gerrard moved to Barcelona before returning to Australia and Perry moved to Ireland – but still wrote, recorded and performed as Dead Can Dance.

===Success===

The duo&#x27;s sixth studio album, &quot;Into the Labyrinth&quot;, was issued in September 1993 and dispensed with guest musicians entirely; it sold 500,000 copies worldwide and appeared in the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. The band became 4AD&#x27;s highest-selling act. They followed with a world tour in 1994 and recorded a live performance in California which was released as &quot;Toward the Within&quot;, with video versions on Laserdisc and VHS (later on DVD). Many unofficial bootlegs of concerts spanning its career exist, containing several rare songs that were only performed live. &quot;Toward the Within&quot; is the duo&#x27;s first official live album, which reached the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and was followed by &quot;In Concert&quot; 19 years later. Gerrard released her debut solo recording, &quot;The Mirror Pool&quot;, and reunited with Perry on the Dead Can Dance studio album &quot;Spiritchaser&quot; in 1996. The album also charted on &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and reached No. 1 on the Top World Music Albums Chart.

===Disbandment and reunions===
In 1998, Dead Can Dance began recording a follow-up album to &quot;Spiritchaser&quot;, which was due to be released in early 1999 followed by a planned world tour. However, they separated before it was completed and canceled the tour. One song from the recording sessions, &quot;The Lotus Eaters&quot;, was eventually released on the box set &quot;Dead Can Dance (1981-1998)&quot; and on the two-disc compilation &quot;Wake&quot; (2003). Gerrard teamed with Pieter Bourke (Snog, Soma) to issue &quot;Duality&quot; in April 1998. Perry released &quot;Eye of the Hunter&quot; in October 1999.

Dead Can Dance reunited in 2005 and released limited-edition recordings of thirteen shows from its European tour and eight recordings from the subsequent North American tour, as well as a compilation titled &quot;Selections from Europe 2005&quot;. These concerts were recorded and released on The Show record label. In 2005, the song &quot;Nierika&quot; became part of the opening titles for Mexican television station TV Azteca&#x27;s soap opera &quot;La Chacala&quot;.

On 12 May 2011, Brendan Perry announced on his official web forum that Dead Can Dance would record a new album and then embark on two-month world tour. The band made a formal announcement about its world tour and new album, &quot;Anastasis&quot;, for a release date of 13 August 2012.

In late 2011, the band announced a reunion world tour, including 12 US cities, to be accompanied by the release of a live album on a new label. The tour was scheduled to begin on 9 August 2012 in Canada and continue until 19 September 2012 in Turkey, 21 and 23 September in Greece, 13 October in Russia, then 28 October 2012 in Ireland, then Mexico and South America and then in Lebanon and finally Australia in February 2013. On 15 November 2012 it was announced that the band would be returning to Europe to continue its tour, starting on 28 May 2013 in Portugal. The final show of the Anastasis World Tour was in Santiago, Chile, on 13 July 2013. On 17 October 2014, the band announced that plans for an upcoming European tour for Spring 2015 had been cancelled &quot;due to unforeseen circumstances&quot;.

On 8 September 2015, the band announced the sale of Brendan Perry&#x27;s Quivvy Church Studio. When asked what this decision meant for the future of Dead Can Dance, Perry responded on the band&#x27;s official Facebook page that the band has relocated to France and that they are in the process of fabricating a new recording and rehearsal studio.


On 21 April 2018, Perry announced mastering of a new album would be commencing at Abbey Road Studios. The new album, &quot;Dionysus&quot;, was released on 2 November 2018.

In September 2018, their website announced &quot;A Celebration – Life &amp; Works 1980-2019&quot; tour with dates in Europe in May and June 2019. In contrast to previous tours, the setlist drew heavily from the band&#x27;s older catalogue, featuring some songs the band had never before played live. In October 2019, the band announced a second leg of the tour with dates in North America, Mexico and South America. However, the tour was postponed to 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The 2021 tour as well as rescheduled dates for later in the year were also cancelled citing COVID-19. In March 2022, Perry anticipated plans for a new album influenced by Indian music and new arrangements and rehearsals for an upcoming Tour. A 2022 European tour did take place, and a second European leg was scheduled for the later in the year as well as a North American leg for 2023. However, in September 2022 the band announced the cancellation of both the second European leg as well as the North American dates citing unspecified health reasons.

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
* &quot;Dead Can Dance&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Spleen and Ideal&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Within the Realm of a Dying Sun&quot; (1987)
* &quot;The Serpent&#x27;s Egg&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Aion&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Into the Labyrinth&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Spiritchaser&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Anastasis&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Dionysus&quot; (2018)

==See also==
*List of ambient music artists

==References==
==External links==
* Dead Can Dance interviews from the Echoes public radio show
* 
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q324400" start="0" end="14" title="Dead Can Dance" label="Dead Can Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840596" start="49" end="57" title="darkwave" label="darkwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="68" end="77" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q40580" start="101" end="113" title="Lisa Gerrard" label="Lisa Gerrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q552479" start="118" end="131" title="Brendan Perry" label="Brendan Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982288" start="231" end="244" title="Ian McFarlane" label="Ian McFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q369820" start="359" end="366" title="Music of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q747529" start="367" end="377" title="polyrhythm" label="polyrhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q854451" start="380" end="391" title="Celtic music" label="Gaelic folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q26473" start="393" end="408" title="Gregorian chant" label="Gregorian chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503406" start="410" end="430" title="Middle Eastern music" label="Middle Eastern music"/>
<link wikidata="Q131510" start="432" end="438" title="mantra" label="mantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q217467" start="445" end="453" title="art rock" label="art rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949866" start="594" end="603" title="Anastasis (album)" label="Anastasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q57341512" start="656" end="664" title="Dionysus (album)" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="782" end="791" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q40580" start="853" end="865" title="Lisa Gerrard" label="Lisa Gerrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762467" start="921" end="935" title="The Scavengers" label="Marching Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q552479" start="950" end="963" title="Brendan Perry" label="Brendan Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652645" start="1082" end="1099" title="Little Band scene" label="Little Band scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191121" start="1185" end="1201" title="Crystal Ballroom (Melbourne)" label="Crystal Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q823531" start="1205" end="1213" title="St Kilda, Victoria" label="St Kilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177428" start="1429" end="1441" title="Peter Ulrich" label="Peter Ulrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753050" start="1480" end="1494" title="Dead Can Dance (album)" label="Dead Can Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q161524" start="1562" end="1573" title="ritual mask" label="ritual mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="1579" end="1589" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q284543" start="1834" end="1847" title="ethereal wave" label="ethereal wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q588820" start="1869" end="1882" title="Cocteau Twins" label="Cocteau Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="1916" end="1929" title="extended play" label="extended play"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282120" start="1942" end="1971" title="Garden of the Arcane Delights" label="Garden of the Arcane Delights"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="1989" end="1997" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q485395" start="2037" end="2041" title="gothic rock" label="goth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755639" start="2224" end="2240" title="Spleen and Ideal" label="Spleen and Ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q189737" start="2327" end="2334" title="tympani" label="tympani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934401" start="2914" end="2932" title="Into the Labyrinth (Dead Can Dance album)" label="Into the Labyrinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="3067" end="3092" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="3217" end="3227" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934269" start="3256" end="3273" title="Toward the Within" label="Toward the Within"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="3304" end="3313" title="Laserdisc" label="Laserdisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="3318" end="3321" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="3526" end="3536" title="live album" label="live album"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994805" start="3608" end="3618" title="In Concert (Dead Can Dance album)" label="In Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521887" start="3690" end="3705" title="The Mirror Pool" label="The Mirror Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q375329" start="3778" end="3790" title="Spiritchaser" label="Spiritchaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602639" start="4293" end="4319" title="Dead Can Dance (1981-1998)" label="Dead Can Dance (1981-1998)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175115" start="4364" end="4368" title="Wake (Dead Can Dance album)" label="Wake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528148" start="4403" end="4416" title="Pieter Bourke" label="Pieter Bourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q13389820" start="4418" end="4422" title="Snog" label="Snog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715633" start="4445" end="4452" title="Duality (Lisa Gerrard and Pieter Bourke album)" label="Duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422693" start="4495" end="4512" title="Eye of the Hunter" label="Eye of the Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875229" start="4959" end="4965" title="Azteca (TV network)" label="Azteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="5491" end="5497" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="5538" end="5544" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="5569" end="5575" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="5591" end="5597" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="5623" end="5630" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="5637" end="5643" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="5648" end="5661" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="5694" end="5703" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="5851" end="5859" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q57341512" start="6578" end="6586" title="Dionysus (album)" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="7095" end="7112" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753050" start="7712" end="7726" title="Dead Can Dance (album)" label="Dead Can Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755639" start="7748" end="7764" title="Spleen and Ideal" label="Spleen and Ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934282" start="7786" end="7817" title="Within the Realm of a Dying Sun" label="Within the Realm of a Dying Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934237" start="7839" end="7861" title="The Serpent&amp;#x27;s Egg (album)" label="The Serpent&amp;#x27;s Egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933709" start="7883" end="7887" title="Aion (Dead Can Dance album)" label="Aion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934401" start="7909" end="7927" title="Into the Labyrinth (Dead Can Dance album)" label="Into the Labyrinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q375329" start="7949" end="7961" title="Spiritchaser" label="Spiritchaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949866" start="7983" end="7992" title="Anastasis (album)" label="Anastasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q57341512" start="8014" end="8022" title="Dionysus (album)" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q688818" start="8051" end="8080" title="List of ambient music artists" label="List of ambient music artists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211588" wikidata="Q922837" url="?curid=211588" title="Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas">
<text>Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas Solórzano (; born 1 May 1934) is a Mexican politician and civil engineer. A prominent social-democrat and the son of 51st president of Mexico Lázaro Cárdenas, he is a former Head of Government of Mexico City and a founder of the Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD). He ran for the presidency of Mexico three times, and his loss in the 1988 Mexican general election to Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) candidate Carlos Salinas de Gortari had long been considered the result of electoral fraud perpetrated by the ruling PRI, later acknowledged by Miguel de la Madrid, the incumbent president at the time of the election. He previously served as a Senator, having been elected in 1976 to represent the state of Michoacán and also as the Governor of Michoacán from 1980 to 1986.

==Early life and education==
Cárdenas Solórzano was born in Mexico City on 1 May 1934 and was named after the last Aztec emperor, Cuauhtémoc. He is the only son of Lázaro Cárdenas and Amalia Solórzano; through his father, he has Purépecha ancestry. When he was seven months old, his father was inaugurated as President of Mexico. He studied at Colegio Williams, an all-boys private, secular English-language school located in the old mansion of Porfirio Díaz&#x27;s finance minister, José Yves Limantour, that has a rigorous academic curriculum. A former alumni described the education there as cultivating &quot;the body as a source of energy and fighting. It was an energy destined to produce active, intelligent animals of prey. [The school] worshiped manly virtues like tenacity, strength, loyalty and aggression.&quot;

==Political career==
===Early career===
Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas often served as his father&#x27;s &quot;aide-de-camp&quot; in later years, when the former president remained a powerful political figure. Lázaro Cárdenas remained active in Institutional Revolutionary Party politics, and, with son Cuauhtémoc, tried to move the party to a more leftist stance. Both were active in the &quot;Movimiento de Liberación Nacional&quot; (MLN, Movement of National Liberation), which sought international support for Cuba following its 1959 revolution, as well as to affect domestic politics in Mexico, particularly the need for democracy in the PRI and decentralization of power.

Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas served as a senator for the state of Michoacán from 1974 to 1980 and as governor of that same state from 1980 to 1986. He won election to these two posts as a member of the then-ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party.

===First presidential campaign===
When President Miguel de la Madrid, a centrist who began policy changes in Mexico that liberalized its economy, designated his presidential successor as Carlos Salinas de Gortari, another technocrat with centre-right tendencies, leftist and other elements within the PRI formed a &quot;democratic current.&quot; They demanded democracy and a return to a more moderate, anti-privatization stance by the PRI. Cárdenas and Porfirio Muñoz Ledo led this current. There was an informal rule within the PRI called &quot;&quot;el dedazo&quot;,&quot; which basically granted the incumbent president the exclusive right to designate his successor. (The expression was a reference to the action of pointing with a finger to the successor.) With the designation of Salinas as the official candidate, the democratic current were forced out of the PRI. In an interview with historian Enrique Krauze, De la Madrid said &quot;as far as I&#x27;m concerned, let them go! Let them form another party.&quot; It was too late to form a new party in advance of the July 1988 elections, but a coalition of small left-wing parties, the Frente Democrático Nacional (&quot;National Democratic Front&quot;) supported Cárdenas as their candidate.

On 6 July 1988, the day of the elections, a system shutdown of the IBM AS/400 that the government was using to count the votes occurred. The government simply stated that &quot;se cayó el sistema&quot; (&quot;the system crashed&quot;), to refer to the incident. When the system was finally restored, Carlos Salinas de Gortari was declared the official winner. The elections became extremely controversial, and even though some declare that Salinas won legally, the expression &quot;se cayó el sistema&quot; became a colloquial euphemism for electoral fraud. It was the first time in 59 years, from the creation of PRI to that point (1929–1988), that the party winning the presidency was in doubt, and citizens of Mexico realized that the PRI could lose. Historian Enrique Krauze&#x27;s assessment is that &quot;an order from [Cárdenas] would have sent Mexico up in flames. But perhaps in memory of his father, the missionary general, a man of strong convictions but not a man of violence, he did the country a great service by sparing it a possible civil war.&quot;

===Foundation of PRD===
The following year (5 May 1989), Cárdenas and other leading center-left and leftist PRI politicians, including Francisco Arellano-Belloc, formally founded the Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD). He was elected the PRD&#x27;s first president, running unopposed, and had a huge influence on the Executive Board&#x27;s composition. The party had the expectation that Cárdenas would make another run for the presidency in 1994 and he was this new party&#x27;s candidate in the 1994 presidential election. He placed third, trailing the PRI and PAN candidates, with 17% of the national vote. That election year was tumultuous, with the rebellion of the Zapatista Army of National Liberation in Chiapas beginning 1 January, the assassination of the PRI candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio in March, and his replacement as presidential candidate by Ernesto Zedillo. Cárdenas&#x27;s poor showing at the polls may reflect the Mexican public&#x27;s desire for stability via the long-time ruling party remaining in office. In the assessment of Enrique Krauze, &quot;the events in Chiapas probably cost the PRD and its candidate, Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas—who had no involvement with the Zapatista uprising—the votes of many Mexicans uneasy with the return of the past.&quot; Despite the PRD&#x27;s electoral results, they were part of the 1996 negotiations between the PRI and the conservative National Action Party (PAN) on institutional reform.

In 1995, Cárdenas played a role in the peace negotiations with the Zapatistas. In 1996, the PRD was choosing a new party president, Cárdenas&#x27;s ally Andrés Manuel López Obrador, who went further and sought a political alliance with the Zapatistas.

In 1997, he was the PRD&#x27;s candidate for the newly created post of Head of Government &quot;(Jefe de Gobierno)&quot; of the Federal District – effectively, a role lying somewhere between that of Mexico City&#x27;s mayor and a state governorship. He won this election, held on 6 July 1997, with a 47.7% share of the popular vote.

He resigned in 1999 (and was succeeded by one of his allies, Rosario Robles), to run for the presidency again in 2000. Cárdenas again placed third with 17% of the vote and the PRI lost the election to Vicente Fox, the candidate of the PAN.

===Departure from PRD===

On 25 November 2014, Cárdenas announced that he was leaving the PRD. He had been a longtime senior member of the PRD, and was considered the &#x27;moral leader&#x27; of the party. Many in Mexico saw his departure from the PRD as a product of the party&#x27;s internal fighting and mounting identity crisis.

==Personal life==
Cárdenas Solórzano was reported to have tested positive for COVID-19 on 12 September 2020.

==Further reading==
* Aguilar Zinser, Adolfo. &quot;Vamos a ganar! La pugna de Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas por el poder&quot;. Mexico City: Editorial Oceano 1995.
* Bruhn, Kathleen. &quot;Taking on Goliath: The Emergence of a New Left Party and the Struggle for Democracy in Mexico&quot;. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press 1997.
* Carr, Barry and Steve Ellner, editors. &quot;The Left in Latin America: From the fall of Allende to Perestroika&quot;. Boulder CO: Westview Press 1993.
* Castañeda, Jorge. &quot;Utopia Unarmed: The Latin American Left after the Cold War&quot;. New York: Knopf 1993.
* Gilly, Adolfo, ed. &quot;Cartas a Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas&quot;. Mexico City: Era 1989.
* Taibo, Paco Ignacio II. &quot;Cárdenas de cerca: Una entrevista biográfica&quot;. Mexico City: Editorial Planeta 1994.

==References==
==External links==
*PBS: Charles Krause interviews Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas 
* Biography on Televisa&#x27;s website.
* Government of the Mexican Federal District: Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas.
* Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas Solórzano, A progressive proposal.
* https://web.archive.org/web/20141208150646/http://www.laprensasa.com/309_america-in-english/2814492_cuauhtemoc-cardenas-leaves-mexico-s-prd.html



|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q922837" start="0" end="29" title="Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas" label="Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas Solórzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209676" start="55" end="62" title="Mexicans" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="106" end="121" title="Social democracy" label="social-democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q296718" start="162" end="177" title="Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Lázaro Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q24056909" start="194" end="227" title="List of heads of government of Mexico City" label="Head of Government of Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q767010" start="249" end="283" title="Party of the Democratic Revolution" label="Party of the Democratic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826046" start="360" end="389" title="1988 Mexican general election" label="1988 Mexican general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="393" end="426" title="Institutional Revolutionary Party" label="Institutional Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q315633" start="443" end="468" title="Carlos Salinas de Gortari" label="Carlos Salinas de Gortari"/>
<link wikidata="Q296691" start="577" end="596" title="Miguel de la Madrid" label="Miguel de la Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q264113" start="677" end="684" title="Senate of the Republic (Mexico)" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344325" start="709" end="713" title="1976 in Mexico" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q79861" start="740" end="749" title="Michoacán" label="Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589681" start="766" end="787" title="Governor of Michoacán" label="Governor of Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q18347346" start="793" end="797" title="1980 in Mexico" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344520" start="801" end="805" title="1986 in Mexico" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="868" end="879" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q297050" start="938" end="948" title="Cuauhtémoc" label="Cuauhtémoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q296718" start="972" end="987" title="Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Lázaro Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960481" start="992" end="1008" title="Amalia Solórzano" label="Amalia Solórzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q45009" start="1037" end="1046" title="Purépecha" label="Purépecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q628004" start="1117" end="1136" title="President of Mexico" label="President of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142924" start="1152" end="1168" title="Colegio Williams" label="Colegio Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="1253" end="1266" title="Porfirio Díaz" label="Porfirio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q684289" start="1292" end="1311" title="José Yves Limantour" label="José Yves Limantour"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="1733" end="1745" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="1867" end="1900" title="Institutional Revolutionary Party" label="Institutional Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080536" start="2063" end="2094" title="Movement of National Liberation" label="Movement of National Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q264113" start="2333" end="2340" title="Senate of Mexico" label="senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q28912963" start="2349" end="2354" title="States of Mexico" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q79861" start="2358" end="2367" title="Michoacán" label="Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="2506" end="2539" title="Partido Revolucionario Institucional" label="Institutional Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q296691" start="2591" end="2610" title="Miguel de la Madrid" label="Miguel de la Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q315633" start="2729" end="2754" title="Carlos Salinas de Gortari" label="Carlos Salinas de Gortari"/>
<link wikidata="Q190044" start="2764" end="2774" title="technocrat" label="technocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956741" start="2996" end="3015" title="Porfirio Muñoz Ledo" label="Porfirio Muñoz Ledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q528185" start="3446" end="3460" title="Enrique Krauze" label="Enrique Krauze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826046" start="3618" end="3637" title="1988 Mexican general election" label="July 1988 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455519" start="3687" end="3714" title="National Democratic Front (Mexico)" label="Frente Democrático Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q9137400" start="3862" end="3872" title="IBM AS/400" label="IBM AS/400"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4997" end="5022" title="Francisco Arellano-Belloc" label="Francisco Arellano-Belloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q767010" start="5045" end="5079" title="Party of the Democratic Revolution" label="Party of the Democratic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837640" start="5365" end="5391" title="1994 Mexican general election" label="1994 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="5423" end="5426" title="Partido Revolucionario Institucional" label="PRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q851087" start="5431" end="5434" title="National Action Party (Mexico)" label="PAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q188590" start="5539" end="5576" title="Zapatista Army of National Liberation" label="Zapatista Army of National Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q280555" start="5648" end="5668" title="Luis Donaldo Colosio" label="Luis Donaldo Colosio"/>
<link wikidata="Q298149" start="5728" end="5743" title="Ernesto Zedillo" label="Ernesto Zedillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23895035" start="6056" end="6074" title="Zapatista uprising" label="Zapatista uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q318508" start="6470" end="6497" title="Andrés Manuel López Obrador" label="Andrés Manuel López Obrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q24056909" start="6641" end="6659" title="Head of Government of the Federal District" label="Head of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="6698" end="6714" title="Mexican Federal District" label="Federal District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="6769" end="6780" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="6788" end="6793" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="6800" end="6818" title="Governor" label="state governorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737753" start="6965" end="6979" title="Rosario Robles" label="Rosario Robles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645480" start="6985" end="7007" title="2000 Mexican general election" label="run for the presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q190572" start="7105" end="7116" title="Vicente Fox" label="Vicente Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q86628344" start="7557" end="7565" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Mexico" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q47099" start="8507" end="8515" title="Televisa" label="Televisa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211592" wikidata="Q446158" url="?curid=211592" title="Gail Russell">
<text>Gail Russell (born Betty Gale Russell; September 21, 1924 – August 26, 1961) was an American film and television actress.

==Early years==
Gail Russell was born to George and Gladys (Barnet) Russell in Chicago and then moved to the Los Angeles area when she was a teenager. Her father was initially a musician but later worked for Lockheed Corporation. Before she ventured into acting, Russell had planned to be a commercial artist. Her beauty saw her dubbed &quot;the Hedy Lamarr of Santa Monica.&quot;

==Career and life==
Russell&#x27;s beauty brought her to the attention of Paramount Pictures in 1942, and she signed a long-term contract with that studio when she was 18.

Russell later said, &quot;suddenly there was this terrific amount of work for myself and no time to myself. It was that way for ten years.&quot;

At the age of 19, Russell made her film debut in the 1943 film &quot;Henry Aldrich Gets Glamour&quot;. She also had a small part in &quot;Lady in the Dark&quot; (1943) and was meant to play a role in &quot;Henry Aldrich Haunts a House&quot; when, in March 1943, she was cast in a key role in &quot;The Uninvited&quot; (1944) with Ray Milland. Joan Mortimer played Russell&#x27;s role in &quot;Henry Aldrich&quot; instead.

===Stardom===

&quot;The Uninvited&quot; was directed by Lewis Allen and was a big success. Producer Charles Brackett wrote that filming with Russell proved difficult; he said that she would cry on set with her mother, claiming she had a sore throat, but in fact, Russell was crying because Director Lewis Allen had made her wear a hat for a scene which she did not want to wear. Allen said that Ray Milland would take Russell aside and continuously practice her lines with her. Allen also said, &quot;She could only do about five or six lines, and then she&#x27;d burst into tears.&quot; According to Allen, Russell, who had not drunk alcohol before, began drinking it to calm herself at the suggestion of the head of make-up on set.

According to the &quot;National Box Office Digest&quot;, it was among the highest-grossing pictures in the United States with rentals of over $500,000. A delighted Paramount announced Russell for &quot;Her Heart in Her Throat&quot; and &quot;True to the Navy&quot; with Eddie Bracken.

Allen directed Russell in &quot;Our Hearts Were Young and Gay&quot; (1944), in which she co-starred with Diana Lynn. It was another success.

Russell co-starred opposite Alan Ladd in &quot;Salty O&#x27;Rourke&quot; (1945), a horse racing drama.

&quot;Her Heart in Her Throat&quot; became the third film Russell made with Allen, &quot;The Unseen&quot; (1945), an unofficial follow up to &quot;The Uninvited&quot;. &quot;True to the Navy&quot; became &quot;Bring On the Girls&quot;; Russell did not appear in that film.

Then she and Lynn were in &quot;Our Hearts Were Growing Up&quot; (1946), a sequel to &quot;Our Hearts Were Young and Gay&quot;. Paramount announced her as the female lead in &quot;The Virginian&quot; (1946) but she did not appear in the final movie.

She was reunited with Ladd in &quot;Calcutta&quot; (1947), shot in 1945 but not released until two years later. She made a cameo as herself in two all-star Paramount films, &quot;Duffy&#x27;s Tavern&quot; (1945) and &quot;Variety Girl&quot; (1947).

===Loan-outs===

Russell was borrowed by Andrew Stone for &quot;The Bachelor&#x27;s Daughters&quot; (1946) at United Artists.

Republic Pictures borrowed her to be John Wayne&#x27;s leading lady in a film Wayne was producing, &quot;Angel and the Badman&quot; (1947). Also at Republic she did &quot;Moonrise&quot; (1948) for Frank Borzage.

Russell returned to Paramount for &quot;Night Has a Thousand Eyes&quot; (1948), directed by John Farrow, who had made &quot;Calcutta&quot;. She reteamed with Wayne at Republic for &quot;Wake of the Red Witch&quot; (1948), which was a hit.

She appeared in a Western, &quot;El Paso&quot; (1949), with John Payne for Pine-Thomas Productions, a production outfit who released through Paramount.

Russell did &quot;Song of India&quot; (1949) for Columbia and &quot;The Great Dan Patch&quot; (1949) for United Artists.

Russell married actor Guy Madison on 1 August 1949. They separated in less than six months but later reunited, then separated in 1953, and divorced in 1954.

She made some more Pine-Thomas films: &quot;Captain China&quot; (1950) with Payne, and &quot;The Lawless&quot; (1951) with Macdonald Carey directed by Joseph Losey.

By 1950 it was well known that she had become a victim of alcoholism. According to Yvonne de Carlo, actress Helen Walker took Russell &quot;under her wing and introduced her to the tranquilizing benefits of vodka&quot; when they were Paramount contractees together. Russell was already drinking on set by her third film, 1944&#x27;s &quot;The Uninvited&quot;, to ease her paralyzing stage fright and lack of confidence. Paramount did not renew her contract.

She made &quot;Air Cadet&quot; (1951) for Universal.

===Legal troubles===

In 1953 John Wayne&#x27;s then-wife claimed during her divorce proceedings that Wayne and Russell had spent the night together. Wayne and Russell denied this.

In November 1953 she was held in jail overnight after being arrested for drunk driving. The following month she and Madison separated permanently.

In January 1954, in a court in Santa Monica, California, Russell pleaded guilty to a charge of drunkenness, receiving a $150 fine (). The fine was in lieu of a jail sentence, with the provision that she not use intoxicants or attend night spots for two years. In the same court session, she received a continuance on a charge of driving while drunk.

She sued Madison for divorce in May 1954. The divorce was finalized in October 1954. During the court proceedings Madison claimed that Russell would never do any housework and would not allow visitors or servants in the house.

In October 1954 she was admitted to a hospital in a coma after an attack of hepatitis.

In February 1955 she hit another car containing a couple and their baby while driving. She was fined $50. The couple later sued her for $30,000 () and settled out of court.

===Comeback===
Russell returned to work in a co-starring role with Randolph Scott in the western &quot;Seven Men from Now&quot; (1956), produced by her friend Wayne and directed by Budd Boetticher. The film and Russell&#x27;s performance were lauded and she seemed poised to make a comeback.

Russell was expected to follow &quot;Seven Men from Now&quot; with &quot;Madame Courage&quot;, again with Boetticher as director, but the film was never made.

Instead Russell appeared in an episode of &quot;Studio 57&quot; and had a substantial role in &quot;The Tattered Dress&quot; (1957).

In April 1957 she was found unconscious on the floor at her home.

On July 5, 1957, she was photographed by a &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; photographer after she drove her convertible into the front of Jan&#x27;s Coffee Shop at 8424 Beverly Boulevard, injuring a janitor. After failing a sobriety test, Russell was arrested and charged with driving under the influence. The janitor sued her for $75,000. She failed to appear at a court appearance and was discovered at home passed out due to drinking. She was fined $420, given a 30-day suspended sentence and put on three years&#x27; probation.

She appeared in &quot;No Place to Land&quot; (1958) for Republic.

She had roles in episodes of &quot;The Rebel&quot; and &quot;Manhunt&quot;. &quot;I guess there are still a lot of doubts about me&quot;, she said in April 1960. &quot;And this is one of the reasons why I want to get back to the business to prove to people I can do a picture. I&#x27;m stronger now. The future looks pretty good.&quot;

In November 1960 she was announced for a film with Mark Stevens and George Raft called &quot;Cause of Death&quot; but it appears to have not been made. She was top billed in her last film, the low-budget &quot;The Silent Call&quot; (1961).

==Death==
Russell moved to a small house where she lived alone. She would periodically try to stop drinking then start again. On one occasion, Russell was hospitalized. On August 26, 1961, she was found dead at her residence in Brentwood, Los Angeles, California, at the age of 36. She was found by two neighbors who were concerned they had not seen her for several days. An empty vodka bottle was by Russell&#x27;s side, and the house was full of empty bottles.

Russell died from liver damage attributed to &quot;acute and chronic alcoholism&quot; with aspiration of stomach contents as an additional cause. She was also found to have been suffering from malnutrition at the time of her death.

==Filmography==
== Radio appearances ==
==References==
==External links==

* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q446158" start="0" end="12" title="Gail Russell" label="Gail Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q446158" start="19" end="37" title="Gail Russell" label="Betty Gale Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="202" end="209" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233" start="331" end="351" title="Lockheed Corporation" label="Lockheed Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49034" start="469" end="480" title="Hedy Lamarr" label="Hedy Lamarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="484" end="496" title="Santa Monica" label="Santa Monica"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="579" end="597" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649518" start="893" end="919" title="Henry Aldrich Gets Glamour" label="Henry Aldrich Gets Glamour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750380" start="962" end="978" title="Lady in the Dark (film)" label="Lady in the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649523" start="1030" end="1058" title="Henry Aldrich Haunts a House" label="Henry Aldrich Haunts a House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199728" start="1122" end="1135" title="The Uninvited (1944 film)" label="The Uninvited"/>
<link wikidata="Q181774" start="1154" end="1165" title="Ray Milland" label="Ray Milland"/>
<link wikidata="Q709398" start="1304" end="1315" title="Lewis Allen (director)" label="Lewis Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q385055" start="1348" end="1364" title="Charles Brackett" label="Charles Brackett"/>
<link wikidata="Q709398" start="1547" end="1558" title="Lewis Allen (director)" label="Lewis Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q181774" start="1643" end="1654" title="Ray Milland" label="Ray Milland"/>
<link wikidata="Q166212" start="2253" end="2266" title="Eddie Bracken" label="Eddie Bracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649282" start="2301" end="2330" title="Our Hearts Were Young and Gay (film)" label="Our Hearts Were Young and Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383560" start="2374" end="2384" title="Diana Lynn" label="Diana Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q346280" start="2439" end="2448" title="Alan Ladd" label="Alan Ladd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878318" start="2458" end="2477" title="Salty O&amp;#x27;Rourke" label="Salty O&amp;#x27;Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283442" start="2604" end="2614" title="The Unseen (1945 film)" label="The Unseen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204625" start="2725" end="2743" title="Bring On the Girls (film)" label="Bring On the Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649278" start="2821" end="2847" title="Our Hearts Were Growing Up" label="Our Hearts Were Growing Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796272" start="2969" end="2982" title="The Virginian (1946 film)" label="The Virginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307636" start="3076" end="3084" title="Calcutta (1947 film)" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040979" start="3219" end="3238" title="Duffy&amp;#x27;s Tavern (film)" label="Duffy&amp;#x27;s Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283547" start="3262" end="3274" title="Variety Girl (film)" label="Variety Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389191" start="3354" end="3383" title="The Bachelor&amp;#x27;s Daughters" label="The Bachelor&amp;#x27;s Daughters"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="3400" end="3414" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="3454" end="3464" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q645771" start="3522" end="3542" title="Angel and the Badman" label="Angel and the Badman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222839" start="3588" end="3596" title="Moonrise (film)" label="Moonrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q369190" start="3614" end="3627" title="Frank Borzage" label="Frank Borzage"/>
<link wikidata="Q518492" start="3670" end="3695" title="Night Has a Thousand Eyes" label="Night Has a Thousand Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q547495" start="3722" end="3733" title="John Farrow" label="John Farrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226767" start="3816" end="3837" title="Wake of the Red Witch" label="Wake of the Red Witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351759" start="3903" end="3910" title="El Paso (film)" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q723415" start="3930" end="3940" title="John Payne (actor)" label="John Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195048" start="3945" end="3968" title="Pine-Thomas Productions" label="Pine-Thomas Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q48672677" start="4041" end="4054" title="Song of India (film)" label="Song of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737699" start="4091" end="4110" title="The Great Dan Patch" label="The Great Dan Patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557542" start="4167" end="4178" title="Guy Madison" label="Guy Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867522" start="4347" end="4360" title="Captain China" label="Captain China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125774" start="4396" end="4407" title="The Lawless" label="The Lawless"/>
<link wikidata="Q304828" start="4426" end="4441" title="Macdonald Carey" label="Macdonald Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q269357" start="4454" end="4466" title="Joseph Losey" label="Joseph Losey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="4527" end="4537" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q286339" start="4552" end="4567" title="Yvonne de Carlo" label="Yvonne de Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129644" start="4577" end="4589" title="Helen Walker" label="Helen Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q374" start="4676" end="4681" title="vodka" label="vodka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697775" start="4943" end="4952" title="Air Cadet (film)" label="Air Cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q295984" start="6220" end="6234" title="Randolph Scott" label="Randolph Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q677782" start="6256" end="6274" title="Seven Men from Now" label="Seven Men from Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q51466" start="6334" end="6349" title="Budd Boetticher" label="Budd Boetticher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252351" start="6654" end="6663" title="Studio 57" label="Studio 57"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768153" start="6706" end="6724" title="The Tattered Dress" label="The Tattered Dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="6856" end="6873" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q250062" start="7082" end="7109" title="driving under the influence" label="driving under the influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014328" start="7360" end="7376" title="No Place to Land (film)" label="No Place to Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759742" start="7440" end="7449" title="The Rebel (American TV series)" label="The Rebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844597" start="7466" end="7473" title="Manhunt (1959 TV series)" label="Manhunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768058" start="7952" end="7967" title="The Silent Call" label="The Silent Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q909975" start="8211" end="8233" title="Brentwood, Los Angeles" label="Brentwood, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="8516" end="8526" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="8640" end="8652" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211600" wikidata="Q2526223" url="?curid=211600" title="List of Sweden-related topics">
<text>This is a list of topics related to [[Sweden]].

Those interested in the subject can monitor changes to the pages by clicking on &quot;Related changes&quot; in the sidebar.

== Main articles ==
*Sweden, a country in Europe
*History of Sweden
*Politics of Sweden
*Geography of Sweden
*Agriculture in Sweden
*Counties of Sweden
*Economy of Sweden
*Demographics of Sweden
*Swedish language
*Culture of Sweden

== Lists of people ==
*List of Swedes
**List of Swedes by net worth
*List of Swedish monarchs
*List of Swedish queens 
*List of Swedish prime ministers
*List of Swedish actors
*List of Swedish architects
*List of Swedish artists
*List of Swedish clergymen
*List of Swedish diplomats
*List of Swedish entrepreneurs
*List of Swedish film directors
*List of Swedish military commanders
**List of Swedish Field Marshals
*List of Swedes in music
*List of Swedish politicians
**List of County Governors of Sweden
*List of Swedish scientists
*List of Swedes in sports
*List of Swedish language writers

==Administrative subdivisions==

===Lists===
*List of Swedish counties
*List of municipalities of Sweden 
**List of municipalities of Sweden by area 
**List of municipalities of Sweden by density 
**List of municipalities of Sweden by population 
**List of municipalities of Sweden by wealth
*List of postal codes in Sweden

===Articles===
*Subdivisions of Sweden
*Counties of Sweden
*County Councils of Sweden
*Municipalities of Sweden
*Urban areas in Sweden

== Culture ==

===Lists===
*List of Swedish cultural institutions

===Articles===
*Culture of Sweden
*Music of Sweden
*Rap music in Sweden
*Swedish literature
*Cinema of Sweden
*Swedish cuisine
*Holidays in Sweden
**Flag flying days in Sweden
**Namesdays in Sweden
*National anthem of Sweden
*Swedish heraldry
**Coat of Arms of Sweden
**Flag of Sweden
*Registered partnership in Sweden
*Same-sex marriage in Sweden

==Demographics==

===Lists===
*List of municipalities of Sweden by density 
*List of municipalities of Sweden by population

===Articles===
*Demographics of Sweden
*Swedish people

==Economy, business and enterprise==

===Lists===
*List of Swedish companies
*List of Swedish government enterprises
*List of municipalities of Sweden by wealth

===Articles===
*Company mortgage (Sweden)
*Economy of Sweden
**Swedish welfare
**Unemployment benefits in Sweden
*Swedish Krona
*Tourism in Sweden

==Education==

===Lists===
*List of universities in Sweden

===Articles===
*Education in Sweden

==Genealogy, names and nobility==

===Lists===
*List of Swedish noble families

===Articles===
*Swedish nobility
*Swedish heraldry

==Geography==

===Lists===
*List of cities in Sweden 
*List of rivers in Sweden 
*List of islands of Sweden 
*List of lakes in Sweden 
*List of national parks of Sweden
*Forests of Sweden

===Articles===
*Geography of Sweden

==Government and politics==

===Lists===
*List of political parties in Sweden 
*List of Swedish governments
*Line of succession to the Swedish throne
*Swedish diplomatic missions
**Sweden and the United Nations

===Articles===
*Politics of Sweden
**Foreign relations of Sweden
**Monetary policy of Sweden
**Swedish welfare/Social security in Sweden
*Constitution of Sweden
*Monarch of Sweden
*Government of Sweden
*Prime Minister of Sweden
*Riksdag (the Parliament of Sweden)
*Elections in Sweden
*Referendums in Sweden
*Government agencies in Sweden
*Sveriges Riksbank

==Healthcare==

===Lists===
*List of hospitals in Sweden

===Articles===
*Healthcare in Sweden
*Abortion in Sweden
*Disability policy in Sweden

==History==

===Lists===
*List of Swedish wars
**List of Swedish battles
*List of historic buildings in Sweden

===Articles===
*History of Sweden
*Lands of Sweden
*Provinces of Sweden
*Dominions of Sweden

==Language==

===Articles===
*Swedish language
**Standard Swedish
**Finland-Swedish
**Swedish alphabet
**Swedish phonology
**Swedish grammar
**Mandatory Swedish
**Rinkebysvenska
*Minority languages of Sweden

==Media==

===Lists===
*List of Swedish newspapers
*List of Swedish magazines 
*List of Swedish radio stations 
*List of Swedish television channels

===Articles===
*Media in Sweden
*Communications in Sweden

==Military==

===Lists===
*List of Swedish regiments
*List of Swedish ships of the line 
*List of Swedish steam battleships 
*List of military aircraft of Sweden

===Articles===
*Swedish Armed Forces

==Organizations and institutions ==

===Lists===
*Non-governmental organizations in Sweden
*SACC New York
*Swedish Royal Academies

==Religion==

===Articles===
*Religion in Sweden
*Church of Sweden

==Sport==

===Lists===
*List of football clubs in Sweden 
*List of sport events in Sweden

===Articles===
*Sport in Sweden

==See also==
*Swedish (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2526223" start="10" end="46" title="List of Sweden-related topics" label="list of topics related to [[Sweden]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="195" end="201" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="216" end="222" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q201350" start="224" end="241" title="History of Sweden" label="History of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q875894" start="243" end="261" title="Politics of Sweden" label="Politics of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771444" start="263" end="282" title="Geography of Sweden" label="Geography of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694087" start="284" end="305" title="Agriculture in Sweden" label="Agriculture in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q200547" start="307" end="325" title="Counties of Sweden" label="Counties of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455200" start="327" end="344" title="Economy of Sweden" label="Economy of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q522328" start="346" end="368" title="Demographics of Sweden" label="Demographics of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="370" end="386" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745202" start="388" end="405" title="Culture of Sweden" label="Culture of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418353" start="430" end="444" title="List of Swedes" label="List of Swedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727987" start="447" end="474" title="List of Swedes by net worth" label="List of Swedes by net worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q182162" start="476" end="500" title="List of Swedish monarchs" label="List of Swedish monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q182162" start="502" end="524" title="List of Swedish queens" label="List of Swedish queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11029090" start="527" end="558" title="List of Swedish prime ministers" label="List of Swedish prime ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598793" start="560" end="582" title="List of Swedish actors" label="List of Swedish actors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361591" start="584" end="610" title="List of Swedish architects" label="List of Swedish architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598794" start="612" end="635" title="List of Swedish artists" label="List of Swedish artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722458" start="637" end="662" title="List of Swedish clergymen" label="List of Swedish clergymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418353" start="664" end="689" title="List of Swedish diplomats" label="List of Swedish diplomats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598805" start="691" end="720" title="List of Swedish entrepreneurs" label="List of Swedish entrepreneurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424966" start="722" end="752" title="List of Swedish film directors" label="List of Swedish film directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598830" start="754" end="789" title="List of Swedish military commanders" label="List of Swedish military commanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q678497" start="792" end="822" title="List of Swedish Field Marshals" label="List of Swedish Field Marshals"/>
<link wikidata="Q358074" start="824" end="847" title="List of Swedes in music" label="List of Swedes in music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598843" start="849" end="876" title="List of Swedish politicians" label="List of Swedish politicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q196321" start="879" end="913" title="List of County Governors of Sweden" label="List of County Governors of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q15241303" start="915" end="941" title="List of Swedish scientists" label="List of Swedish scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598845" start="943" end="967" title="List of Swedes in sports" label="List of Swedes in sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187031" start="969" end="1001" title="List of Swedish language writers" label="List of Swedish language writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q200547" start="1049" end="1073" title="List of Swedish counties" label="List of Swedish counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328114" start="1075" end="1107" title="List of municipalities of Sweden" label="List of municipalities of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328114" start="1111" end="1151" title="List of municipalities of Sweden by area" label="List of municipalities of Sweden by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328114" start="1155" end="1198" title="List of municipalities of Sweden by density" label="List of municipalities of Sweden by density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328114" start="1202" end="1248" title="List of municipalities of Sweden by population" label="List of municipalities of Sweden by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629692" start="1252" end="1294" title="List of municipalities of Sweden by wealth" label="List of municipalities of Sweden by wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417798" start="1296" end="1326" title="Postal codes in Sweden" label="List of postal codes in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q914262" start="1344" end="1366" title="Subdivisions of Sweden" label="Subdivisions of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q200547" start="1368" end="1386" title="Counties of Sweden" label="Counties of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754161" start="1388" end="1413" title="County Councils of Sweden" label="County Councils of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q127448" start="1415" end="1439" title="Municipalities of Sweden" label="Municipalities of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q12813115" start="1441" end="1462" title="Urban areas in Sweden" label="Urban areas in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598802" start="1492" end="1529" title="List of Swedish cultural institutions" label="List of Swedish cultural institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745202" start="1547" end="1564" title="Culture of Sweden" label="Culture of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q846784" start="1566" end="1581" title="Music of Sweden" label="Music of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q204067" start="1583" end="1602" title="Rap music in Sweden" label="Rap music in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q376292" start="1604" end="1622" title="Swedish literature" label="Swedish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199168" start="1624" end="1640" title="Cinema of Sweden" label="Cinema of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q35623" start="1642" end="1657" title="Swedish cuisine" label="Swedish cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401522" start="1659" end="1677" title="Holidays in Sweden" label="Holidays in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028629" start="1680" end="1706" title="Flag flying days in Sweden" label="Flag flying days in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4177072" start="1709" end="1728" title="Namesdays in Sweden" label="Namesdays in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q133261" start="1730" end="1755" title="National anthem of Sweden" label="National anthem of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070396" start="1757" end="1773" title="Swedish heraldry" label="Swedish heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q190129" start="1776" end="1798" title="Coat of Arms of Sweden" label="Coat of Arms of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q81286" start="1801" end="1815" title="Flag of Sweden" label="Flag of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q17466" start="1817" end="1849" title="Registered partnership in Sweden" label="Registered partnership in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q17466" start="1851" end="1878" title="Same-sex marriage in Sweden" label="Same-sex marriage in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328114" start="1911" end="1954" title="List of municipalities of Sweden by density" label="List of municipalities of Sweden by density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328114" start="1957" end="2003" title="List of municipalities of Sweden by population" label="List of municipalities of Sweden by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q522328" start="2021" end="2043" title="Demographics of Sweden" label="Demographics of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q165192" start="2045" end="2059" title="Swedish people" label="Swedish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427054" start="2112" end="2137" title="List of Swedish companies" label="List of Swedish companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621774" start="2139" end="2177" title="List of Swedish government enterprises" label="List of Swedish government enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629692" start="2179" end="2221" title="List of municipalities of Sweden by wealth" label="List of municipalities of Sweden by wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155543" start="2239" end="2264" title="Company mortgage (Sweden)" label="Company mortgage (Sweden)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455200" start="2266" end="2283" title="Economy of Sweden" label="Economy of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10672941" start="2286" end="2301" title="Swedish welfare" label="Swedish welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884212" start="2304" end="2335" title="Unemployment benefits in Sweden" label="Unemployment benefits in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="2337" end="2350" title="Swedish krona" label="Swedish Krona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446652" start="2352" end="2369" title="Tourism in Sweden" label="Tourism in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853405" start="2399" end="2429" title="List of universities in Sweden" label="List of universities in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q861619" start="2447" end="2466" title="Education in Sweden" label="Education in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735606" start="2516" end="2546" title="List of Swedish noble families" label="List of Swedish noble families"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065129" start="2564" end="2580" title="Swedish nobility" label="Swedish nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070396" start="2582" end="2598" title="Swedish heraldry" label="Swedish heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q189301" start="2628" end="2652" title="List of cities in Sweden" label="List of cities in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466012" start="2655" end="2679" title="List of rivers in Sweden" label="List of rivers in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465929" start="2682" end="2707" title="List of islands of Sweden" label="List of islands of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q393373" start="2710" end="2733" title="List of lakes in Sweden" label="List of lakes in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q746800" start="2736" end="2768" title="List of national parks of Sweden" label="List of national parks of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444595" start="2770" end="2787" title="Forests of Sweden" label="Forests of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771444" start="2805" end="2824" title="Geography of Sweden" label="Geography of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q617209" start="2868" end="2903" title="List of political parties in Sweden" label="List of political parties in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598824" start="2906" end="2933" title="List of Swedish governments" label="List of Swedish governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q247426" start="2935" end="2975" title="Line of succession to the Swedish throne" label="Line of succession to the Swedish throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632536" start="2977" end="3004" title="Swedish diplomatic missions" label="Swedish diplomatic missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066952" start="3007" end="3036" title="Sweden and the United Nations" label="Sweden and the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q875894" start="3054" end="3072" title="Politics of Sweden" label="Politics of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4113732" start="3075" end="3102" title="Foreign relations of Sweden" label="Foreign relations of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899016" start="3105" end="3130" title="Monetary policy of Sweden" label="Monetary policy of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10672941" start="3133" end="3148" title="Swedish welfare" label="Swedish welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049352" start="3149" end="3174" title="Social security in Sweden" label="Social security in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503325" start="3176" end="3198" title="Constitution of Sweden" label="Constitution of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q26796319" start="3200" end="3217" title="Monarch of Sweden" label="Monarch of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q930729" start="3219" end="3239" title="Government of Sweden" label="Government of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q687075" start="3241" end="3265" title="Prime Minister of Sweden" label="Prime Minister of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q272930" start="3267" end="3274" title="Parliament of Sweden" label="Riksdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735285" start="3303" end="3322" title="Elections in Sweden" label="Elections in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260870" start="3324" end="3345" title="Referendums in Sweden" label="Referendums in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122645" start="3347" end="3376" title="Government agencies in Sweden" label="Government agencies in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q564652" start="3378" end="3395" title="Sveriges Riksbank" label="Sveriges Riksbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623695" start="3426" end="3453" title="List of hospitals in Sweden" label="List of hospitals in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4287732" start="3471" end="3491" title="Healthcare in Sweden" label="Healthcare in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9138333" start="3493" end="3511" title="Abortion in Sweden" label="Abortion in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999562" start="3513" end="3540" title="Disability policy in Sweden" label="Disability policy in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250124" start="3568" end="3588" title="List of Swedish wars" label="List of Swedish wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607346" start="3591" end="3614" title="List of Swedish battles" label="List of Swedish battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862334" start="3616" end="3652" title="List of historic buildings in Sweden" label="List of historic buildings in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q201350" start="3670" end="3687" title="History of Sweden" label="History of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q742615" start="3689" end="3704" title="Lands of Sweden" label="Lands of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q193556" start="3706" end="3725" title="Provinces of Sweden" label="Provinces of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148626" start="3727" end="3746" title="Dominions of Sweden" label="Dominions of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="3778" end="3794" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546521" start="3797" end="3813" title="Standard Swedish" label="Standard Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461092" start="3816" end="3831" title="Finland-Swedish" label="Finland-Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352347" start="3834" end="3850" title="Swedish alphabet" label="Swedish alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329970" start="3853" end="3870" title="Swedish phonology" label="Swedish phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q728768" start="3873" end="3888" title="Swedish grammar" label="Swedish grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084421" start="3891" end="3908" title="Mandatory Swedish" label="Mandatory Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166499" start="3911" end="3925" title="Rinkebysvenska" label="Rinkebysvenska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869253" start="3927" end="3955" title="Minority languages of Sweden" label="Minority languages of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862893" start="3981" end="4007" title="List of Swedish newspapers" label="List of Swedish newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099219" start="4009" end="4034" title="List of Swedish magazines" label="List of Swedish magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099168" start="4037" end="4067" title="List of Swedish radio stations" label="List of Swedish radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086137" start="4070" end="4105" title="List of Swedish television channels" label="List of Swedish television channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018130" start="4123" end="4138" title="Media in Sweden" label="Media in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696033" start="4140" end="4164" title="Communications in Sweden" label="Communications in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004246" start="4193" end="4218" title="List of Swedish regiments" label="List of Swedish regiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638908" start="4220" end="4253" title="List of Swedish ships of the line" label="List of Swedish ships of the line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352729" start="4256" end="4289" title="List of Swedish steam battleships" label="List of Swedish steam battleships"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628507" start="4292" end="4327" title="List of military aircraft of Sweden" label="List of military aircraft of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q783911" start="4345" end="4365" title="Swedish Armed Forces" label="Swedish Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630724" start="4417" end="4457" title="Non-governmental organizations in Sweden" label="Non-governmental organizations in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388461" start="4459" end="4472" title="SACC New York" label="SACC New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310653" start="4474" end="4497" title="Swedish Royal Academies" label="Swedish Royal Academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635976" start="4529" end="4547" title="Religion in Sweden" label="Religion in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q749243" start="4549" end="4565" title="Church of Sweden" label="Church of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244071" start="4591" end="4623" title="List of football clubs in Sweden" label="List of football clubs in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640349" start="4626" end="4656" title="List of sport events in Sweden" label="List of sport events in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348425" start="4674" end="4689" title="Sport in Sweden" label="Sport in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q298714" start="4705" end="4729" title="Swedish (disambiguation)" label="Swedish (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211602" wikidata="Q898521" url="?curid=211602" title="Hidden-variable theory">
<text>In physics, a hidden-variable theory is a deterministic physical model which seeks to explain the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics by introducing additional (possibly inaccessible) variables.

Indeterminacy of the state of a system previous to measurement is assumed to be a part of the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics; moreover, bounds for indeterminacy can be expressed in a quantitative form by the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Most hidden-variable theories are attempts to avoid this indeterminacy, but possibly at the expense of requiring that nonlocal interactions be allowed. One notable hidden-variable theory is the de Broglie–Bohm theory.

In 1935, Albert Einstein, Boris Podolsky, and Nathan Rosen in their EPR paper argued that quantum entanglement might indicate quantum mechanics is an incomplete description of reality. John Stewart Bell in 1964, in his eponymous theorem proved that correlations between particles under any local hidden variable theory must obey certain constraints. Subsequently, Bell test experiments have demonstrated broad violation of these constraints, ruling out such theories. Bell&#x27;s theorem, however, does not rule out the possibility of nonlocal theories or superdeterminism; these therefore cannot be falsified by Bell tests.

== Motivation ==
Macroscopic physics requires classical mechanics which allows accurate predictions of mechanical motion with reproducible, high precision. Quantum phenomena require quantum mechanics, which allows accurate predictions of statistical averages only. If quantum states had hidden-variables awaiting ingenious new measurement technologies, then the latter (statistical results) might be convertible to a form of the former (classical-mechanical motion).

This classical mechanics description would eliminate unsettling characteristics of quantum theory like the uncertainty principle. More fundamentally however, a successful model of quantum phenomena with hidden variables implies quantum entities with intrinsic values independent of measurements. Existing quantum mechanics asserts that state properties can only be known after a measurement. As N. David Mermin puts it:

In other words, whereas a hidden-variable theory would imply intrinsic particle properties, in quantum mechanics an electron has no definite position and velocity to even &quot;be&quot; revealed.

== History ==

=== &quot;God does not play dice&quot; ===
In June 1926, Max Born published a paper, in which he was the first to clearly enunciate the probabilistic interpretation of the quantum wave function, which had been introduced by Erwin Schrödinger earlier in the year. Born concluded the paper as follows:

Here the whole problem of determinism comes up. From the standpoint of our quantum mechanics there is no quantity which in any individual case causally fixes the consequence of the collision; but also experimentally we have so far no reason to believe that there are some inner properties of the atom which conditions a definite outcome for the collision. Ought we to hope later to discover such properties ... and determine them in individual cases? Or ought we to believe that the agreement of theory and experiment—as to the impossibility of prescribing conditions for a causal evolution—is a pre-established harmony founded on the nonexistence of such conditions? I myself am inclined to give up determinism in the world of atoms. But that is a philosophical question for which physical arguments alone are not decisive.

Born&#x27;s interpretation of the wave function was criticized by Schrödinger, who had previously attempted to interpret it in real physical terms, but Albert Einstein&#x27;s response became one of the earliest and most famous assertions that quantum mechanics is incomplete:

Quantum mechanics is very worthy of respect. But an inner voice tells me this is not the genuine article after all. The theory delivers much but it hardly brings us closer to the Old One&#x27;s secret. In any event, I am convinced that &quot;He&quot; is not playing dice.

Niels Bohr reportedly replied to Einstein&#x27;s later expression of this sentiment by advising him to &quot;stop telling God what to do.&quot;

=== Early attempts at hidden-variable theories ===
Shortly after making his famous &quot;God does not play dice&quot; comment, Einstein attempted to formulate a deterministic counter proposal to quantum mechanics, presenting a paper at a meeting of the Academy of Sciences in Berlin, on 5 May 1927, titled &quot;Bestimmt Schrödinger&#x27;s Wellenmechanik die Bewegung eines Systems vollständig oder nur im Sinne der Statistik?&quot; (&quot;Does Schrödinger&#x27;s wave mechanics determine the motion of a system completely or only in the statistical sense?&quot;). However, as the paper was being prepared for publication in the academy&#x27;s journal, Einstein decided to withdraw it, possibly because he discovered that, contrary to his intention, his use of Schrödinger&#x27;s field to guide localized particles allowed just the kind of non-local influences he intended to avoid.

At the Fifth Solvay Congress, held in Belgium in October 1927 and attended by all the major theoretical physicists of the era, Louis de Broglie presented his own version of a deterministic hidden-variable theory, apparently unaware of Einstein&#x27;s aborted attempt earlier in the year. In his theory, every particle had an associated, hidden &quot;pilot wave&quot; which served to guide its trajectory through space. The theory was subject to criticism at the Congress, particularly by Wolfgang Pauli, which de Broglie did not adequately answer; de Broglie abandoned the theory shortly thereafter.

=== Declaration of completeness of quantum mechanics, and the Bohr–Einstein debates ===

Also at the Fifth Solvay Congress, Max Born and Werner Heisenberg made a presentation summarizing the recent tremendous theoretical development of quantum mechanics. At the conclusion of the presentation, they declared:

[W]hile we consider ... a quantum mechanical treatment of the electromagnetic field ... as not yet finished, we consider quantum mechanics to be a closed theory, whose fundamental physical and mathematical assumptions are no longer susceptible of any modification...

On the question of the &#x27;validity of the law of causality&#x27; we have this opinion: as long as one takes into account only experiments that lie in the domain of our currently acquired physical and quantum mechanical experience, the assumption of indeterminism in principle, here taken as fundamental, agrees with experience.

Although there is no record of Einstein responding to Born and Heisenberg during the technical sessions of the Fifth Solvay Congress, he did challenge the completeness of quantum mechanics at various times. In his tribute article for Born&#x27;s retirement he discussed the quantum representation of a macroscopic ball bouncing elastically between rigid barriers. He argues that such a quantum representation does not represent a specific ball, but &quot;time ensemble of systems&quot;. As such the representation is correct, but incomplete because it does not represent the real individual macroscopic case. Einstein considered quantum mechanics incomplete &quot;because the state function, in general, does not even describe the individual event/system&quot;.

=== Von Neumann&#x27;s proof ===
John von Neumann in his 1932 book &quot;Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics&quot; had presented a proof that there could be no &quot;hidden parameters&quot; in quantum mechanics. The validity of von Neumann&#x27;s proof was questioned by Grete Hermann in 1935, who found a flaw in the proof. The critical issue concerned averages over ensembles. Von Neumann assumed that a relation between the expected values of different observable quantities holds for each possible value of the &quot;hidden parameters&quot;, rather than only for a statistical average over them. However Hermann&#x27;s work went mostly unnoticed until its rediscovery by John Stewart Bell more than 30 years later.

The validity and definitiveness of von Neumann&#x27;s proof were also questioned by Hans Reichenbach, and possibly in conversation though not in print by Albert Einstein. Reportedly, in a conversation circa 1938 with his assistants Peter Bergmann and Valentine Bargmann, Einstein pulled von Neumann&#x27;s book off his shelf, pointed to the same assumption critiqued by Hermann and Bell, and asked why one should believe in it. Simon Kochen and Ernst Specker rejected von Neumann&#x27;s key assumption as early as 1961, but did not publish a criticism of it until 1967.

=== EPR paradox ===
Einstein argued that quantum mechanics could not be a complete theory of physical reality. He wrote,

Consider a mechanical system consisting of two partial systems &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; which interact with each other only during a limited time. Let the &quot;ψ&quot; function [i.e., wavefunction] before their interaction be given. Then the Schrödinger equation will furnish the &quot;ψ&quot; function after the interaction has taken place. Let us now determine the physical state of the partial system &quot;A&quot; as completely as possible by measurements. Then quantum mechanics allows us to determine the &quot;ψ&quot; function of the partial system &quot;B&quot; from the measurements made, and from the &quot;ψ&quot; function of the total system. This determination, however, gives a result which depends upon which of the physical quantities (observables) of &quot;A&quot; have been measured (for instance, coordinates or momenta). Since there can be only one physical state of &quot;B&quot; after the interaction which cannot reasonably be considered to depend on the particular measurement we perform on the system &quot;A&quot; separated from &quot;B&quot; it may be concluded that the &quot;ψ&quot; function is not unambiguously coordinated to the physical state. This coordination of several &quot;ψ&quot; functions to the same physical state of system &quot;B&quot; shows again that the &quot;ψ&quot; function cannot be interpreted as a (complete) description of a physical state of a single system.

Together with Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen, Einstein published a paper that gave a related but distinct argument against the completeness of quantum mechanics. They proposed a thought experiment involving a pair of particles prepared in what would later become known as an entangled state. Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen pointed out that, in this state, if the position of the first particle were measured, the result of measuring the position of the second particle could be predicted. If instead the momentum of the first particle were measured, then the result of measuring the momentum of the second particle could be predicted. They argued that no action taken on the first particle could instantaneously affect the other, since this would involve information being transmitted faster than light, which is impossible according to the theory of relativity. They invoked a principle, later known as the &quot;EPR criterion of reality&quot;, positing that: &quot;If, without in any way disturbing a system, we can predict with certainty (i.e., with probability equal to unity) the value of a physical quantity, then there exists an element of reality corresponding to that quantity.&quot; From this, they inferred that the second particle must have a definite value of both position and of momentum prior to either quantity being measured. But quantum mechanics considers these two observables incompatible and thus does not associate simultaneous values for both to any system. Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen therefore concluded that quantum theory does not provide a complete description of reality.

Bohr answered the Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen challenge as follows:
[The argument of] Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen contains an ambiguity as regards the meaning of the expression &quot;without in any way disturbing a system.&quot; ... [E]ven at this stage [i.e., the measurement of, for example, a particle that is part of an entangled pair], there is essentially the question of an influence on the very conditions which define the possible types of predictions regarding the future behavior of the system. Since these conditions constitute an inherent element of the description of any phenomenon to which the term &quot;physical reality&quot; can be properly attached, we see that the argumentation of the mentioned authors does not justify their conclusion that quantum-mechanical description is essentially incomplete.&quot;

Bohr is here choosing to define a &quot;physical reality&quot; as limited to a phenomenon that is immediately observable by an arbitrarily chosen and explicitly specified technique, using his own special definition of the term &#x27;phenomenon&#x27;. He wrote in 1948:
As a more appropriate way of expression, one may strongly advocate limitation of the use of the word &quot;phenomenon&quot; to refer exclusively to observations obtained under specified circumstances, including an account of the whole experiment.

This was, of course, in conflict with the EPR criterion of reality.

=== Bell&#x27;s theorem ===
In 1964, John Stewart Bell showed through his famous theorem that if local hidden variables exist, certain experiments could be performed involving quantum entanglement where the result would satisfy a Bell inequality. If, on the other hand, statistical correlations resulting from quantum entanglement could not be explained by local hidden variables, the Bell inequality would be violated. Another no-go theorem concerning hidden-variable theories is the Kochen–Specker theorem.

Physicists such as Alain Aspect and Paul Kwiat have performed experiments that have found violations of these inequalities up to 242 standard deviations. This rules out local hidden-variable theories, but does not rule out non-local ones. Theoretically, there could be experimental problems that affect the validity of the experimental findings.

Gerard &#x27;t Hooft has disputed the validity of Bell&#x27;s theorem on the basis of the superdeterminism loophole and proposed some ideas to construct local deterministic models.

== Bohm&#x27;s hidden-variable theory ==
In 1952, David Bohm proposed a hidden variable theory. Bohm unknowingly rediscovered (and extended) the idea that Louis de Broglie&#x27;s pilot wave theory had proposed in 1927 (and abandoned) – hence this theory is commonly called &quot;de Broglie-Bohm theory&quot;. Assuming the validity of Bell&#x27;s theorem, any deterministic hidden-variable theory that is consistent with quantum mechanics would have to be non-local, maintaining the existence of instantaneous or faster-than-light relations (correlations) between physically separated entities.

Bohm posited &quot;both&quot; the quantum particle, e.g. an electron, and a hidden &#x27;guiding wave&#x27; that governs its motion. Thus, in this theory electrons are quite clearly particles. When a double-slit experiment is performed, the electron goes through either one of the slits. Also, the slit passed through is not random but is governed by the (hidden) pilot wave, resulting in the wave pattern that is observed.

In Bohm&#x27;s interpretation, the (non-local) quantum potential constitutes an implicate (hidden) order which organizes a particle, and which may itself be the result of yet a further implicate order: a &quot;superimplicate order&quot; which organizes a field. Nowadays Bohm&#x27;s theory is considered to be one of many interpretations of quantum mechanics. Some consider it the simplest theory to explain quantum phenomena. Nevertheless, it &quot;is&quot; a hidden-variable theory, and necessarily so. The major reference for Bohm&#x27;s theory today is his book with Basil Hiley, published posthumously.

A possible weakness of Bohm&#x27;s theory is that some (including Einstein, Pauli, and Heisenberg) feel that it looks contrived. (Indeed, Bohm thought this of his original formulation of the theory.) Bohm said he considered his theory to be unacceptable as a physical theory due to the guiding wave&#x27;s existence in an abstract multi-dimensional configuration space, rather than three-dimensional space.

== Recent developments ==
In August 2011, Roger Colbeck and Renato Renner published a proof that any extension of quantum mechanical theory, whether using hidden variables or otherwise, cannot provide a more accurate prediction of outcomes, assuming that observers can freely choose the measurement settings. Colbeck and Renner write: &quot;In the present work, we have ... excluded the possibility that any extension of quantum theory (not necessarily in the form of local hidden variables) can help predict the outcomes of any measurement on any quantum state. In this sense, we show the following: under the assumption that measurement settings can be chosen freely, quantum theory really is complete&quot;.

In January 2013, Giancarlo Ghirardi and Raffaele Romano described a model which, &quot;under a different free choice assumption [...] violates [the statement by Colbeck and Renner] for almost all states of a bipartite two-level system, in a possibly experimentally testable way&quot;.

== See also ==

* Einstein&#x27;s thought experiments
* Pusey–Barrett–Rudolph theorem
* Spekkens toy model
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3" end="10" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q898521" start="14" end="36" title="Hidden-variable theory" label="hidden-variable theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="42" end="55" title="Determinism" label="deterministic"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="122" end="139" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269059" start="202" end="215" title="quantum indeterminacy" label="Indeterminacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q606855" start="296" end="341" title="mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics" label="mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="425" end="457" title="Heisenberg uncertainty principle" label="Heisenberg uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269079" start="577" end="598" title="Quantum nonlocality" label="nonlocal interactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q899444" start="653" end="675" title="de Broglie–Bohm theory" label="de Broglie–Bohm theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="687" end="702" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q560982" start="704" end="718" title="Boris Podolsky" label="Boris Podolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q370226" start="724" end="736" title="Nathan Rosen" label="Nathan Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q214975" start="746" end="755" title="Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen paradox" label="EPR paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q215675" start="768" end="788" title="quantum entanglement" label="quantum entanglement"/>
<link wikidata="Q370077" start="863" end="880" title="John Stewart Bell" label="John Stewart Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q388525" start="897" end="914" title="Bell&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="eponymous theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098572" start="968" end="996" title="Local hidden-variable theory" label="local hidden variable theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054240" start="1042" end="1051" title="Bell test" label="Bell test"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643248" start="1234" end="1250" title="superdeterminism" label="superdeterminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="1879" end="1900" title="uncertainty principle" label="uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959634" start="2167" end="2182" title="N. David Mermin" label="N. David Mermin"/>
<link wikidata="Q58978" start="2462" end="2470" title="Max Born" label="Max Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362761" start="2585" end="2598" title="wavefunction" label="wave function"/>
<link wikidata="Q9130" start="2629" end="2646" title="Erwin Schrödinger" label="Erwin Schrödinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="3684" end="3699" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="4082" end="4092" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q329464" start="4480" end="4499" title="Prussian Academy of Sciences" label="Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5118" end="5139" title="Solvay Conference#Fifth Conference" label="Fifth Solvay Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q83331" start="5238" end="5254" title="Louis de Broglie" label="Louis de Broglie"/>
<link wikidata="Q48179" start="5265" end="5322" title="Pilot wave theory" label="his own version of a deterministic hidden-variable theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q65989" start="5599" end="5613" title="Wolfgang Pauli" label="Wolfgang Pauli"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="5849" end="5866" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Werner Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="7418" end="7434" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902709" start="7458" end="7503" title="Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics" label="Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7526" end="7531" title="Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics#No hidden variables proof" label="proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q68550" start="7666" end="7679" title="Grete Hermann" label="Grete Hermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="7822" end="7836" title="expected value" label="expected value"/>
<link wikidata="Q170147" start="8199" end="8215" title="Hans Reichenbach" label="Hans Reichenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q96809" start="8347" end="8361" title="Peter Bergmann" label="Peter Bergmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q215977" start="8366" end="8384" title="Valentine Bargmann" label="Valentine Bargmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513086" start="8543" end="8555" title="Simon B. Kochen" label="Simon Kochen"/>
<link wikidata="Q117486" start="8560" end="8573" title="Ernst Specker" label="Ernst Specker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362761" start="9000" end="9012" title="wavefunction" label="wavefunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q560982" start="10246" end="10260" title="Boris Podolsky" label="Boris Podolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q370226" start="10265" end="10277" title="Nathan Rosen" label="Nathan Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q147027" start="10411" end="10429" title="thought experiment" label="thought experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q215675" start="10508" end="10517" title="Quantum entanglement" label="entangled"/>
<link wikidata="Q230883" start="10518" end="10523" title="quantum state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="11073" end="11093" title="theory of relativity" label="theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="11285" end="11296" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11630" end="11642" title="Observable#Incompatibility of observables in quantum mechanics" label="incompatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q370077" start="13287" end="13304" title="John Stewart Bell" label="John Stewart Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q388525" start="13480" end="13495" title="Bell&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Bell inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914432" start="13678" end="13691" title="no-go theorem" label="no-go theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q528955" start="13735" end="13757" title="Kochen–Specker theorem" label="Kochen–Specker theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q364997" start="13779" end="13791" title="Alain Aspect" label="Alain Aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054240" start="13822" end="13833" title="Bell test experiments" label="experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q388525" start="14029" end="14050" title="Bell test loopholes" label="experimental problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q184592" start="14107" end="14127" title="Gerard &amp;#x27;t Hooft" label="Gerard &amp;#x27;t Hooft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643248" start="14197" end="14213" title="superdeterminism" label="superdeterminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q310765" start="14339" end="14349" title="David Bohm" label="David Bohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q48179" start="14468" end="14485" title="pilot wave theory" label="pilot wave theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319773" start="14693" end="14703" title="consistency" label="consistent"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="14709" end="14726" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q629202" start="14744" end="14753" title="Principle of locality" label="non-local"/>
<link wikidata="Q217785" start="15084" end="15106" title="double-slit experiment" label="double-slit experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399993" start="15356" end="15373" title="quantum potential" label="quantum potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q899137" start="15631" end="15667" title="interpretations of quantum mechanics" label="interpretations of quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q508291" start="15690" end="15698" title="simplicity" label="simplest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867187" start="15880" end="15891" title="Basil Hiley" label="Basil Hiley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16368" end="16381" title="Roger Colbeck" label="Roger Colbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q62631365" start="16386" end="16399" title="Renato Renner" label="Renato Renner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381425" start="17055" end="17073" title="Giancarlo Ghirardi" label="Giancarlo Ghirardi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17078" end="17093" title="Raffaele Romano" label="Raffaele Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610614" start="17342" end="17377" title="Einstein&amp;#x27;s thought experiments" label="Einstein&amp;#x27;s thought experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099549" start="17380" end="17409" title="Pusey–Barrett–Rudolph theorem" label="Pusey–Barrett–Rudolph theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575807" start="17412" end="17430" title="Spekkens toy model" label="Spekkens toy model"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211604" wikidata="Q8223" url="?curid=211604" title="Biberach (district)">
<text>Biberach () is a (district) in Baden-Württemberg, Germany. It is bounded by (from the south and clockwise) the districts of Ravensburg, Sigmaringen, Reutlingen and Alb-Donau, and the Bavarian districts Neu-Ulm, Unterallgäu and the district-free city Memmingen. The major towns in the district of Biberach are Biberach an der Riß, Riedlingen, Ochsenhausen and Laupheim.

== Geography ==

The district consists of hilly countryside between the rivers of the Danube and the Iller. The Danube crosses the district in its westernmost part from south to north. The Iller forms the eastern border of the district. Another river is the Riss (Riß), an affluent of the Danube crossing the district from south to north.

The Federsee is a small lake in the southwest of the district. Its area is only 1.4 km2, but it is famous for Neolithic findings and rare birds.

== Media ==
The local newspaper is the Schwäbische Zeitung (&quot;Swabian Newspaper&quot;). Biberach has also a film festival for German films which celebrated its 31st anniversary in 2009.

== Coat of arms ==
The imperial eagle symbolizes the imperial city of Biberach. Originally the coat of arms of the city showed an eagle as well as a beaver as a canting symbol. In 1488 the coat of arms of the city was changed to show only the beaver. The crosier symbolises the monasteries of the region.

== Cities and towns ==


==References==
== External links ==

* Official website of the district of Biberach (German)
* Federsee Neolithic Museum (German, English)
* Federsee Nature Reserve (German)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8223" start="0" end="8" title="Biberach (district)" label="Biberach"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="31" end="48" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="50" end="57" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8225" start="124" end="134" title="Ravensburg (district)" label="Ravensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8230" start="136" end="147" title="Sigmaringen (district)" label="Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8217" start="149" end="159" title="Reutlingen (district)" label="Reutlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8221" start="164" end="173" title="Alb-Donau (district)" label="Alb-Donau"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="183" end="190" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10410" start="202" end="209" title="Neu-Ulm (district)" label="Neu-Ulm"/>
<link wikidata="Q10408" start="211" end="222" title="Unterallgäu" label="Unterallgäu"/>
<link wikidata="Q14825" start="250" end="259" title="Memmingen" label="Memmingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16069" start="309" end="328" title="Biberach an der Riß" label="Biberach an der Riß"/>
<link wikidata="Q505967" start="330" end="340" title="Riedlingen" label="Riedlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q522526" start="342" end="354" title="Ochsenhausen" label="Ochsenhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q574314" start="359" end="367" title="Laupheim" label="Laupheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="456" end="462" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q159467" start="471" end="476" title="Iller" label="Iller"/>
<link wikidata="Q632309" start="628" end="632" title="Riss (river)" label="Riss"/>
<link wikidata="Q248234" start="714" end="722" title="Federsee" label="Federsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="820" end="829" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258020" start="895" end="914" title="Schwäbische Zeitung" label="Schwäbische Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q358148" start="1070" end="1084" title="imperial eagle" label="imperial eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542" start="1196" end="1202" title="beaver" label="beaver"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211607" wikidata="Q1101435" url="?curid=211607" title="Climax">
<text>Climax may refer to:

== Language arts ==
* Climax (narrative), the point of highest tension in a narrative work
* Climax (rhetoric), a figure of speech that lists items in order of importance

== Biology ==
* Climax community, a biological community that has reached a steady state because the life there is best adapted to the area
* Climax (sexual), another expression for orgasm
* &quot;Climax&quot; (beetle), a genus of beetles

== Film and television ==
* &quot;Climax&quot; (1965 film), a 1965 Norwegian drama film
* &quot;Climax!&quot;, a 1950s American television series
* &quot;Climax&quot; (2013 film), a 2013 Indian biographical film
* &quot;Climax&quot; (2018 film), a 2018 French-Belgian horror film

== Music ==
* Climax (band), a 1970s American rock band best known for their soft rock hit &quot;Precious and Few&quot;
* Climax Blues Band, a British blues-based rock band formed in 1968
* &quot;Climax&quot; (La&#x27;Mule album), 2001
* &quot;Climax&quot; (Ohio Players album), by American band The Ohio Players
* &quot;Climax&quot; (Plan B album), 2018
* &quot;Climax&quot; (Usher song), a 2012 song by singer Usher
* &quot;Climax&quot;, a 2015 song by Maluma from &quot;PB.DB The Mixtape&quot;
* &quot;Climax&quot;, a 2000 song by hip hop group Slum Village
* &quot;Climax&quot;, a 1992 song by Susumu Hirasawa from the video game &quot;Detonator Orgun 3&quot;
* &quot;Climax&quot;, a 2013 album by the Spanish singer Edurne
* Clymax, a record label by Bill Haley when he was with Bill Haley &amp; His Comets
* Klymaxx, an all-female R&amp;B band

== People ==
* John Climacus, 7th-century Christian monk at the monastery on Mount Sinai
* Climax Lawrence, Indian footballer

== Places ==
=== Canada ===
* Climax, Saskatchewan

=== Turkey ===
* Climax (Paphlagonia), a town of ancient Paphlagonia

=== United States ===
* Climax, Colorado, an unincorporated mining village and a former post office
* Climax, Georgia
* Climax, Kansas
* Climax, Kentucky
* Climax, Michigan
* Climax Township, Michigan
* Climax, Minnesota
* Climax Springs, Missouri
* Climax, New York, a hamlet in Greene County
* Climax, North Carolina
* Climax, Ohio, an unincorporated community
* Climax, Oregon, an unincorporated community
* Climax, Pennsylvania
* Climax, Texas
* Climax, Virginia

== Transportation ==
* Airborne Climax, a hang glider
* Climax locomotive, a geared steam locomotive

== Video games ==
* Climax Entertainment, a video game studio based in Japan
* Climax Group, a global game development studio

== Other uses ==
* Coventry Climax, an engine manufacturer

== See also ==
* The Climax (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1101435" start="0" end="6" title="Climax" label="Climax"/>
<link wikidata="Q569250" start="44" end="62" title="Climax (narrative)" label="Climax (narrative)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122956" start="115" end="132" title="Climax (rhetoric)" label="Climax (rhetoric)"/>
<link wikidata="Q815521" start="210" end="226" title="Climax community" label="Climax community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887" start="336" end="351" title="Climax (sexual)" label="Climax (sexual)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133637" start="385" end="412" title="Climax (beetle)" label="&amp;quot;Climax&amp;quot; (beetle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133638" start="462" end="492" title="Climax (1965 film)" label="&amp;quot;Climax&amp;quot; (1965 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072832" start="530" end="537" title="Climax!" label="Climax!"/>
<link wikidata="Q16247667" start="582" end="612" title="Climax (2013 film)" label="&amp;quot;Climax&amp;quot; (2013 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q52000412" start="648" end="678" title="Climax (2018 film)" label="&amp;quot;Climax&amp;quot; (2018 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133636" start="729" end="742" title="Climax (band)" label="Climax (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q490339" start="837" end="854" title="Climax Blues Band" label="Climax Blues Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q25096430" start="905" end="944" title="Climax (La&amp;#x27;Mule album)" label="&amp;quot;Climax&amp;quot; (La&amp;#x27;Mule album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133634" start="953" end="992" title="Climax (Ohio Players album)" label="&amp;quot;Climax&amp;quot; (Ohio Players album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391113" start="1030" end="1063" title="Climax (Plan B album)" label="&amp;quot;Climax&amp;quot; (Plan B album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762184" start="1072" end="1103" title="Climax (Usher song)" label="&amp;quot;Climax&amp;quot; (Usher song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21480895" start="1188" end="1205" title="PB.DB The Mixtape" label="PB.DB The Mixtape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950423" start="1263" end="1275" title="Slum Village" label="Slum Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q930143" start="1313" end="1328" title="Susumu Hirasawa" label="Susumu Hirasawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048415" start="1436" end="1442" title="Edurne" label="Edurne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914477" start="1499" end="1526" title="Bill Haley &amp;amp; His Comets" label="Bill Haley &amp;amp; His Comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421559" start="1529" end="1536" title="Klymaxx" label="Klymaxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q317072" start="1581" end="1594" title="John Climacus" label="John Climacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101466" start="1657" end="1672" title="Climax Lawrence" label="Climax Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999684" start="1723" end="1743" title="Climax, Saskatchewan" label="Climax, Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65046816" start="1762" end="1782" title="Climax (Paphlagonia)" label="Climax (Paphlagonia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q637747" start="1839" end="1855" title="Climax, Colorado" label="Climax, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895646" start="1917" end="1932" title="Climax, Georgia" label="Climax, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q302028" start="1935" end="1949" title="Climax, Kansas" label="Climax, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14690237" start="1952" end="1968" title="Climax, Kentucky" label="Climax, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409907" start="1971" end="1987" title="Climax, Michigan" label="Climax, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133649" start="1990" end="2015" title="Climax Township, Michigan" label="Climax Township, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346581" start="2018" end="2035" title="Climax, Minnesota" label="Climax, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123937" start="2038" end="2062" title="Climax Springs, Missouri" label="Climax Springs, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706229" start="2065" end="2081" title="Climax, New York" label="Climax, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133631" start="2111" end="2133" title="Climax, North Carolina" label="Climax, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q22033774" start="2136" end="2148" title="Climax, Ohio" label="Climax, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q24191854" start="2180" end="2194" title="Climax, Oregon" label="Climax, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133632" start="2226" end="2246" title="Climax, Pennsylvania" label="Climax, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q22076440" start="2249" end="2262" title="Climax, Texas" label="Climax, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133633" start="2265" end="2281" title="Climax, Virginia" label="Climax, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698440" start="2306" end="2321" title="Airborne Climax" label="Airborne Climax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133647" start="2339" end="2356" title="Climax locomotive" label="Climax locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101463" start="2405" end="2425" title="Climax Entertainment" label="Climax Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133643" start="2464" end="2476" title="Climax Group" label="Climax Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q173016" start="2531" end="2546" title="Coventry Climax" label="Coventry Climax"/>
<link wikidata="Q13406330" start="2589" end="2616" title="The Climax (disambiguation)" label="The Climax (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211610" wikidata="Q7907" url="?curid=211610" title="Rheingau-Taunus-Kreis">
<text>Rheingau-Taunus is a Kreis (district) in the west of Hesse, Germany. Rheingau-Taunus-Kreis is part of the Darmstadt region; its main administrative seat is Bad Schwalbach. Outposted sections of the local administration are located in Idstein and Rüdesheim am Rhein.

Neighbouring districts are the Hessian districts of Limburg-Weilburg, Hochtaunuskreis, Main-Taunus-Kreis, district-free Wiesbaden and Mainz-Bingen and Rhein-Lahn which are located in Rhineland-Palatinate.

==History==
From 983 to 1803, the Rheingau area belonged to the Electorate of Mainz and was then merged into the new Duchy of Nassau.

The Untertaunus region was part of the Earldom of Katzenelnbogen. From 1816 onward, the whole area of the district became part of the Duchy of Nassau. After the 1866 Austro-Prussian war, Nassau was annexed by Prussia and formed the new province of Hesse-Nassau.

In 1867, the province was divided into districts. Therefore, the districts of Rheingau and Untertaunus were created.

After the Second World War and the creation of Hesse in 1946, these two districts remained unchanged. Only in 1977, because administrative borders were redrawn, the districts of Rheingau and Untertaunus merged and thus formed the Rheingau-Taunus district.

==Geography==

The district covers the western part of the Taunus mountains. The river Rhine forms the district&#x27;s border in the south.

== Politics ==

=== District council ===
Recent district elections had the following results:

===Coat of arms===
The coat of arms combines the coat of arms of the two former districts - in the bottom right the Mainz wheel taken from the Rheingau district, in the top left the lion of Nassau from the former Untertaunuskreis.

==Subdivisions==


===Towns===
#Bad Schwalbach
#Eltville
#Geisenheim
#Idstein
#Lorch
#Oestrich-Winkel
#Rüdesheim
#Taunusstein

===Municipalities===
#Aarbergen
#Heidenrod
#Hohenstein
#Hünstetten
#Kiedrich
#Niedernhausen
#Schlangenbad
#Waldems
#Walluf
==References==
==External links==
* Official website (in German)
* Rheingau Daily Photo Blog</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7907" start="0" end="15" title="Rheingau-Taunus-Kreis" label="Rheingau-Taunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q106658" start="28" end="36" title="Districts of Germany" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199" start="53" end="58" title="Hesse" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="60" end="67" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932" start="106" end="122" title="Darmstadt (region)" label="Darmstadt region"/>
<link wikidata="Q522541" start="156" end="170" title="Bad Schwalbach" label="Bad Schwalbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q525659" start="234" end="241" title="Idstein" label="Idstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q628118" start="246" end="264" title="Rüdesheim am Rhein" label="Rüdesheim am Rhein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906" start="319" end="335" title="Limburg-Weilburg" label="Limburg-Weilburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908" start="337" end="352" title="Hochtaunuskreis" label="Hochtaunuskreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909" start="354" end="371" title="Main-Taunus-Kreis" label="Main-Taunus-Kreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721" start="387" end="396" title="Wiesbaden" label="Wiesbaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8569" start="401" end="413" title="Mainz-Bingen" label="Mainz-Bingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8601" start="418" end="428" title="Rhein-Lahn" label="Rhein-Lahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="450" end="470" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q284667" start="537" end="556" title="Electorate of Mainz" label="Electorate of Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q836680" start="590" end="605" title="Duchy of Nassau" label="Duchy of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q636133" start="658" end="672" title="Katzenelnbogen" label="Katzenelnbogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="774" end="793" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Austro-Prussian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="817" end="824" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q693356" start="856" end="868" title="Hesse-Nassau" label="Hesse-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199" start="1036" end="1041" title="Hesse" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q158884" start="1305" end="1311" title="Taunus" label="Taunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="1327" end="1332" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="1333" end="1338" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="1598" end="1603" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q836680" start="1672" end="1678" title="Nassau (duchy)" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q522541" start="1746" end="1760" title="Bad Schwalbach" label="Bad Schwalbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q275193" start="1762" end="1770" title="Eltville" label="Eltville"/>
<link wikidata="Q558516" start="1772" end="1782" title="Geisenheim" label="Geisenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q525659" start="1784" end="1791" title="Idstein" label="Idstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q625783" start="1793" end="1798" title="Lorch, Hesse" label="Lorch"/>
<link wikidata="Q571737" start="1800" end="1815" title="Oestrich-Winkel" label="Oestrich-Winkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q628118" start="1817" end="1826" title="Rüdesheim am Rhein" label="Rüdesheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q569664" start="1828" end="1839" title="Taunusstein" label="Taunusstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q301056" start="1863" end="1872" title="Aarbergen" label="Aarbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q634132" start="1874" end="1883" title="Heidenrod" label="Heidenrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q640473" start="1885" end="1895" title="Hohenstein, Hesse" label="Hohenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q534887" start="1897" end="1907" title="Hünstetten" label="Hünstetten"/>
<link wikidata="Q627351" start="1909" end="1917" title="Kiedrich" label="Kiedrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q427360" start="1919" end="1932" title="Niedernhausen" label="Niedernhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q624446" start="1934" end="1946" title="Schlangenbad" label="Schlangenbad"/>
<link wikidata="Q622297" start="1948" end="1955" title="Waldems" label="Waldems"/>
<link wikidata="Q634161" start="1957" end="1963" title="Walluf" label="Walluf"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211611" wikidata="Q133879" url="?curid=211611" title="Fukui Prefecture">
<text>is a prefecture of Japan located in the Chūbu region of Honshū. Fukui Prefecture has a population of 778,943 (1 June 2017) and has a geographic area of 4,190 km2 (1,617 sq mi). Fukui Prefecture borders Ishikawa Prefecture to the north, Gifu Prefecture to the east, Shiga Prefecture to the south, and Kyoto Prefecture to the southwest.

Fukui is the capital and largest city of Fukui Prefecture, with other major cities including Sakai, Echizen, and Sabae. Fukui Prefecture is located on the Sea of Japan coast and is part of the historic Hokuriku region of Japan. The Matsudaira clan, a powerful &quot;samurai&quot; clan during the Edo period that became a component of the Japanese nobility after the Meiji Restoration, was headquartered at Fukui Castle on the site of the modern prefectural offices. Fukui Prefecture is home to the Kitadani Formation and Kitadani Family, the Ichijōdani Asakura Family Historic Ruins, and the Tōjinbō cliff range.

== Prehistory ==
The Kitadani Dinosaur Quarry, on the Sugiyama River within the city limits of Katsuyama, has yielded animals such As &quot;Fukuiraptor&quot;, &quot;Fukuisaurus&quot;, &quot;Nipponosaurus&quot;, &quot;Koshisaurus&quot;, Fukuivenator,&quot; &quot;Fukuititan,&quot; and &quot;Tambatitanis,&quot; as well as an unnamed dromaeosaurid.

== History ==
Fukui originally consisted of the old provinces of Wakasa and Echizen, before the prefecture was formed in 1871.

During the Edo period, the &quot;daimyō&quot; of the region was surnamed Matsudaira, and was a descendant of Tokugawa Ieyasu.

During World War II, Fukui was heavily bombed and its palace, Fukui Castle, surrounded by a moat, was demolished. Buildings for the Fukui Prefectural government were built on the site of the castle.

== Geography ==
Fukui faces the Sea of Japan, and has a western part (formerly Wakasa) which is a narrow plain between the mountains and the sea, and a larger eastern part (formerly Echizen) with wider plains including the capital and most of the population. The province lies within Japan&#x27;s &quot;Snow country&quot;.


As of 31 March 2008, 15% of the total land area of the prefecture was designated as Natural Parks, namely the Hakusan National Park; Echizen-Kaga Kaigan and Wakasa Wan Quasi-National Parks; and Okuetsu Kōgen Prefectural Natural Park.

===Cities===

Nine cities are located in Fukui Prefecture:
===Towns===
These are the towns in each district:
=== Mergers ===
== Economy ==
* Sabae is known for producing 90% of Japan&#x27;s domestically-made glasses.
* There are several nuclear power plants located along Wakasa Bay in Tsuruga which supply power to the Keihanshin metropolitan region. Fukui has 14 reactors, the most of any prefecture.

== Demographics ==

Fukui is one of the less populated prefectures of Japan; in September 2015 there were an estimated 785,508 people living in 281,394 households. As seen in most of Japan, Fukui is facing the problem of both an aging and decreasing population; 28.6% of the population was over the age of 65 in July 2015 and the population has decreased by 2.6% from the 806,000 measured in the October 2010 national census.

== Culture ==
* Ichijōdani Asakura Family Historic Ruins is one of the most important cultural heritage sites in Japan.
* Eihei-ji is a temple offering training and education to Buddhist monks. Founded by Dogen Zenji in 1244, Eiheiji is located on a plot of land covering about 33 hectares.
* Myōtsū-ji&#x27;s Three-storied Pagoda and Main Hall are National Treasures of Japan.
* Fukui is home to Maruoka Castle, the oldest standing castle in Japan. It was built in 1576.
* Residents of Fukui Prefecture have a distinctive accent, Fukui-ben.
* Fukui has long been a center for papermaking in Japan (along with Kyoto). Its Echizen Papermaking Cooperative is a world-famous collection of papermakers making paper in the traditional Echizen style.
* Fukui is also renowned for its clean water and crops, which result in sake, rice, and soba noodles.
* In August 2010 Fukui launched its own dating website entitled Fukui Marriage-Hunting Café in hopes of helping the declining population growth of Japan increase. Couples who meet in the site and continue on to marry receive monetary aid from the government as well as gifts.

== Friendship cities ==
* Vihti, Finland
* Winsen (Luhe), Germany

== Education ==

=== University ===
*Fukui University
*Fukui University of Technology
*Fukui Prefectural University
*Jin-ai University

== Transportation ==
=== Railroad ===
*Echizen Railway
**Katsuyama-Eiheiji Line
**Mikuni-Awara Line
*Fukui Railway
**Fukubu Line
*Hokuriku Shinkansen (from March, 2024)
*JR West
**Hokuriku Line
**Kuzuryu Line
**Obama Line

=== Road ===

==== Expressway and Toll Road ====
*Chubu Jukan Expressway
*Hokuriku Expressway
*Maizuru-Wakasa Expressway
*Mikata Lake Rainbow Road
*Mount Hoonji Toll Road

==== National Highway ====
* Route 8
* Route 27
* Route 157
* Route 158
* Route 161
* Route 162
* Route 303
* Route 305
* Route 364
* Route 365
* Route 367
* Route 416
* Route 417
* Route 418
* Route 476

=== Port ===
*Fukui Port
*Tsuruga Port - Ferry route to Niigata, Akita, Tomakomai, Otaru and International container hub


== Tourism ==

* Ichijōdani Asakura Family Historic Ruins
* Eihei-ji Temple
* Echizen Ono Castle
* Maruoka Castle
* Tōjinbō, a scenic piece of coastline, which is also a notorious spot for suicide.
* Echizen crabs are a local delicacy available year-round, though the crabbing season is during the winter.
* Another traditional sea-side Fukui dish is &quot;genge,&quot; a small guppy-like fish that when eaten raw as sashimi, gives the body a brief tingling sensation.
* Awara is a famous onsen in the north of the prefecture.
* Takefu Chrysanthemum Character Doll Exhibition, held in Takefu Central Park every October to November, first held in 1952.
*Mikuni Festival, a combined portable shrine and floats traditional festival during May every year, first held in 1697.
*Many dinosaur fossils have been excavated in Fukui and they can be seen at the Fukui Prefectural Dinosaur Museum in Katsuyama.

==Notes==
==References==
* Nussbaum, Louis-Frédéric and Käthe Roth. (2005). &quot;Japan encyclopedia.&quot; Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ; OCLC 58053128

== External links ==
* Official Fukui Prefecture homepage
* Enjoy Fukui - Official Fukui Prefecture tourism website
*Echizen Papermaking Cooperative </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q50337" start="5" end="15" title="Prefectures of Japan" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="19" end="24" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q134638" start="40" end="52" title="Chūbu region" label="Chūbu region"/>
<link wikidata="Q13989" start="56" end="62" title="Honshū" label="Honshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q712226" start="158" end="161" title="Square kilometre" label="km2"/>
<link wikidata="Q232291" start="169" end="174" title="sq mi" label="sq mi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131281" start="202" end="221" title="Ishikawa Prefecture" label="Ishikawa Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q131277" start="236" end="251" title="Gifu Prefecture" label="Gifu Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q131358" start="265" end="281" title="Shiga Prefecture" label="Shiga Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q120730" start="300" end="316" title="Kyoto Prefecture" label="Kyoto Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q201618" start="336" end="341" title="Fukui, Fukui" label="Fukui"/>
<link wikidata="Q990342" start="429" end="434" title="Sakai, Fukui" label="Sakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q877941" start="436" end="443" title="Echizen, Fukui" label="Echizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q847598" start="449" end="454" title="Sabae, Fukui" label="Sabae"/>
<link wikidata="Q27092" start="491" end="503" title="Sea of Japan" label="Sea of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q381025" start="538" end="553" title="Hokuriku region" label="Hokuriku region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141077" start="568" end="583" title="Matsudaira clan" label="Matsudaira clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="602" end="609" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="632" end="642" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q241734" start="674" end="691" title="Kazoku" label="Japanese nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="702" end="719" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073692" start="742" end="754" title="Fukui Castle" label="Fukui Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417687" start="834" end="852" title="Kitadani Formation" label="Kitadani Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2968274" start="878" end="918" title="Ichijōdani Asakura Family Historic Ruins" label="Ichijōdani Asakura Family Historic Ruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q648937" start="928" end="935" title="Tōjinbō" label="Tōjinbō"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417687" start="971" end="995" title="Kitadani Dinosaur Quarry" label="Kitadani Dinosaur Quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q132536" start="1090" end="1101" title="Fukuiraptor" label="Fukuiraptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18560048" start="1115" end="1126" title="Fukuisaurus" label="Fukuisaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131753" start="1140" end="1153" title="Nipponosaurus" label="Nipponosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18961256" start="1167" end="1178" title="Koshisaurus" label="Koshisaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22927446" start="1186" end="1198" title="Fukuivenator" label="Fukuivenator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096199" start="1212" end="1222" title="Fukuititan" label="Fukuititan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17524002" start="1240" end="1252" title="Tambatitanis" label="Tambatitanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130995" start="1282" end="1295" title="dromaeosaurid" label="dromaeosaurid"/>
<link wikidata="Q860290" start="1346" end="1359" title="Old provinces of Japan" label="old provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053713" start="1363" end="1369" title="Wakasa Province" label="Wakasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047144" start="1374" end="1381" title="Echizen Province" label="Echizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="1437" end="1447" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="1459" end="1465" title="daimyō" label="daimyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141077" start="1499" end="1509" title="Matsudaira" label="Matsudaira"/>
<link wikidata="Q171977" start="1535" end="1550" title="Tokugawa Ieyasu" label="Tokugawa Ieyasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1560" end="1572" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073692" start="1615" end="1627" title="Fukui Castle" label="Fukui Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q27092" start="1785" end="1797" title="Sea of Japan" label="Sea of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q866733" start="2056" end="2068" title="Snow country (Japan)" label="Snow country"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2162" end="2175" title="List of national parks of Japan#History" label="Natural Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570081" start="2188" end="2209" title="Hakusan National Park" label="Hakusan National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069254" start="2211" end="2230" title="Echizen-Kaga Kaigan Quasi-National Park" label="Echizen-Kaga Kaigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960839" start="2235" end="2245" title="Wakasa Wan Quasi-National Park" label="Wakasa Wan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082720" start="2272" end="2310" title="Okuetsu Kōgen Prefectural Natural Park" label="Okuetsu Kōgen Prefectural Natural Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122846" start="2412" end="2420" title="Districts of Japan" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q847598" start="2454" end="2459" title="Sabae, Fukui" label="Sabae"/>
<link wikidata="Q37501" start="2521" end="2528" title="glasses" label="glasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q847581" start="2599" end="2606" title="Tsuruga, Fukui" label="Tsuruga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149484" start="2633" end="2643" title="Keihanshin" label="Keihanshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="2678" end="2686" title="Nuclear reactor technology" label="reactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q515716" start="2704" end="2714" title="prefecture" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2968274" start="3160" end="3200" title="Ichijōdani Asakura Family Historic Ruins" label="Ichijōdani Asakura Family Historic Ruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303633" start="3266" end="3274" title="Eihei-ji" label="Eihei-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331935" start="3437" end="3446" title="Myōtsū-ji" label="Myōtsū-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139795" start="3493" end="3520" title="National Treasures of Japan" label="National Treasures of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143892" start="3541" end="3555" title="Maruoka Castle" label="Maruoka Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161014" start="3675" end="3684" title="Fukui-ben" label="Fukui-ben"/>
<link wikidata="Q170219" start="3961" end="3965" title="sake" label="sake"/>
<link wikidata="Q753910" start="3977" end="3981" title="soba" label="soba"/>
<link wikidata="Q935858" start="4294" end="4299" title="Vihti" label="Vihti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000" start="4311" end="4324" title="Winsen (Luhe)" label="Winsen (Luhe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370063" start="4372" end="4388" title="Fukui University" label="Fukui University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507658" start="4390" end="4420" title="Fukui University of Technology" label="Fukui University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845464" start="4422" end="4450" title="Fukui Prefectural University" label="Fukui Prefectural University"/>
<link wikidata="Q10883828" start="4452" end="4469" title="Jin-ai University" label="Jin-ai University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007890" start="4510" end="4525" title="Echizen Railway" label="Echizen Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q502125" start="4641" end="4648" title="West Japan Railway" label="JR West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318747" start="4651" end="4664" title="Hokuriku Line" label="Hokuriku Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058227" start="4682" end="4692" title="Obama Line" label="Obama Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549512" start="4768" end="4787" title="Hokuriku Expressway" label="Hokuriku Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850265" start="5097" end="5109" title="Tsuruga Port" label="Tsuruga Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q179691" start="5127" end="5134" title="Niigata (city)" label="Niigata"/>
<link wikidata="Q17139" start="5136" end="5141" title="Akita, Akita" label="Akita"/>
<link wikidata="Q390413" start="5143" end="5152" title="Tomakomai" label="Tomakomai"/>
<link wikidata="Q242108" start="5154" end="5159" title="Otaru" label="Otaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2968274" start="5211" end="5251" title="Ichijōdani Asakura Family Historic Ruins" label="Ichijōdani Asakura Family Historic Ruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303633" start="5254" end="5269" title="Eihei-ji" label="Eihei-ji Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072530" start="5272" end="5290" title="Echizen Ono Castle" label="Echizen Ono Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143892" start="5293" end="5307" title="Maruoka Castle" label="Maruoka Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q648937" start="5310" end="5317" title="Tōjinbō" label="Tōjinbō"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717246" start="5394" end="5407" title="Chionoecetes" label="Echizen crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q538623" start="5665" end="5670" title="Awara, Fukui" label="Awara"/>
<link wikidata="Q655311" start="5683" end="5688" title="onsen" label="onsen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5723" end="5769" title=":ja:たけふ菊人形" label="Takefu Chrysanthemum Character Doll Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5779" end="5798" title=":ja:武生中央公園" label="Takefu Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5847" end="5862" title=":ja:三国祭" label="Mikuni Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q979940" start="5875" end="5890" title="Mikoshi" label="portable shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247157" start="6046" end="6079" title="Fukui Prefectural Dinosaur Museum" label="Fukui Prefectural Dinosaur Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="6214" end="6238" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211615" wikidata="Q450458" url="?curid=211615" title="List of former and unopened London Underground stations">
<text>The London Underground is a public rapid transit system in the United Kingdom that serves a large part of Greater London and adjacent parts of the home counties of Essex, Hertfordshire and Buckinghamshire. It has many closed stations, while other stations were planned but never opened for public use. Some stations were closed down because a scarcity of passengers made them uneconomic; some became redundant after lines were re-routed or replacements were built; and others are no longer served by the Underground but remain open to National Rail main line services. Many stations were planned as parts of new lines or extensions to existing ones but were later abandoned.

Some closed station buildings are still standing, converted for other uses or abandoned, while others have been demolished and their sites redeveloped. A number of stations, while still open, have closed platforms or sections, such as the Jubilee line platforms at Charing Cross. The interiors and platforms of a few closed stations are among parts of the London Underground available for filming purposes, such as those at Aldwych.

London Transport Museum runs guided tours of several disused stations including Aldwych and Down Street through its &quot;Hidden London&quot; programme. The tours look at the history of the network and feature historical details drawn from the museum&#x27;s own archives and collections.

==Closed and Former stations==

The following stations were once served by a London Underground line or by one of the organisation&#x27;s predecessor companies, but are no longer served. Many are permanently closed, but some continue to be served by National Rail main line train operators.

==Unopened stations==

The following stations were once planned by the London Underground or one of the early independent underground railway companies and were granted parliamentary approval. Subsequent changes of plans or shortages of funds led to these stations being cancelled before they opened, and, in most cases, before any construction work was carried out.

==See also==
* List of London Underground stations – includes previous names for stations
* List of closed railway stations in London
* List of closed railway stations in Britain
* List of fictional rapid transit stations
* List of London Underground-related fiction
* Ghost stations of other cities:
** Ghost stations of the Paris Métro
** Ghost stations of Berlin
** Disused Barcelona Metro stations
** List of closed New York City Subway stations

==Notes and references==
===Notes===
===References===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* London&#x27;s Abandoned Tube Stations
* Underground-history.co.uk</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="4" end="22" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="35" end="48" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q23306" start="106" end="120" title="Greater London" label="Greater London"/>
<link wikidata="Q795172" start="147" end="160" title="home counties" label="home counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="164" end="169" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="171" end="184" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="189" end="204" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q26334" start="535" end="548" title="National Rail" label="National Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q961290" start="915" end="927" title="Jubilee line" label="Jubilee line"/>
<link wikidata="Q795322" start="941" end="954" title="Charing Cross tube station" label="Charing Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q990658" start="1100" end="1107" title="Aldwych tube station" label="Aldwych"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541098" start="1110" end="1133" title="London Transport Museum" label="London Transport Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q990658" start="1190" end="1197" title="Aldwych tube station" label="Aldwych"/>
<link wikidata="Q450893" start="1202" end="1213" title="Down Street tube station" label="Down Street"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1232" end="1245" title="London Transport Museum#Hidden London" label="Hidden London"/>
<link wikidata="Q26334" start="1649" end="1662" title="National Rail" label="National Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880" start="2074" end="2109" title="List of London Underground stations" label="List of London Underground stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148556" start="2151" end="2192" title="List of closed railway stations in London" label="List of closed railway stations in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610197" start="2195" end="2237" title="List of closed railway stations in Britain" label="List of closed railway stations in Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619752" start="2240" end="2280" title="List of fictional rapid transit stations" label="List of fictional rapid transit stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577000" start="2283" end="2325" title="List of London Underground-related fiction" label="List of London Underground-related fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q168565" start="2328" end="2341" title="Ghost station" label="Ghost station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343247" start="2363" end="2396" title="Ghost stations of the Paris Métro" label="Ghost stations of the Paris Métro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2400" end="2424" title="Ghost station#Ghost stations in Berlin" label="Ghost stations of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179758" start="2428" end="2460" title="Disused Barcelona Metro stations" label="Disused Barcelona Metro stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610188" start="2464" end="2508" title="List of closed New York City Subway stations" label="List of closed New York City Subway stations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211617" wikidata="Q2526705" url="?curid=211617" title="Vincent Novello">
<text>Vincent Novello (6 September 17819 August 1861), was an English musician and music publisher born in London. He was an organist, chorister, conductor and composer, but he is best known for bringing to England many works now considered standards, and with his son he created a major music publishing house.

==Life==
Vincent, born at 240 Oxford Street, was the son of Giuseppe Novello, an Italian confectioner who moved to London in 1771. As a boy Vincent was a chorister at the Sardinian Embassy Chapel in Duke Street, Lincoln&#x27;s Inn Fields, where he learnt the organ from Samuel Webbe; and from 1796 to 1822 he became in succession organist of the Sardinian, Spanish (in Manchester Square) and Portuguese (at the Portuguese Embassy chapel off Grosvenor Square), and from 1840 to 1843 of St Mary Moorfields. He taught music privately throughout his career. One of his most notable pupils was musicologist and music critic Edward Holmes. He was an original member of the Philharmonic Society, of the Classical Harmonists and of the Choral Harmonists, officiating frequently as conductor, and was a conductor/accompanist at the King&#x27;s Theatre. 

Novello married Mary Sabilla Hehl in 1808. From 1834 they lived at 69 Meard Street, Soho. In 1849 they went to live in Nice for the sake of Mary&#x27;s health. She died there of cholera in 1854. Novello remained in Nice, where he died in 1861 just before his eightieth birthday.

==Musical activities==
Many of Novello&#x27;s original compositions were sacred music, such as the cantata &quot;Rosalba&quot;, commissioned by the Philharmonic Society and premiered in March 1834. A secular example is &quot;Old May Morning&quot;, which won the Manchester Prize for best cheerful glee in 1832. His great contribution, however, together with Christian Ignatius Latrobe, lay in the introduction to England of unknown compositions by the great masters, such as the Masses written by Haydn and those by Mozart, the works of Palestrina, the manuscripts of the Fitzwilliam Museum, and many other works that are now in the core repertoire. 

Novello and his wife Mary held regular musical evenings at his home, attracting a wide range of literary, artistic and musical figures, including Charles and Mary Lamb, Leigh Hunt, Percy Shelley, William Hazlitt, Charles Cowden Clarke, John Keats and his pupil Edward Holmes. The evenings were described by Lamb in his essay ‘A Chapter on Ears’. The young Felix Mendelssohn and the singer Maria Malibran attended later meetings.

==Publishing==
His first venture into editing and publishing was the &quot;Collection of Sacred Music&quot; (1811), compiled from manuscripts in use at the Portuguese Chapel, which marks the founding of the publishing firm Novello &amp; Co. There followed &quot;Twelve Easy Masses&quot; (1816, including three of his own compositions), the &quot;Collection of Motets for the Offertory&quot; (c 1818) and &quot;The Evening Service&quot; (1822).
Between 1819 and 1824 Novello also published a series of masses by Haydn and Mozart in the form of vocal scores that were affordable and accessible to choral societies for the first time.

His son Joseph Alfred Novello (1810–1896), who had started as a bass singer, took over as head of the business in 1829 at the early age of nineteen, operating it from 67 Frith Street in Soho. It was Alfred who really established the business, and he is credited with introducing affordable music and of departing from the method of publishing by subscription. From 1841 Henry Littleton assisted him, becoming a partner in 1861, when the firm became Novello &amp; Co., and, on J.A. Novello&#x27;s retirement in 1866, sole proprietor. Having incorporated the firm of Ewer &amp; Co. in 1867, the title was changed to Novello, Ewer &amp; Co., and still later back to Novello &amp; Co., and, on Henry Littleton&#x27;s death in 1888, his two sons carried on the business.

==The Mozart pilgrimage==
In 1829, Mary and Vincent Novello traveled to Austria in hopes of gathering biographical material about Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, who had died 38 years earlier in Vienna. They had also taken up a collection for Mozart&#x27;s older sister Maria Anna Mozart, sometimes called today by her childhood name &quot;Nannerl&quot;, whom they mistakenly thought to be impoverished. In Salzburg they met with and interviewed Mozart&#x27;s wife Constanze and her son Franz Xaver Wolfgang Mozart. They also were able to speak with Maria Anna Mozart, who however by this time had become very old and feeble. The Novellos never wrote the book that they had planned as the result of their project, but their travel diaries were preserved (published 1955) and remain as a useful contribution to Mozart scholarship.

==Family==

Novello and his wife, Mary Sabilla (née Hehl), had eleven children. Five of his daughters survived to adulthood, four of them gifted singers. 
* Mary Victoria Cowden Clarke (née Novello) (1809–1898), was a literary scholar and writer. She married the author (and friend of Keats) Charles Cowden Clarke, edited &quot;The Musical Times&quot; for four years and compiled one of the first concordances of Shakespeare.
* Joseph Alfred Novello (1810–1896), singer, music publisher, founded &quot;The Musical Times&quot; in 1844, retired in 1866 and sold off his stake in Novello &amp; Co.
* Cecilia Serle (née Novello) (1812-1890) was an actress and singer, a pupil of the singing teacher Mrs. Blaine Hunt. She achieved early success on the stage but retired in 1836 when she married Thomas James Serle, a playwright, actor, novelist, and editor of a London weekly newspaper.
* Edward Petre Novello (1813-1836) showed promise as a painter but died young. He painted the family portrait, &quot;The Novello Family&quot; around 1830, and a portrait of Clara Novello in 1833. They are now at the National Portrait Gallery.
* Emma Aloysia Novello (1814–c. 1880), painter.
* Sidney Vincent Novello (1816–1820)
* Clara Anastasia Novello (1818–1908), was a soprano, one of the best known vocalists in opera and oratorio, and on the concert stage, from 1833 onward. In 1843 she married Count Gigliucci, but after a few years returned to her profession, retiring in 1860. Charles Lamb wrote a poem (&quot;To Clara N.&quot;) in her praise.
* Julia Harriet Novello (born and died 1820)
* Mary Sabilla Novello (1821–1904), singer, teacher of singing and translator.
* Florence Novello (1822- c.1832). In Edward&#x27;s family portrait &quot;The Novello Family&quot;, Florence is pictured in a white dress with her back to the viewer
* Charles Arthur Novello (born and died 1824)

==References==
==Sources==
*Hurd, Michael: &quot;Vincent Novello and Company&quot; (London: Granada, 1981); 
*Clarke, Mary Cowden: &quot;The life and labours of Vincent Novello&quot;, 1864, Novello &amp; Co.

==External links==
* 
* &quot;The Novello Family&quot;, National Portrait Gallery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2526705" start="0" end="15" title="Vincent Novello" label="Vincent Novello"/>
<link wikidata="Q209714" start="337" end="350" title="Oxford Street" label="Oxford Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423804" start="478" end="502" title="Sardinian Embassy Chapel" label="Sardinian Embassy Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736153" start="519" end="544" title="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn Fields" label="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412899" start="577" end="589" title="Samuel Webbe" label="Samuel Webbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747523" start="676" end="693" title="Manchester Square" label="Manchester Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q932992" start="748" end="764" title="Grosvenor Square" label="Grosvenor Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323998" start="792" end="810" title="St Mary Moorfields" label="St Mary Moorfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343491" start="926" end="939" title="Edward Holmes (musicologist)" label="Edward Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292443" start="974" end="994" title="Royal Philharmonic Society" label="Philharmonic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155331" start="1130" end="1149" title="King’s Theatre" label="King&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159982" start="1220" end="1235" title="Gargoyle Club" label="69 Meard Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="1272" end="1276" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965351" start="1791" end="1817" title="Christian Ignatius Latrobe" label="Christian Ignatius Latrobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q217295" start="1912" end="1916" title="Mass (music)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251764" start="1927" end="1935" title="List of Masses by Joseph Haydn" label="by Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381032" start="1946" end="1955" title="List of masses by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="by Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q179277" start="1970" end="1980" title="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina" label="Palestrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421440" start="2005" end="2023" title="Fitzwilliam Museum" label="Fitzwilliam Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q372984" start="2231" end="2238" title="Charles Lamb" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q276126" start="2243" end="2252" title="Mary Lamb" label="Mary Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q655213" start="2254" end="2264" title="Leigh Hunt" label="Leigh Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q93343" start="2266" end="2279" title="Percy Bysshe Shelley" label="Percy Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q126596" start="2281" end="2296" title="William Hazlitt" label="William Hazlitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076512" start="2298" end="2319" title="Charles Cowden Clarke" label="Charles Cowden Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="2321" end="2331" title="John Keats" label="John Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="2441" end="2458" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q232783" start="2474" end="2488" title="Maria Malibran" label="Maria Malibran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328480" start="2738" end="2754" title="Novello &amp;amp; Co" label="Novello &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059897" start="3156" end="3177" title="Joseph Alfred Novello" label="Joseph Alfred Novello"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565954" start="3318" end="3330" title="Frith Street" label="Frith Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="4045" end="4068" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q157928" start="4178" end="4195" title="Maria Anna Mozart" label="Maria Anna Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q84464" start="4373" end="4382" title="Constanze Mozart" label="Constanze"/>
<link wikidata="Q156023" start="4395" end="4422" title="Franz Xaver Wolfgang Mozart" label="Franz Xaver Wolfgang Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222976" start="4896" end="4937" title="Mary Cowden Clarke" label="Mary Victoria Cowden Clarke (née Novello)"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="5024" end="5029" title="John Keats" label="Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076512" start="5031" end="5052" title="Charles Cowden Clarke" label="Charles Cowden Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757371" start="5067" end="5084" title="The Musical Times" label="The Musical Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q839018" start="5136" end="5148" title="Concordance (publishing)" label="concordances"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059897" start="5167" end="5188" title="Alfred Novello" label="Joseph Alfred Novello"/>
<link wikidata="Q52149482" start="5529" end="5547" title="Thomas James Serle" label="Thomas James Serle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4322567" start="5951" end="5974" title="Clara Novello" label="Clara Anastasia Novello"/>
<link wikidata="Q372984" start="6207" end="6219" title="Charles Lamb (writer)" label="Charles Lamb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211618" wikidata="Q1584072" url="?curid=211618" title="Australian raven">
<text>The Australian raven (Corvus coronoides) is a passerine corvid bird native to Australia. Measuring in length, it has an all-black plumage, beak and mouth, as well as strong, greyish-black legs and feet. The upperparts of its body are glossy, with a purple-blue, greenish sheen; its black feathers have grey bases. The Australian raven is distinguished from the Australian crow, and other related corvids, by its long chest feathers, or throat hackles, which are prominent in mature birds. Older individuals and subadults have white irises, while the younger birds&#x27; eyes display blue inner rims; hatchlings and young birds have brown, dark irises until about fifteen months of age, at which point their irises become hazel-coloured, with an inner blue rim around each pupil, this lasting until they are roughly 2.5 to 3 years of age. Nicholas Aylward Vigors and Thomas Horsfield described the Australian raven in 1827, its species name &quot;coronoides&quot; highlighting its similarity with the carrion crow (&quot;C. corone&quot;). Two subspecies are recognised, which differ slightly in their vocalisations, and are quite divergent, genetically.

The preferred habitat of the Australian raven includes open woodlands and transitional zones, in addition to cities and towns; it has adapted well to human settlements and other urban environments, and is a commonly sighted bird in several major cities, including Sydney, Canberra, Perth, Adelaide and Brisbane. The Australian raven is territorial, with pairs generally bonding for life. Breeding takes place between July and September, with almost no variation across its range. The nest is a bowl-shaped structure of sticks sited high in a tree, or occasionally in a man-made structure such as a windmill or other building. 

An omnivorous and opportunistic feeder, the Australian raven eats a wide variety of plant and animal material, from fruits and seeds to lizards, chicks of other bird species, and small mammals; they will also scour waste bins and disposal sites for human food waste, such as various produce, meats, seafood, eggs, etc. The ravens living in eastern Australia are often associated with sheep farms, and have been blamed for the killing of lambs; however, this is an exceedingly rare occurrence, as the ravens are likely seeking the afterbirth from ewes that may have recently given birth. Additionally, ravens aid in environmental &quot;cleanup&quot;—much like vultures on other continents—by helping rid the area of potentially dangerous pathogens which could deploy on carrion, stillborn farm animals (or other deceased mammals and birds), even scavenging newborn mammalian faeces. 

==Taxonomy and naming==
The Australian raven was first described by Nicholas Aylward Vigors and Thomas Horsfield in 1827, when they reported George Caley&#x27;s early notes on the species from the Sydney district. Its specific epithet &quot;coronoides&quot; &quot;crow-shaped&quot; is derived from the Greek &quot;corone&quot;/κορόνη &quot;crow&quot; and &quot;eidos&quot;/είδος &quot;shape&quot; or &quot;form&quot;. The two naturalists regarded the Australian raven as very similar in appearance to the carrion crow (&quot;C. corone&quot;) of Europe, though they noted it was larger with a longer bill. They did not give it a common name. The location where the type specimen was collected is not recorded, but thought to be in the Parramatta district. Christian Ludwig Brehm described &quot;Corvus affinis&quot; in 1845, later determined to be this species. In his 1865 &quot;Handbook to the Birds of Australia&quot;, John Gould recognised only one species of corvid in Australia, &quot;Corvus australis&quot;, which he called the white-eyed crow. He used Johann Friedrich Gmelin&#x27;s 1788 name, which predated Vigors and Horsfield&#x27;s description. In 1877 Richard Bowdler Sharpe recognised two species, but recorded that the feather bases of the type specimen of &quot;C. coronoides&quot; were white. He named &quot;C. coronoides&quot; as the &quot;crow&quot; and &quot;C. australis&quot; (as &quot;Corone australis&quot;) the &quot;raven&quot;. Scottish naturalist William Robert Ogilvie-Grant corrected this in 1912 after re-examining the type specimen, clarifying the species as &quot;C. coronoides&quot; (raven, and incorporating little and forest ravens) and &quot;C. cecilae&quot; (Torresian crow).

Gregory Mathews described the western subspecies &quot;perplexus&quot; in 1912, naming it the southwestern crow and noting that it was smaller than the nominate subspecies. He called &quot;C. coronoides coronoides&quot; the eastern crow, listing its range as New South Wales, and described what is now the Australian crow as another subspecies, &quot;C. coronoides cecilae&quot;, calling it the north-western crow and recording its range as northwestern Australia. In the same work he listed the raven as &quot;Corvus marianae&quot;, with a type specimen from Gosford and listing its range as New South Wales. He listed the little raven and forest raven as subspecies. Mathews had erected &quot;C. marianae&quot; in 1911 as the name after declaring &quot;Corvus australis&quot; Gould to be preoccupied; French-American ornithologist Charles Vaurie acted as first reviser under Article 24 of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN) Code and discarded &quot;C. australis&quot; as a junior homonym—in 1788, Gmelin had used the same binomial name to describe the black nunbird—to preserve the stability of the name. This has been followed by later authors.

German ornithologist Erwin Stresemann lumped all Australian corvids plus other species as far as India into a single species, &quot;C. coronoides&quot;, as he believed there was intergradation between all characteristics such as iris colour, colour of feather bases and plumage. This was hotly disputed by Mathews. The official RAOU checklist listed three species (Australian raven, Torresian crow and little crow), with the little raven recognised as a fourth species in 1967 and forest raven in 1970. Stresemann described &quot;C. difficilis&quot; in 1943 from a single specimen, now thought to have been an unusual Australian raven or an Australian raven/Torresian crow hybrid.

&quot;Australian raven&quot; has been designated the official name by the International Ornithologists&#x27; Union (IOC). Alternative names sometimes seen include southern raven, southern crow and Kelly, the last thought to have alluded to the Kelly Gang, though did not appear until the 1920s. Southern crow was considered by the RAOU before Australian raven was adopted as the official name for the species in 1926. The term &quot;crow&quot; is colloquially applied to any or all species of Australian corvid. The Australian raven was called &quot;wugan&quot; by the local Eora and Darug inhabitants of the Sydney Basin.

===Evolution and systematics===

The Australian raven&#x27;s closest relatives are the other two species of raven occurring in Australia: the little raven and forest raven. The Australian raven is also somewhat closely related to the Torresian and little crow, although not as closely related as it is to the other raven species. Initial single gene genetic analysis of the genus using mitochondrial DNA showed the three raven species to belong to one lineage and the two crows to another. The genetic separation between species is small and there was a suggestion the little raven may be nested within the Australian raven, though the authors conceded more genetic work was needed. Subsequent multigene analysis using nuclear DNA by Jønsson and colleagues in 2012 showed the eastern and western subspecies of the Australian raven to form two clades, almost as genetically distinct as the forest and little raven are to each other. This led the authors to propose that the subspecies be recognised as separate species.

Ian Rowley proposed that the common ancestor of the five species diverged into a tropical crow and temperate raven sometime after entering Australia from the north, which molecular evidence indicates occurred in the early Pliocene epoch around 4 million years ago. The raven diverged into the ancestor of the forest and little ravens in the east and Australian raven in the west, this split occurring around 2 million years ago in the early Pleistocene. As the climate became cooler and drier, the aridity of central Australia split them entirely. Furthermore, the eastern birds diverged into nomadic little ravens and, in forested refuges, forest ravens. As the climate eventually became warmer, the western birds spread eastwards and almost outcompeted forest ravens on mainland Australia. Rowley noted that the western subspecies of the Australian raven had features intermediate between the eastern subspecies of Australian and little ravens.

Two subspecies are recognised:
* &quot;C. c. coronoides&quot;, the nominate or eastern subspecies, is found across most of eastern Australia. Its range is also highly correlated with the presence of sheep. This is thought to be because of the frequency of dead animals, which can be an important source of food. Ornithologist Ian Rowley held that the eastern subspecies was expanding eastwards before European colonisation, and that this suggested it was of younger origin than the western subspecies, which appears static. The advent of agriculture facilitated further spread.
* &quot;C. c. perplexus&quot;, the western subspecies, occurs from the head of the Great Australian Bight in South Australia westwards into Western Australia where its northern limits are Shark Bay and the mulga-eucalypt boundary line. It is less specialised in its habitat, as it does not share its distribution with the little raven, and does not appear to correlate with the range of sheep. The western subspecies has a slightly lower-pitched call than that of the eastern subspecies, with similarities to calls of the little raven. Of smaller size overall, it has a more slender bill and shorter hackles. There is otherwise no difference in plumage. Intermediate birds are found in the Eyre Peninsula, Gawler Ranges and vicinity of Lake Eyre in South Australia.

==Description==

Measuring in length with a wingspan and weighing around the , the Australian raven is Australia&#x27;s largest species of corvid. The adult Australian raven is an all black-bird with a black beak, mouth and tongue and sturdy black or grey-black legs and feet. The tibia is fully feathered and the tarsus is long, and the feet large and strong. It has white irises. The plumage is glossy with a blue-purple to a blue-green sheen, greenish over the ear coverts, depending on the light. The underparts are not glossy. The Australian raven has throat feathers (hackles) that are with rounded tips, while the other four species of Australian corvids have bifurcate tips, though this can be difficult to see in the field. The hackles are also longer than those of the other four species; when they are raised (such as when the bird is calling), they give the bird an unusual bearded appearance. The upper third of the upper mandible, including the nares and nasal groove, is covered with bristles, which can be up to long. The heavy-set beak is tipped with a slight hook, and is longer than the bird&#x27;s head. The wings are long and broad, with the longest of its ten primary feathers (usually the seventh but occasionally the eighth) almost reaching the end of the tail when the bird is at rest. The tail is rounded or wedge-shaped. The Australian raven can be distinguished from the two species of crow occurring in Australia by the grey base of the feathers, which is white in the latter species. The demarcation between pale and black regions on the feather is gradual in the ravens and sharply delineated in the crows. Feather bases are not normally visible when observing birds in the field, but can sometimes be seen on a windy day if the feathers are ruffled. Unlike the other four species, the Australian raven has a bare patch of skin under and extending to beside, the bill. This can be hard to discern in the field. The three species of raven are more heavily set with a broader chest than the two crow species, with the forest raven the stockiest of all. Relative size of species is only useful when two species can be seen side by side, as the overlap in size is large and the difference in size small.

Juveniles resemble adults, but lack throat hackles, and sometimes have a pink fleshy gape. The bill is shorter and shallower; its base can be pinkish and the tip can be light grey. The plumage is more ruffled and softer in appearance, lacks the glossy highlights and often having a brown tinge. The bare skin on the throat is pink in birds that have recently left the nest. Eye colour varies with age, gradually lightening from juvenile to adult. Nestlings up to four months old have blue-grey irises, juveniles aged from four to fifteen months have dark brown irises, and immature birds have hazel irises with an inner blue rim around each pupil until age two years and ten months. Immature birds older than one year develop hackles, while some pink remains in the gape until the bird is two or three years of age.

===Vocalisations===
The territorial call of the Australian raven is a slow, high &quot;ah-ah-aaaah&quot; (similar to the near-open front unrounded vowel (IPA:/æ/)) with the last note drawn out. It uses this call to communicate with other Australian ravens in the area. When giving this call, the species has a horizontal posture, holding its head forward and body parallel to the ground, while perched on a prominent position. It ruffles its hackles and lowers its tail, and sometimes holds its beak open between calls. In contrast, the little raven and forest raven hold their bodies in an upright posture. This call becomes louder if trespassers encroach upon the Australian raven&#x27;s territory. The five Australian species are very difficult to tell apart, with the call being the easiest way to do so, although the drawing-out of the final note—long held to be solely recorded for the Australian raven—has been recorded for the other species and is hence not diagnostic.
The volume, pitch, tempo and order of notes can be changed depending on the message the Australian raven intends to convey. There is a variety of contact calls: a pair often makes a low murmuring sound when preening each other while roosting, and members of a flock carry on with a quiet chattering while at rest. Birds make a call and answer sequence if temporarily out of sight of one another while foraging. Birds in flocks make a single high-pitched &quot;caa&quot; while flying over another territory as a transit call to signify they are just passing through. An Australian raven will give a longer &quot;caa&quot; with a downward inflection to signify its return to the nest to its mate.

==Distribution and habitat==
The Australian raven is common throughout eastern Australia, and southern Western Australia (the populations being connected by a narrow strip across the Nullarbor Plain), but it is rarer and more scattered in the north, with isolated sightings in Cape York at Coen, Windmill Creek and the Mitchell River, and becoming more common south of Rockhampton in central Queensland. It is found throughout New South Wales, though is uncommon in the northeast of the state. It is rare in the Australian Alps, being replaced there by the little raven. It occurs across Victoria and eastern South Australia, through the Eyre Peninsula and Nullarbor Plain into Western Australia, across the state north to the Wooramel River. It is found on some offshore islands such as Rottnest Island and Kangaroo Island. It is a rare vagrant to Lord Howe Island.

The Australian raven can be found in a wide range of natural and modified habitats. It requires available water and trees (or buildings) to roost in or perch on. Preferred habitats include eucalypt-dominated sclerophyll forest, and farmland adjacent to trees. It is also found in heath and mangroves. In areas where it occurs with the little raven, namely over much of central New South Wales, Victoria and into South Australia, the Australian raven is restricted to more forested areas while the latter species prefers more open areas. Similarly, in inland Australia it can share a range with the little crow, as the two do not appear to compete. However, the ranges of similar-sized forest raven and Torresian crow only narrowly overlap with the Australian raven as all three compete with each other. In central and western regions, Australian ravens and Torresian crows vie for the scattered uncommon trees and outcrops, and only one or the other are found there. It co-occurs with the forest raven in northeastern New South Wales from Port Stephens northwards. The Australian raven has adapted very well to human habitation in some cities and is the most common corvid in Canberra, Sydney and Perth; in Melbourne and Adelaide it is replaced by the little raven, and by the Torresian crow in Brisbane. Its large range, abundance and increasing population mean it is classified as &quot;Least Concern&quot; on the IUCN Red List.

==Behaviour==
Difficulties in distinguishing Australian corvids has hampered understanding of seasonal movements. The Australian raven is thought to be largely sedentary, with most movement of over due to flocks of non-breeding subadult birds. Juvenile birds leave their parents and join flocks when they are four or five months old. Smaller flocks of 8–30 birds stay within an area of around 260 square kilometres, while larger flocks of up to 300 birds may travel hundreds of kilometres seeking food.

A single breeding pair and their brood can occupy a territory of up to around and remains there year-round, though groups of ravens may enter this area to forage. Australian ravens will defend their territory by chasing, dive-bombing and occasionally striking the backs of birds of prey, foxes or even people. They generally mate for life, though occasionally one male has been found to be mated with two females in adjacent territories. If the female dies, the male Australian raven maintains the territory and finds another mate, while if the male bird is lost, the female abandons the territory. No courtship behaviour has been observed, and species that mate for life often lack elaborate courting displays. Once they begin breeding at three years of age, they live another four to five years on average. During this time they produce two surviving young each year on average. The longest-lived Australian raven recorded is an adult (of at least 3 years of age) that was banded and recaptured alive 12 years and 5 months later.

Australian ravens generally walk when moving around on the ground, though do hop when hurrying. They preen themselves frequently, particularly when roosting in the middle of the day. They also engage in allopreening, where birds will preen each other&#x27;s head and neck. This takes place particularly in autumn, winter and spring, and is important in pair bonding. Either member may initiate it, generally by landing near the other bird, shuffling next to its mate, then bending its head forward and presenting its nape.

===Breeding===
Australian ravens begin breeding once they are three years old. Breeding season is from July to September, with no substantial difference in timing across its range around the country despite it inhabiting a range of diverse climates and habitats across 19 degrees of latitude. Rowley has pointed out this is unusual for a bird species with a wide range and has postulated that breeding is initiated by day length. Rarely, breeding can take place in May, June or October. Australian ravens generally nest in tall trees, never near to the ground as some species do. The nest also functions as a lookout post and so tall or emergent trees are selected. The ravens occasionally nest on buildings, telegraph poles, or tall windmills which allow the species to occupy areas lacking in tall trees. Windmills may have assisted the spread of the species in North Queensland and the Northern Territory. The highest recorded corvid nest in Australia was found atop the AWA Tower in Sydney.

Nests are generally large and untidy, consisting of a bowl or platform of sticks lined with grasses, barks, and feathers that can be up to thick. As they are relatively heavy, they are built on larger forks in trees rather than out in the canopy. Building the nest is often time-consuming initially as the birds try (and often fail) to wedge sticks, which are long and thick, into the tree fork to make a platform. Thinner sticks and rootlets are used to make the bowl before the bowl is lined with feathers. Both birds build the nest, with the female taking over the lining of the nest while the male brings her material. New nests are built each year generally, as the re-use of old ones might spread disease or parasites—nests become caked with faeces as the nestlings grow and the parents cannot keep up with its removal. Furthermore, old nests often disintegrate within twelve months due to their exposed locations. The female develops a brood patch—a patch of bare skin on the bird&#x27;s underparts that reddens and becomes much more extensive from around three weeks before the first egg is laid. The skin itself is oedematous and wrinkled, and does not get re-feathered until December after the breeding season has finished.

Their lofty locations makes monitoring of Australian raven nests difficult. A clutch can comprise up to six eggs, though usually four or five are laid, with five being the most common number. Measuring , eggs are pale green or bluish-green and splotched with darker olive, brown and blackish markings. Eggs are quite variable, and thus which Australian corvid laid them cannot be reliably identified. Incubation of the eggs is done solely by the female over roughly 20 days. Incubation is intermittent initially, becoming constant by the time the third or fourth egg is laid. Only one brood is raised per year, though a second clutch may be laid if the first clutch is lost early in the season. Late clutches have poor survival rates, possibly due to chicks getting dehydrated on hot days as the year progresses or being eaten by wedge-tailed eagles. The chicks are altricial and nidicolous; that is, they are born helpless, naked and blind, and remain in the nest for an extended period. They have pink skin until 5 days of age, when feathers under the skin turn it grey. They lose their egg tooth at the same time. Their eyes begin opening at 5 to 6 days of age and are fully open by 11 to 12 days, by which time their feathers begin emerging. At 14 days, their primary feathers begin emerging, and they are fully feathered by 35–36 days old. They leave the nest at 40–45 days of age, and stay with the parents for three to four months after that. They follow their parents and beg for food for the first month outside the nest but are feeding themselves by the third month. Young birds are often attacked when they enter neighbouring territories, and melees ensue as their parents try to defend them and herd them back.

===Feeding===
The Australian raven is omnivorous, though eats more meat than smaller corvids. Its diet in summer contains a high proportion of insects, while more plant items are eaten in autumn. Flesh makes up over half its diet in winter. Invertebrates commonly eaten include spiders, millipedes, centipedes (which ravens behead before eating), grasshoppers, cicadas and caterpillars (especially of the family Noctuidae), which are important in feeding nestlings. Australian ravens sometimes eat yabbies (&quot;Cherax destructor&quot;) from the edges of dams. Unusually for a ground-feeding omnivore, earthworms are rarely eaten. Australian ravens have been reported killing birds of such size as young galahs (&quot;Eolophus roseicapillus&quot;) and starlings (&quot;Sturnus vulgaris&quot;). Most mammals are eaten as carrion, as many species are too large for the raven to kill, though young rabbits are a frequent prey item. Australian ravens drink water frequently, up to ten times a day in hot weather. Birds have been observed dunking pieces of meat in water before eating them, as well as doing the same with hard biscuits to make them soggy and soft.

Australian ravens are intelligent birds, and like many other corvids have innovative methods of seeking out food. Foraging takes place in the early morning or late afternoon; birds rest in the hotter part of the day. Food is taken mainly from the ground, birds either finding objects while flying overhead or by walking along and looking. However, they occasionally feed in trees—Australian ravens forage eucalypt foliage for Christmas beetles (&quot;Anoplognathus&quot;), and devote a substantial amount of time to look for nests and eggs to eat. They have also been known to take golf balls from fairways, possibly mistaking them for eggs. Ravens use their bill rather than their feet to explore or turn items on the ground (rocks or sticks) over or hold or snatch food while flying. They have also been recorded using fence posts as anvils to bash snails against before eating them. Australian ravens most often eat food where they find it unless taking food back for nestlings. Occasionally they have been observed caching carrion or a killed animal in a hole nearby to store it. They can pack shredded meat in their mouth under their tongue. Australian ravens have adapted well to eating food scraps in urban areas, such as school playgrounds, rubbish tips, bins outside supermarkets or restaurants, abattoirs, piggeries and farmyards. In one isolated study, they were observed feeding on nectar from eucalypt flowers. Australian ravens sometimes forage in mixed-species flocks with any of the other four species of Australian corvids. Sometimes they are aggressive with little ravens if both are at a food source and drive them off, though not if the smaller species greatly outnumber the larger.

===Parasites and predators===
A circovirus—given the name raven circovirus or RaCV—was isolated from an Australian raven suffering from feather lesions in 2006. It has affinities with canary circovirus (CaCV) and pigeon circovirus (PiCV). Its clinical significance is unknown. A species of &quot;Isospora&quot;—given the name of &quot;I. coronoideae&quot; was isolated from this species, its only known host. Tick infestation is rare in the Australian raven, with &quot;Ixodes holocyclus&quot; and &quot;Amblyomma triguttatum&quot; recorded. Lice and hippoboscid flies have been recorded yet little-researched, and an infestation by the fly &quot;Passeromyia longicornis&quot; was recorded in one nest.

The wedge-tailed eagle (&quot;Aquila audax&quot;) preys on adult, nestling, and fledgling Australian ravens, while the little eagle (&quot;Hieraaetus morphnoides&quot;) also takes nestlings, and powerful owl (&quot;Ninox strenua&quot;) has been recorded killing adults; other birds of prey are seen as threats, yet there is no evidence they have successfully preyed on the ravens. The introduced red fox (&quot;Vulpes vulpes&quot;) competes with the Australian raven for carrion and can drive it off. It may also kill young birds that it catches on the ground. The channel-billed cuckoo (&quot;Scythrops novaehollandiae&quot;) has been recorded as a brood parasite.

==Relationship with humans==
Australian ravens sometimes die by being shot or poisoned—generally by farmers. Despite their fondness for roadkill, fewer ravens are hit by vehicles than Australian magpies. Research in the 1950s and 60s showed that 64% of Australian ravens perished in their first year of life. Immature birds are most at risk of dying. The Australian raven is a peaceful bird, showing no aggression toward humans or other birds without reason. However, the Australian raven is frequently blamed for the loss of young lambs. Scientific observation in the country&#x27;s southeast showed that the killing of healthy lambs was rare, but that sick animals were predisposed to being attacked. Australian ravens mostly eat faeces (often from the lamb&#x27;s anus), afterbirth or stillborn lambs. Newborn lamb faeces is nutritious, containing around 21–44% protein, 9–37% fat and 10–30% carbohydrate. It has the consistency of treacle and often sticks to the lamb&#x27;s hindquarters or tail. The raven bites a sleeping lamb&#x27;s tail, holding on and walking behind it when it wakes up. A healthy lamb would respond by running away or butting the bird, but a sick one might not respond and be attacked further as it alerts the bird that it is vulnerable. Wounded lambs can also succumb to &quot;Clostridium&quot; infection as these bacteria are present on raven bills. Ravens bring some benefits to agricultural areas as they clean away carrion and eat insects that are potentially damaging to crops. In areas of Western Australia, the species is classified as a Declared Pest of Agriculture under the provisions of the &quot;Agriculture and Related Resources Protection Act 1976&quot;, meaning that shooting on private land in rural areas is legal, although should be considered only after other options have been exhausted.

===In Indigenous culture===

In Australian Aboriginal mythology, Crow is a trickster, culture hero and ancestral being. In the Kulin nation in central Victoria he was known as &quot;Waa&quot; (also &quot;Wahn&quot; or &quot;Waang&quot;) and was regarded as one of two moiety ancestors, the other being the more sombre eaglehawk &quot;Bunjil&quot;. Legends relating to Crow have been observed in various Aboriginal language groups and cultures across Australia.

To the Noongar people of southwestern Australia, the Australian raven was &quot;Waardar&quot;, &quot;the Watcher&quot; and was wily and unpredictable. Noongar people were socially divided into two moieties or kinships: &quot;waardarng-maat&quot; and &quot;marrnetj-maat&quot;, or members of the Australian raven and long-billed corella (&quot;Cacatua tenuirostris&quot;) respectively.

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
=== Citations ===
=== Cited texts ===

==External links==
* An Australian Raven call (two birds)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1584072" start="4" end="20" title="Australian raven" label="Australian raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="46" end="55" title="passerine" label="passerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25565" start="56" end="62" title="Corvidae" label="corvid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="63" end="67" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="78" end="87" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584645" start="361" end="376" title="Australian crow" label="Australian crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125503" start="436" end="450" title="Hackles" label="throat hackles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516282" start="511" end="520" title="Juvenile (organism)" label="subadults"/>
<link wikidata="Q178748" start="532" end="538" title="Iris (anatomy)" label="irises"/>
<link wikidata="Q22294905" start="600" end="610" title="Hatchling" label="hatchlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q173318" start="772" end="777" title="pupil" label="pupil"/>
<link wikidata="Q332479" start="838" end="861" title="Nicholas Aylward Vigors" label="Nicholas Aylward Vigors"/>
<link wikidata="Q507763" start="866" end="882" title="Thomas Horsfield" label="Thomas Horsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q26198" start="1000" end="1012" title="carrion crow" label="carrion crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="1042" end="1052" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q917925" start="1129" end="1138" title="Divergent evolution" label="divergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="1418" end="1424" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="1426" end="1434" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="1436" end="1441" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="1443" end="1451" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="1456" end="1464" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="1785" end="1795" title="omnivorous" label="omnivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q334173" start="1800" end="1813" title="Opportunism" label="opportunistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18919" start="2037" end="2047" title="food waste" label="food waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330629" start="2122" end="2139" title="Eastern states of Australia" label="eastern Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790941" start="2166" end="2177" title="Sheep farming" label="sheep farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962315" start="2312" end="2322" title="Placental expulsion" label="afterbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q123120" start="2441" end="2449" title="Vulture" label="vultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q202994" start="2551" end="2558" title="carrion" label="carrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q745832" start="2560" end="2569" title="Stillbirth" label="stillborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="2656" end="2662" title="Feces" label="faeces"/>
<link wikidata="Q332479" start="2734" end="2757" title="Nicholas Aylward Vigors" label="Nicholas Aylward Vigors"/>
<link wikidata="Q507763" start="2762" end="2778" title="Thomas Horsfield" label="Thomas Horsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q955988" start="2807" end="2819" title="George Caley" label="George Caley"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2968" end="2973" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q26198" start="3171" end="3183" title="carrion crow" label="carrion crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="3330" end="3343" title="Type (biology)" label="type specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q21319" start="3400" end="3410" title="Parramatta" label="Parramatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q21112" start="3421" end="3443" title="Christian Ludwig Brehm" label="Christian Ludwig Brehm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647333" start="3545" end="3579" title="Handbook to the Birds of Australia" label="Handbook to the Birds of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q313787" start="3587" end="3597" title="John Gould" label="John Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q57230" start="3725" end="3748" title="Johann Friedrich Gmelin" label="Johann Friedrich Gmelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q432586" start="3831" end="3853" title="Richard Bowdler Sharpe" label="Richard Bowdler Sharpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349942" start="4141" end="4169" title="William Robert Ogilvie-Grant" label="William Robert Ogilvie-Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584645" start="4363" end="4377" title="Torresian crow" label="Torresian crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q933124" start="4381" end="4396" title="Gregory Mathews" label="Gregory Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584645" start="4687" end="4702" title="Australian crow" label="Australian crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583515" start="5005" end="5017" title="little raven" label="little raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299780" start="5022" end="5034" title="forest raven" label="forest raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066318" start="5214" end="5228" title="Charles Vaurie" label="Charles Vaurie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5238" end="5251" title="International Code of Zoological Nomenclature#Principle of the First Reviser" label="first reviser"/>
<link wikidata="Q13011" start="5276" end="5321" title="International Code of Zoological Nomenclature" label="International Code of Zoological Nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264128" start="5457" end="5470" title="black nunbird" label="black nunbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q62357" start="5573" end="5589" title="Erwin Stresemann" label="Erwin Stresemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q865099" start="5880" end="5884" title="Royal Australasian Ornithologists Union" label="RAOU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325616" start="6308" end="6348" title="International Ornithologists&amp;#x27; Union" label="International Ornithologists&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q301816" start="6474" end="6488" title="Ned Kelly" label="the Kelly Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q257174" start="6809" end="6813" title="Eora" label="Eora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166813" start="6818" end="6823" title="Darug people" label="Darug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373806" start="6843" end="6855" title="Sydney Basin" label="Sydney Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583515" start="7000" end="7012" title="little raven" label="little raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299780" start="7017" end="7029" title="forest raven" label="forest raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q769863" start="7577" end="7588" title="nuclear DNA" label="nuclear DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="8100" end="8108" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="8319" end="8330" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147244" start="9152" end="9162" title="Ian Rowley" label="Ian Rowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q186733" start="9487" end="9509" title="Great Australian Bight" label="Great Australian Bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q217487" start="9592" end="9601" title="Shark Bay" label="Shark Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875863" start="9610" end="9638" title="mulga-eucalypt line" label="mulga-eucalypt boundary line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385889" start="10094" end="10108" title="Eyre Peninsula" label="Eyre Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q918694" start="10110" end="10123" title="Gawler Ranges" label="Gawler Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q179970" start="10140" end="10149" title="Lake Eyre" label="Lake Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432336" start="10452" end="10457" title="Tibiotarsus" label="tibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135328" start="10485" end="10491" title="Tarsometatarsus" label="tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178748" start="10545" end="10551" title="Iris (anatomy)" label="irises"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11353" end="11369" title="Flight feather#Primaries" label="primary feathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="12488" end="12492" title="gape" label="gape"/>
<link wikidata="Q740768" start="13341" end="13372" title="near-open front unrounded vowel" label="near-open front unrounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q740768" start="13379" end="13380" title="Near-open front unrounded vowel" label="æ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556804" start="14344" end="14356" title="contact call" label="contact call"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="14997" end="15014" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q381050" start="15077" end="15092" title="Nullarbor Plain" label="Nullarbor Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522178" start="15184" end="15188" title="Coen, Queensland" label="Coen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939518" start="15213" end="15227" title="Mitchell River (Queensland)" label="Mitchell River"/>
<link wikidata="Q606162" start="15263" end="15274" title="Rockhampton" label="Rockhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q390226" start="15406" end="15421" title="Australian Alps" label="Australian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385889" start="15532" end="15546" title="Eyre Peninsula" label="Eyre Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q381050" start="15551" end="15566" title="Nullarbor Plain" label="Nullarbor Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15629833" start="15621" end="15635" title="Wooramel River" label="Wooramel River"/>
<link wikidata="Q585317" start="15682" end="15697" title="Rottnest Island" label="Rottnest Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q210371" start="15702" end="15717" title="Kangaroo Island" label="Kangaroo Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q104784" start="15743" end="15759" title="Lord Howe Island" label="Lord Howe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405491" start="15951" end="15959" title="eucalypt" label="eucalypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q766271" start="15970" end="15981" title="sclerophyll" label="sclerophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q479030" start="16801" end="16814" title="Port Stephens (New South Wales)" label="Port Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q25565" start="16928" end="16934" title="Corvidae" label="corvid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="16938" end="16946" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="16948" end="16954" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="16959" end="16964" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="16969" end="16978" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="16983" end="16991" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="17057" end="17065" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="17178" end="17191" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q300206" start="20229" end="20238" title="AWA Tower" label="AWA Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q660931" start="21194" end="21205" title="brood patch" label="brood patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q954226" start="21887" end="21897" title="Avian incubation" label="Incubation"/>
<link wikidata="Q110576835" start="22352" end="22361" title="altricial" label="altricial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341246" start="22366" end="22376" title="nidicolous" label="nidicolous"/>
<link wikidata="Q669339" start="22575" end="22584" title="egg tooth" label="egg tooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="23488" end="23494" title="spider" label="spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q167367" start="23497" end="23506" title="millipede" label="millipede"/>
<link wikidata="Q43447" start="23509" end="23518" title="centipede" label="centipede"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398431" start="23557" end="23568" title="grasshopper" label="grasshopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947892" start="23571" end="23577" title="cicada" label="cicada"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="23583" end="23594" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q459180" start="23622" end="23631" title="Noctuidae" label="Noctuidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711833" start="23708" end="23715" title="Common yabby" label="yabbies"/>
<link wikidata="Q124378" start="23813" end="23822" title="earthworm" label="earthworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253755" start="23915" end="23920" title="galah" label="galah"/>
<link wikidata="Q25469" start="23963" end="23972" title="common starling" label="starlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852318" start="24798" end="24814" title="Christmas beetle" label="Christmas beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115905" start="25834" end="25854" title="mixed-species foraging flock" label="mixed-species flocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121560" start="26108" end="26118" title="circovirus" label="circovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154157" start="26372" end="26380" title="Isospora" label="Isospora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015043" start="26546" end="26563" title="Ixodes holocyclus" label="Ixodes holocyclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10407849" start="26580" end="26601" title="Amblyomma triguttatum" label="Amblyomma triguttatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q256346" start="26627" end="26638" title="Hippoboscidae" label="hippoboscid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26723" end="26746" title="Passeromyia longicornis" label="Passeromyia longicornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q752465" start="26784" end="26802" title="wedge-tailed eagle" label="wedge-tailed eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074631" start="26899" end="26911" title="little eagle" label="little eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q370297" start="26975" end="26987" title="powerful owl" label="powerful owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="27176" end="27183" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q616692" start="27345" end="27366" title="channel-billed cuckoo" label="channel-billed cuckoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q647144" start="27430" end="27444" title="brood parasite" label="brood parasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140949" start="27631" end="27648" title="Australian magpie" label="Australian magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q10972293" start="28382" end="28389" title="treacle" label="treacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q327663" start="28752" end="28763" title="Clostridium" label="Clostridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="29327" end="29337" title="Australian Aborigines" label="Aboriginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q376608" start="29338" end="29347" title="Australian Aboriginal mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189066" start="29349" end="29353" title="Crow (Australian Aboriginal mythology)" label="Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q902180" start="29359" end="29368" title="trickster" label="trickster"/>
<link wikidata="Q977690" start="29370" end="29382" title="culture hero" label="culture hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q930202" start="29411" end="29423" title="Kulin nation" label="Kulin nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="29435" end="29443" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823774" start="29552" end="29568" title="Australian Aboriginal kinship" label="moiety ancestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q752465" start="29602" end="29611" title="eaglehawk" label="eaglehawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928214" start="29618" end="29624" title="Bunjil" label="Bunjil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996477" start="29753" end="29760" title="Noongar" label="Noongar"/>
<link wikidata="Q845964" start="30062" end="30081" title="long-billed corella" label="long-billed corella"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211623" wikidata="Q6250402" url="?curid=211623" title="John Nichol (biographer)">
<text>John Nichol (8 September 1833 – 11 October 1894), was a Scottish literary academic, and the first Regius Professor of English Language and Literature at the University of Glasgow.

==Early life==
Born in Montrose, Scotland, Nichol was the son of John Pringle Nichol, Regius Professor of Astronomy at the University of Glasgow. John Jr. studied first at Glasgow (1848–55) and then Balliol College, Oxford (1855–9) as a Snell Exhibitioner, graduating with a First-Class degree in Classics, Philosophy and Mathematics. After graduating, Nicholl remained at Oxford as a coach. With Albert Venn Dicey, Thomas Hill Green, Swinburne and others, he formed the Old Mortality Society for discussions on literary matters.

==Glasgow==
In 1862 he was made Regius Professor of English Literature at Glasgow. He had already made a reputation as an acute critic and a successful lecturer, and his influence at Glasgow was very marked. During his tenure as Regius Professor, he also lectured at Oxford University as well as private tutoring across Britain, and formed a strong reputation as an inspiring lecturer, later joining Glasgow&#x27;s Dialectic Society.

He left Glasgow for London in 1889, and died on 11 October 1894. &quot;A Memoir by Professor Knight&quot; was published in 1896.

==Works==
Among the major works by Nichol were his drama &quot;Hannibal&quot; (1873), &quot;The Death of Themistocles, and other Poems&quot; (1881), his Byron in the &quot;English Men of Letters&quot; series (1880), his Robert Burns (1882) and Carlyle (1892).

Nichol was also an enthusiastic Americanist and wrote the ground-breaking &quot;American Literature: An Historical Review, 1620–1880&quot; (1882). He visited the United States in 1865, and in 1882 he wrote the article on American literature for the ninth edition of the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;.

In addition to the above, he was also the author of the following works:

*&quot;Fragments of Criticism&quot;, a volume of essays, (1860); 
*&quot;Tables of European Literature and History, A.D. 200-1876&quot; (1876);
*&quot;Tables of Ancient Literature and History&quot;, (1877);
*&quot;English Composition&quot;, a literature primer, (1879); 
*&quot;Questions on English Composition&quot;, (1890); and 
*two volumes on &quot;Lord Bacon&#x27;s Life and Philosophy&quot; for Black&#x27;s &quot;Series of Philosophical Writers&quot;, (1887–89).

Nichol also wrote essays for the &quot;Westminster Review&quot;, &quot;North British Review&quot;, and other reviews; articles in the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;; and several pamphlets on education questions.

Nichol was long blamed by biographers of the poet Swinburne for leading Swinburne to lose his faith and to alcoholism. Neither charge is true (See Terry L. Meyers, &quot;On Drink and Faith: Swinburne and John Nichol at Oxford&quot;. Review of English Studies, ns 55:220 (June 2004), 392–424).

==References==
== External links ==
* 
* His article about American Literature (in Encyclopædia Britannica 9th edition)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6250402" start="0" end="11" title="John Nichol (biographer)" label="John Nichol"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="56" end="64" title="Scotland" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309477" start="98" end="149" title="Regius Professor of English Language and Literature, Glasgow" label="Regius Professor of English Language and Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="157" end="178" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q420303" start="204" end="212" title="Montrose, Angus" label="Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="214" end="222" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253446" start="246" end="265" title="John Pringle Nichol" label="John Pringle Nichol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309469" start="267" end="296" title="Regius Professor of Astronomy, Glasgow" label="Regius Professor of Astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="304" end="325" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="380" end="403" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547619" start="418" end="436" title="Snell Exhibitioner" label="Snell Exhibitioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344299" start="578" end="595" title="Albert Venn Dicey" label="Albert Venn Dicey"/>
<link wikidata="Q369621" start="597" end="614" title="Thomas Hill Green" label="Thomas Hill Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q315511" start="616" end="625" title="Algernon Charles Swinburne" label="Swinburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309477" start="744" end="782" title="Regius Professor of English Language and Literature, Glasgow" label="Regius Professor of English Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="786" end="793" title="University of Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="979" end="996" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566946" start="1127" end="1144" title="Glasgow University Dialectic Society" label="Dialectic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="1430" end="1435" title="Lord Byron" label="Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378327" start="1449" end="1471" title="English Men of Letters" label="English Men of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="1497" end="1509" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="1521" end="1528" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1700" end="1713" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="1814" end="1837" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989198" start="2430" end="2448" title="Westminster Review" label="Westminster Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054291" start="2462" end="2482" title="North British Review" label="North British Review"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211624" wikidata="Q145247" url="?curid=211624" title="Lesser water boatman">
<text>The lesser waterboatman or lesser water boatman (&quot;Corixa punctata&quot;) is a freshwater-dwelling insect of the order Hemiptera.

Adults normally range in size from 5 to 15 mm long, and are found in ponds, lakes, swimming pools and most bodies of freshwater.
The boatman feeds on algae and dead plant material. They are green with long hind legs which they use to swim on top of water. These powerful legs are covered in tiny hairs which helps them float on the surface of the water. They also have wings which enable them to fly and reach suitable environments.

They breathe oxygen by trapping air beneath their wing cases when they are on the surface as the oxygen is trapped by tiny hairs. They use trapped air in their physical gill to convert water-borne sounds into airborne sounds that they can hear.

They are similar in appearance to &quot;Notonecta glauca&quot;, the back swimmer, but lesser waterboatmen are herbivores and swim on their fronts. They are not related to &quot;Notonecta glauca&quot; nor to the European &quot;Micronecta scholtzi&quot;, also known as the &quot;lesser water boatman&quot;.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Banks, C.J. (1949). &quot;The absorption of water by the eggs of &quot;Corixa punctata&quot; Illig. (Hemiptera, Corixidae) under experimental conditions.&quot; &quot;The Journal of Experimental Biology&quot; 26: 131–136.
* Short, J.R.T. (1953). &quot;On the musculature of the legs of &quot;Corixa punctata&quot; (Illig.) Hemiptera.&quot; &quot;Proceedings of the Royal Entomological Society of London A&quot; 28: 31–35.

== External links ==

* Canterbury Environmental Education Centre, includes images
* Microcosmos.nl - description and images</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q145247" start="4" end="23" title="Lesser water boatman" label="lesser waterboatman"/>
<link wikidata="Q145247" start="27" end="47" title="Lesser water boatman" label="lesser water boatman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="103" end="109" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q26371" start="123" end="132" title="Hemiptera" label="Hemiptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="285" end="290" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q266370" start="855" end="871" title="Notonecta glauca" label="Notonecta glauca"/>
<link wikidata="Q875622" start="883" end="895" title="back swimmer" label="back swimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626598" start="1041" end="1060" title="Micronecta scholtzi" label="Micronecta scholtzi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211626" wikidata="Q968938" url="?curid=211626" title="Johnnie Taylor">
<text>Johnnie Harrison Taylor (May 5, 1934 – May 31, 2000) was an American recording artist and songwriter who performed a wide variety of genres, from blues, rhythm and blues, soul, and gospel to pop, doo-wop, and disco. He was initially successful at Stax Records with the number-one R&amp;B hits &quot;Who&#x27;s Making Love&quot; (1968), &quot;Jody&#x27;s Got Your Girl and Gone&quot; (1971) and &quot;I Believe in You (You Believe in Me)&quot; (1973), and reached number one on the US pop charts with &quot;Disco Lady&quot; in 1976.

In 2022, Taylor was inducted into the Blues Hall of Fame.

==Biography==
===Early years===

Johnnie Taylor was born in Crawfordsville, Arkansas, United States. He grew up in West Memphis, Arkansas, performing in gospel groups as a youngster. As an adult, he had one release, &quot;Somewhere to Lay My Head&quot;, on Chicago&#x27;s Vee Jay Records label in the 1950s, as part of the gospel group The Highway Q.C.&#x27;s, which included a young Sam Cooke. Taylor&#x27;s singing then was strikingly close to that of Cooke, and he was hired to take Cooke&#x27;s place in the latter&#x27;s gospel group, the Soul Stirrers, in 1957.

A few years later, after Cooke had established his independent SAR Records, Taylor signed on as one of the label&#x27;s first acts and recorded &quot;Rome Wasn&#x27;t Built In A Day&quot; in 1962. However, SAR Records quickly became defunct after Cooke&#x27;s death in 1964.

In 1966, Taylor moved to Stax Records in Memphis, Tennessee, where he was dubbed &quot;The Philosopher of Soul&quot;. He recorded with the label&#x27;s house band, which included Booker T. &amp; the M.G.&#x27;s. His hits included &quot;I Had a Dream&quot;, &quot;I&#x27;ve Got to Love Somebody&#x27;s Baby&quot; (both written by the team of Isaac Hayes and David Porter) and most notably &quot;Who&#x27;s Making Love&quot;, which reached No. 5 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart and No. 1 on the R&amp;B chart in 1968. &quot;Who&#x27;s Making Love&quot; sold over one million copies, and was awarded a gold disc. In 1970 Taylor married Gerlean Rocket, with their divorce finalized on May 10, 2000, 21 days before his passing. His children from that marriage are Jon Harrison Taylor, and Tasha Taylor, both musicians.

During his tenure at Stax, he became an R&amp;B star, with over a dozen chart successes, such as &quot;Jody&#x27;s Got Your Girl and Gone&quot;, which reached No. 23 on the Hot 100 chart, &quot;Cheaper to Keep Her&quot; (Mack Rice) and record producer Don Davis&#x27;s penned &quot;I Believe in You (You Believe in Me)&quot;, which reached No. 11 on the Hot 100 chart. &quot;I Believe in You (You Believe in Me)&quot; also sold more than one million copies, and was awarded gold disc status by the R.I.A.A. in October 1973. Taylor, along with Isaac Hayes and The Staple Singers, was one of the label&#x27;s flagship artists, who were credited for keeping the company afloat in the late 1960s and early 1970s after the death of its biggest star, Otis Redding, in an aviation accident. He appeared in the documentary film, &quot;Wattstax&quot;, which was released in 1973.

===Columbia Records===
After Stax folded in 1975, Taylor switched to Columbia Records, where he recorded his biggest success with Don Davis still in charge of production, &quot;Disco Lady&quot;, in 1976. It spent four weeks at number one on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and six weeks at the top of the R&amp;B chart. It peaked at No. 25 in the UK Singles Chart in May 1976. &quot;Disco Lady&quot; was the first certified platinum single (two million copies sold) by the RIAA. Taylor recorded several more successful albums and R&amp;B single hits with Davis on Columbia, before Brad Shapiro took over production duties, but sales generally fell away.

===Malaco Records===
After a short stay at a small independent label in Los Angeles, Beverly Glen Records, Taylor signed with Malaco Records after the company&#x27;s founder Tommy Couch and producing partner Wolf Stephenson heard him sing at blues singer Z. Z. Hill&#x27;s funeral in spring 1984.

Backed by members of the Muscle Shoals Rhythm Section, as well as in-house veterans such as former Stax keyboardist Carson Whitsett and guitarist/bandleader Bernard Jenkins, Malaco gave Taylor the type of recording freedom that Stax had given him in the late 1960s and early 1970s, enabling him to record ten albums for the label in his 16-year stint.

In 1996, Taylor&#x27;s eighth album for Malaco, &quot;Good Love!&quot;, reached number one on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Top Blues Albums chart (No. 15 R&amp;B), and was the biggest record in Malaco&#x27;s history. With this success, Malaco recorded a live video of Taylor at the Longhorn Ballroom in Dallas, Texas, in the summer of 1997. The club portion of the &quot;Good Love&quot; video was recorded at 1001 Nightclub in Jackson, Mississippi.

Taylor&#x27;s final song was &quot;Soul Heaven&quot;, in which he dreamed of being at a concert featuring deceased African-American music icons from Louis Armstrong to Otis Redding to Z.Z. Hill to The Notorious B.I.G., among others.

==Radio==
In the 1980s, Johnnie Taylor was a DJ on KKDA, a radio station in the Dallas area, where he had made his home. The station&#x27;s format was mostly R&amp;B and Soul oldies and their on-the-air personalities were often local R&amp;B, Soul, blues, and jazz musicians. Taylor was billed as &quot;The Wailer, Johnnie Taylor&quot;.

==Death==
Taylor died of a heart attack at Charlton Methodist Hospital in Dallas, Texas, on May 31, 2000, aged 66. Stax billed Johnnie Taylor as &quot;The Philosopher of Soul&quot;. He was also known as &quot;the Blues Wailer&quot;. He was buried beside his mother, Ida Mae Taylor, at Forrest Hill Cemetery in Kansas City, Missouri.

His highly complex personal life was revealed after his death. Having six accepted children and three others with confirmed paternity born to three different mothers, the difficulties associated with executing his will were presented in an episode of the TV program &quot;The Will: Family Secrets Revealed&quot; called &quot;The Estate of Johnnie Taylor&quot;. In a 2021 &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; article, Fonda Bryant, one of the nine heirs of Taylor&#x27;s estate, shared some of the complexities that she and her other siblings have had to deal with during the past decade regarding her father&#x27;s royalty payments from Sony Music. Bryant believed that the alleged lack of transparency concerning those payouts was reason enough for Sony to disclose her father&#x27;s personal information. Sony&#x27;s refusal to do so left Bryant and the other heirs in the dark. Music industry attorney Erin M. Jacobson stated in the article that &quot;&#x27;a label is not just going to turn over a bunch of financial records to anyone that asks for it.&#x27;&quot; An audit is a viable option for &quot;heirs who are distrustful of a label&#x27;s accounting&quot; practices. The down side to doing one, though, is the exorbitant amount of money that it would cost to do so, something too &quot;unrealistic for most heirs like Bryant.&quot;

==Awards and nominations==
Taylor was given a Pioneer Award by the Rhythm and Blues Foundation in 1999. Taylor was also a three-time Grammy Award nominee. In 2015 Taylor was inducted into the National Rhythm &amp; Blues Hall of Fame. In 2022, Taylor was inducted into the Blues Hall of Fame. His induction citation stated &quot;Taylor liked to emphasize that he could sing more than blues, as indeed he amply proved when performing gospel and soul, but among African-American audiences, he reigned as the top headliner of his era at blues events&quot;.

===Grammy Awards===
Taylor was nominated for three career Grammy Awards without a win.
|rowspan=&quot;1&quot;|1969
|rowspan=&quot;1&quot;|&quot;Who&#x27;s Making Love&quot;
|Best Male R&amp;B Vocal Performance
|-
|rowspan=&quot;1&quot;|1977
|rowspan=&quot;1&quot;|&quot;Disco Lady&quot;
|Best Male R&amp;B Vocal Performance
|-
|rowspan=&quot;1&quot;|2001
|rowspan=&quot;1&quot;|&quot;Gotta Get the Groove Back&quot;
|Best Traditional R&amp;B Vocal Album
|-

Johnnie Taylor was awarded the &quot;first-ever&quot; Platinum Record Award in history by the RIAA for his two-million-selling smash hit, &quot;Disco Lady&quot;.

==Musical influence==
In 2004, the UK&#x27;s Shapeshifters sampled Taylor&#x27;s 1982 &quot;What About My Love?&quot;, for their No. 1 hit single, &quot;Lola&#x27;s Theme&quot;.

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
===Live albums===
* &quot;FunkSoulBrother&quot; - Fuel/Universal. Retrospective album 1970

===Singles===
==References==
==External links==
* Complete Discography
* 
*Wanted One Soul Singer - Johnnie Taylor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q968938" start="0" end="23" title="Johnnie Taylor" label="Johnnie Harrison Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="146" end="151" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="153" end="169" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="171" end="175" title="soul music" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="181" end="187" title="Gospel music" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="191" end="194" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q546359" start="196" end="203" title="doo-wop" label="doo-wop"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="209" end="214" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546001" start="247" end="259" title="Stax Records" label="Stax Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="280" end="292" title="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs" label="R&amp;amp;B hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997043" start="299" end="321" title="Who&amp;#x27;s Making Love" label="Who&amp;#x27;s Making Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208025" start="342" end="376" title="Jody&amp;#x27;s Got Your Girl and Gone" label="Jody&amp;#x27;s Got Your Girl and Gone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976302" start="400" end="436" title="I Believe in You (You Believe in Me)" label="I Believe in You (You Believe in Me)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228461" start="506" end="516" title="Disco Lady" label="Disco Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q258100" start="571" end="589" title="Blues Hall of Fame" label="Blues Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661262" start="652" end="676" title="Crawfordsville, Arkansas" label="Crawfordsville, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q80050" start="707" end="729" title="West Memphis, Arkansas" label="West Memphis, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="849" end="856" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q679007" start="864" end="879" title="Vee Jay Records" label="Vee Jay Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="880" end="885" title="record label" label="label"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739665" start="928" end="951" title="The Highway Q.C.&amp;#x27;s" label="The Highway Q.C.&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q295919" start="976" end="985" title="Sam Cooke" label="Sam Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q466840" start="1136" end="1149" title="Soul Stirrers" label="Soul Stirrers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205032" start="1224" end="1235" title="SAR Records" label="SAR Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546001" start="1462" end="1474" title="Stax Records" label="Stax Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="1478" end="1496" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437096" start="1589" end="1599" title="house band" label="house band"/>
<link wikidata="Q893007" start="1616" end="1647" title="Booker T. &amp;amp; the M.G.&amp;#x27;s" label="Booker T. &amp;amp; the M.G.&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q753110" start="1755" end="1762" title="songwriter" label="written"/>
<link wikidata="Q206439" start="1778" end="1789" title="Isaac Hayes" label="Isaac Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q664909" start="1794" end="1806" title="David Porter (musician)" label="David Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997043" start="1831" end="1853" title="Who&amp;#x27;s Making Love" label="Who&amp;#x27;s Making Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="1888" end="1917" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q373899" start="1918" end="1923" title="record chart" label="chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="1941" end="1948" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="2047" end="2056" title="music recording sales certification" label="gold disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208025" start="2366" end="2400" title="Jody&amp;#x27;s Got Your Girl and Gone" label="Jody&amp;#x27;s Got Your Girl and Gone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724246" start="2484" end="2493" title="Mack Rice" label="Mack Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="2499" end="2514" title="record producer" label="record producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292497" start="2515" end="2524" title="Don Davis (record producer)" label="Don Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="2761" end="2769" title="R.I.A.A." label="R.I.A.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q935884" start="2822" end="2840" title="The Staple Singers" label="The Staple Singers"/>
<link wikidata="Q217839" start="3008" end="3020" title="Otis Redding" label="Otis Redding"/>
<link wikidata="Q732335" start="3090" end="3098" title="Wattstax" label="Wattstax"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="3204" end="3220" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228461" start="3312" end="3322" title="Disco Lady" label="Disco Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="3380" end="3409" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="3484" end="3500" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="3561" end="3569" title="music recording sales certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="3610" end="3614" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740874" start="3918" end="3932" title="Malaco Records" label="Malaco Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q135815" start="4047" end="4057" title="Z. Z. Hill" label="Z. Z. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940302" start="4115" end="4143" title="Muscle Shoals Rhythm Section" label="Muscle Shoals Rhythm Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546001" start="4189" end="4193" title="Stax Records" label="Stax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046966" start="4206" end="4221" title="Carson Whitsett" label="Carson Whitsett"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="4547" end="4556" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="4563" end="4579" title="Top Blues Albums" label="Top Blues Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018837" start="4722" end="4739" title="Longhorn Ballroom" label="Longhorn Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="4743" end="4756" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28198" start="4867" end="4887" title="Jackson, Mississippi" label="Jackson, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="5039" end="5054" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q217839" start="5058" end="5070" title="Otis Redding" label="Otis Redding"/>
<link wikidata="Q179157" start="5087" end="5107" title="The Notorious B.I.G." label="The Notorious B.I.G."/>
<link wikidata="Q6331797" start="5175" end="5179" title="KKDA (AM)" label="KKDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="5489" end="5501" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="5536" end="5542" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="5544" end="5549" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="5772" end="5783" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="5785" end="5793" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="6173" end="6186" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="6422" end="6432" title="Sony Music" label="Sony Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q123469650" start="6690" end="6706" title="Erin M. Jacobson" label="Erin M. Jacobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q835728" start="7197" end="7224" title="Rhythm and Blues Foundation" label="Rhythm and Blues Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="7263" end="7275" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020203" start="7322" end="7362" title="National Rhythm &amp;amp; Blues Hall of Fame" label="National Rhythm &amp;amp; Blues Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q258100" start="7402" end="7420" title="Blues Hall of Fame" label="Blues Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="7742" end="7755" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500083" start="7794" end="7798" title="11th Grammy Awards" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997043" start="7828" end="7850" title="Who&amp;#x27;s Making Love" label="Who&amp;#x27;s Making Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333798" start="7858" end="7893" title="Best Male R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance" label="Best Male R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525886" start="7920" end="7924" title="19th Grammy Awards" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228461" start="7954" end="7964" title="Disco Lady" label="Disco Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333798" start="7972" end="8007" title="Best Male R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance" label="Best Male R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q777063" start="8034" end="8038" title="43rd Grammy Awards" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113381" start="8101" end="8137" title="Best Traditional R&amp;amp;B Performance" label="Best Traditional R&amp;amp;B Vocal Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="8236" end="8240" title="RIAA" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q664467" start="8350" end="8363" title="The Shapeshifters" label="Shapeshifters"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="8364" end="8371" title="sampling (music)" label="sampled"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258751" start="8458" end="8475" title="Lola&amp;#x27;s Theme" label="Lola&amp;#x27;s Theme"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211627" wikidata="Q369621" url="?curid=211627" title="T. H. Green">
<text>Thomas Hill Green (7 April 183626 March 1882), known as T. H. Green, was an English philosopher, political radical and temperance reformer, and a member of the British idealism movement. Like all the British idealists, Green was influenced by the metaphysical historicism of G. W. F. Hegel. He was one of the thinkers behind the philosophy of social liberalism.

== Life ==

Green was born on 7 April 1836 at Birkin, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, England, where his father was rector. On his paternal side, he was descended from Oliver Cromwell. His education was conducted entirely at home until, at the age of 14, he entered Rugby, where he remained for five years.

In 1855, he became an undergraduate member of Balliol College, Oxford, and was elected fellow in 1860. He began a life of teaching (mainly philosophical) in the university—first as college tutor, and later, from 1878 until his death, as Whyte&#x27;s Professor of Moral Philosophy.

The lectures he delivered as professor form the substance of his two most important works, viz., the &quot;Prolegomena to Ethics&quot; and the &quot;Lectures on the Principles of Political Obligation&quot;, which contain the whole of his positive constructive teaching. These works were not published until after his death, but Green&#x27;s views were previously known indirectly through the &quot;Introduction&quot; to the standard edition of David Hume&#x27;s works by Green and T. H. Grose, fellow of Queen&#x27;s College, in which the doctrine of the &quot;English&quot; or &quot;empirical&quot; philosophy was exhaustively examined.

In 1871 he married Charlotte Byron Symonds who was known as a promoter of women&#x27;s education. In 1879, Green sat on the committee formed to create an Oxford women&#x27;s college &quot;in which no distinction will be made between students on the ground of their belonging to different religious denominations.&quot; Green and his wife&#x27;s work resulted in the founding of Somerville Hall (later Somerville College).

Green was involved in local politics for many years, through the university, temperance societies and the local Oxford Liberal association. During the passage of the Second Reform Act, he campaigned for the franchise to be extended to all men living in boroughs even if they did not own real property. In that sense, Green&#x27;s position was more radical than that of most other Advanced Liberals, including William Ewart Gladstone.

It was in the context of his Liberal Party activities that in 1881, Green gave what became one of his most famous statements of his liberal political philosophy, the &quot;Lecture on Liberal Legislation and Freedom of Contract&quot;. At this time, he was also lecturing on religion, epistemology, ethics and political philosophy.

Most of his major works were published posthumously, including his lay sermons on &quot;Faith and The Witness of God&quot;, the essay &quot;On the Different Senses of &#x27;Freedom&#x27; as Applied to Will and the Moral Progress of Man&quot;, &quot;Prolegomena to Ethics&quot;, &quot;Lectures on the Principles of Political Obligation&quot;, and the &quot;Lecture on Liberal Legislation and Freedom of Contract&quot;.

Green died of blood poisoning at the age of 45 on 26 March 1882. In addition to friends from his academic life, approximately 2,000 local townspeople attended his funeral.

He helped to found the City of Oxford High School for Boys.

== Thought ==
Hume&#x27;s empiricism and biological evolution (including Herbert Spencer) were chief features in English thought during the third quarter of the 19th century. Green represents primarily the reaction against such doctrines. Green argued that when these doctrines were carried to their logical conclusion, they not only &quot;rendered all philosophy futile&quot;, but were fatal to practical life. By reducing the human mind to a series of unrelated atomic sensations, these related teachings destroyed the possibility of knowledge, he argued. These teachings were especially important for Green to refute because they had underpinned the conception of mind that was held by the nascent science of psychology. Green tried to deflate the pretensions of psychologists who had claimed that their young field would provide a scientific replacement for traditional epistemology and metaphysics.

Green further objected that such empiricists represented a person as a &quot;being who is simply the result of natural forces&quot;, and thereby made conduct, or any theory of conduct, meaningless; for life in any human, intelligible sense implies a personal self that (1) knows what to do, and (2) has power to do it. Green was thus driven, not theoretically, but as a practical necessity, to raise again the whole question of humankind in relation to nature. When (he held) we have discovered what a person in themselves are, and what their relation to their environment is, we shall then know their function—what they are fitted to do. In the light of this knowledge, we shall be able to formulate the moral code, which, in turn, will serve as a criterion of actual civic and social institutions. These form, naturally and necessarily, the objective expression of moral ideas, and it is in some civic or social whole that the moral ideal must finally take concrete shape.

===What is man?===
To ask &quot;What is man?&quot; is to ask &quot;What is experience?&quot; for experience means that of which I am conscious. The facts of consciousness are the only facts that, to begin with, we are justified in asserting to exist. On the other hand, they are valid evidence for whatever is necessary to their own explanation, i.e. for whatever is logically involved in them. Now the most striking characteristic of humans, that in fact which marks them specially, as contrasted with other animals, is self-consciousness. The simplest mental act into which we can analyse the operations of the human mind—the act of sense-perception—is never merely a change, physical or psychical, but is the consciousness of a change.

Human experience consists, not of processes in an animal organism, but of these processes recognised as such. That which we perceive is from the outset an apprehended fact—that is to say, it cannot be analysed into isolated elements (so-called sensations) which, as such, are not constituents of consciousness at all, but exist from the first as a synthesis of relations in a consciousness which keeps distinct the &quot;self&quot; and the various elements of the &quot;object,&quot; though holding all together in the unity of the act of perception. In other words, the whole mental structure we call knowledge consists, in its simplest equally with its most complex constituents, of the &quot;work of the mind.&quot; Locke and Hume held that the work of the mind was &quot;eo ipso&quot; [by that very act] unreal because it was &quot;made by&quot; humans and not &quot;given to&quot; humans. It thus represented a subjective creation, not an objective fact. But this consequence follows only upon the assumption that the work of the mind is arbitrary, an assumption shown to be unjustified by the results of exact science, with the distinction, universally recognised, which such science draws between truth and falsehood, between the real and &quot;mere ideas.&quot; This (obviously valid) distinction logically involves the consequence that the object, or content, of knowledge, viz., reality, is an intelligible ideal reality, a system of thought relations, a spiritual cosmos. How is the existence of this ideal whole to be accounted for? Only by the existence of some &quot;principle which renders all relations possible and is itself determined by none of them&quot;; an eternal self-consciousness which knows in whole what we know in part. To God the world is, to humans the world becomes. Human experience is God gradually made manifest.

===Moral philosophy===
Carrying on the same method into the area of moral philosophy, Green argued that ethics applies to the conditions of social life—that investigation into human nature which metaphysics began. The faculty employed in this further investigation is no &quot;separate moral faculty&quot;, but that same reason which is the source of all our knowledge—ethical and other.

Self-reflection gradually reveals to us human capacity, human function, with, consequently, human responsibility. It brings out into clear consciousness certain potentialities in the realisation of which human&#x27;s true good must consist. As the result of this analysis, combined with an investigation into the surroundings humans live in, a &quot;content&quot;—a moral code—becomes gradually evolved. Personal good is perceived to be realisable only by making real and actual the conceptions thus arrived at. So long as these remain potential or ideal, they form the motive of action; motive consisting always in the idea of some &quot;end&quot; or &quot;good&quot; that humans present to themselves as an end in the attainment of which he would be satisfied; that is, in the realisation of which he would find his true self.

The determination to realise the self in some definite way constitutes an &quot;act of will&quot;, which, as thus constituted, is neither arbitrary nor externally determined. For the motive which may be said to be its cause lies in the person himself, and the identification of the self with such a motive is a self-determination, which is at once both rational and free. The &quot;freedom of man&quot; is constituted, not by a supposed ability to do anything he may choose, but in the power to identify himself with that true good that reason reveals to him as his true good.

This good consists in the realisation of personal character; hence the final good, i.e. the moral ideal, as a whole, can be realised only in some society of persons who, while remaining ends to themselves in the sense that their individuality is not lost but rendered more perfect, find this perfection attainable only when the separate individualities are integrated as part of a social whole.

Society is as necessary to form persons as persons are to constitute society. Social union is the indispensable condition of the development of the special capacities of its individual members. Human self-perfection cannot be gained in isolation; it is attainable only in inter-relation with fellow-citizens in the social community.

The law of our being, so revealed, involves in its turn civic or political duties. Moral goodness cannot be limited to, still less constituted by, the cultivation of self-regarding virtues, but consists in the attempt to realise in practice that moral ideal that self-analysis has revealed to us as our ideal. From this fact arises the ground of political obligation, because the institutions of political or civic life are the concrete embodiment of moral ideas in terms of our day and generation. But, since society exists only for the proper development of Persons, we have a criterion by which to test these institutions—namely, do they, or do they not, contribute to the development of moral character in the individual citizens?

It is obvious that the final moral ideal is not realised in any body of civic institutions actually existing, but the same analysis that demonstrates this deficiency points out the direction that a true development will take.

Hence arises the conception of rights and duties that should be maintained by law, as opposed to those actually maintained; with the further consequence that it may become occasionally a moral duty to rebel against the state in the interest of the state itself—that is, in order better to subserve that end or function that constitutes the &quot;raison d&#x27;être&quot; of the state. There exists a &quot;general will&quot; that is a desire for a common good that cannot be easily reconciled as there is an antagonism between the &quot;common good&quot; and the &quot;private good&quot;: such as: &quot;... interest in the common good, in some of its various forms, is necessary to produce that good, and to neutralise or render useful other desires and interests&quot;. Its basis is can be conceived as coercive authority imposed upon the citizens from without or it can be seen as a necessary restriction of individual liberty in light of a social contract, but this consists in the spiritual recognition or metaphysics, on the part of the citizens, of what constitutes their true nature, some conceptions and complicating factors are elaborating questions concerning: &quot;Will, not force, is the basis of the state.&quot;, &quot;Citizen Rights Against the State&quot;, &quot;Private Rights. The Right to Life and Liberty&quot;, &quot;The Right of the State Over the Individual in War&quot;, &quot;The Right of the State to Punish&quot;, &quot;The Right of the State to Promote Morality &quot;, &quot;The Right of the State in Regard to Property&quot;, and &quot;The Right of the State in Regard to the Family&quot;.

===Philosophy of state action===
Green believed that the state should foster and protect the social, political and economic environments in which individuals will have the best chance of acting according to their consciences. But the state must be careful when deciding which liberties to curtail and in which ways to curtail them. Over-enthusiastic or clumsy state intervention could easily close down opportunities for conscientious action thereby stifling the moral development of the individual. The state should intervene only where there is a clear, proven and strong tendency of a liberty to enslave the individual. Even when such a hazard had been identified, Green tended to favour action by the affected community itself rather than national state action itself—local councils and municipal authorities tended to produce measures that were more imaginative and better suited to the daily reality of a social problem. Hence he favoured the &quot;local option&quot; where local people decided on the issuing of liquor licences in their area, through their town councils.

Green stressed the need for specific solutions to be tailored to fit specific problems. He stressed that there are no eternal solutions, no timeless division of responsibilities between national and local governmental units. The distribution of responsibilities should be guided by the imperative to enable as many individuals as possible to exercise their conscientious wills in particular contingent circumstances, as only in this way was it possible to foster individual self-realisation in the long-run. Deciding on the distribution of responsibilities was more a matter for practical politics than for ethical or political philosophy. Experience may show that the local and municipal levels are unable to control the harmful influences of, say, the brewery industry. When it did show this, the national state should take responsibility for this area of public policy.

Green argued that the ultimate power to decide on the allocation of such tasks should rest with the national state (in Britain, for instance, embodied in Parliament). The national state itself is legitimate for Green to the extent that it upholds a system of rights and obligations that is most likely to foster individual self-realisation. Yet, the most appropriate structure of this system is determined neither by purely political calculation nor by philosophical speculation. It is more accurate to say that it arose from the underlying conceptual and normative structure of one&#x27;s particular society.

===Influence of Green&#x27;s thought===
Green&#x27;s teaching was, directly and indirectly, the most potent philosophical influence in England during the last quarter of the 19th century, while his enthusiasm for a common citizenship, and his personal example in practical municipal life, inspired much of the effort made in the years succeeding his death to bring the universities more into touch with the people, and to break down the rigour of class distinctions. His ideas spread to the University of St Andrews through the influence of David George Ritchie, a former student of his, who eventually helped found the Aristotelian Society. John Dewey wrote a number of early essays on Green&#x27;s thought, including &quot;Self-Realization as the Moral Ideal&quot;.

Green was directly cited by many social liberal politicians, such as Herbert Samuel and H. H. Asquith, as an influence on their thought. It is no coincidence that these politicians were educated at Balliol College, Oxford. Roy Hattersley called for Green&#x27;s work to be applied to the problems of 21st century Britain.

== Works and commentary ==

Green&#x27;s most important treatise—the &quot;Prolegomena to Ethics &quot;, practically complete in manuscript at his death—was in the year following, under the editorship of A. C. Bradley (4th ed., 1899). Shortly afterwards, R. L. Nettleship&#x27;s standard edition of his &quot;Works&quot; (exclusive of the &quot;Prolegomena&quot;) appeared in three volumes:

# Reprints of Green&#x27;s criticism of Hume, Spencer, G. H. Lewes
# Lectures on Kant, on Logic, on the &quot;Principles of Political Obligation&quot;
# &quot;Miscellanies&quot;, preceded by a full &quot;Memoir by the Editor&quot;.

All three volumes are available for download at Internet Archive

The &quot;Principles of Political Obligation&quot; was afterwards published in separate form. A criticism of Neo-Hegelianism will be found in Andrew Seth (Pringle Pattison), &quot;Hegelianism and Personality&quot; (1887).

* &quot;Hume and Locke&quot;, Apollo Editions, 425 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10016, 1968 (Reprint of Thomas Y. Crowell Company edition). Contains Green&#x27;s &quot;Introductions to Hume&#x27;s &quot;Treatise of Human Nature&quot;&quot; and also Green&#x27;s &quot;Introduction to the Moral Part of Hume&#x27;s &quot;Treatise&quot;&quot;

==See also==
* Consent of the governed
* Liberalism in the United Kingdom

==References==
==Further reading==
* Articles in &quot;Mind&quot; (January and April 1884) by A. J. Balfour and Henry Sidgwick
* In the &quot;Academy&quot; (xxviii. 242 and xxv. 297) by S. Alexander
* David George Ritchie, &quot;The Principles of State Interference&quot; (London, 1891)
* W. H. Fairbrother, &quot;Philosophy of T.H. Green&quot; (London and New York, 1896)
* S. S. Laurie &quot;The Metaphysics of T H Green&quot; an article in the &quot;Philosophical Review&quot; (Volume vi, March 1897) pages 113 to 131
* Henry Sidgwick, &quot;Lectures on the ethics of T.H. Green, Mr. Herbert Spencer, and J. Martineau&quot; (London, 1902)
* Henry Sidgwick, &quot;Lectures on the Philosophy of Kant&quot; (London, 1905)
* A. W. Benn, &quot;The History of English Rationalism in the Nineteenth Century&quot; (1906), &quot;volume ii&quot;, pp. 401 foll.
*H. Sturt, &quot;Idola theatri, a criticism of Oxford thought and thinkers from the standpoint of personal idealism&quot;, 1906.
* J. H. Muirhead, &quot;The Service of the State: Four Lectures on the Political Teaching of T. H. Green&quot; (1908)
*W. D. Lamont, &quot;Introduction to Green&#x27;s moral philosophy&quot;, 1934.
*J. Pucelle, &quot;La nature et l&#x27;esprit dans la philosophie de T.H. Green; la renaissance de l&#x27;idéalisme en Angleterre au 19e siècle&quot;, 1960.
* M. Freeden (1978) &quot;The New Liberalism: An ideology of Social Reform&quot;, Oxford, Clarendon Press.
* I.M. Greengarten (1981) &quot;Thomas Hill-Green and the Development of Liberal-Democratic Thought&quot;, University of Toronto Press.
* Geoffrey Thomas (1988) &quot;The Moral Philosophy of T. H. Green&quot; (Oxford and New York).
* Avital Simhony (1993) &quot;T.H. Green: the common good society&quot;, History of Political Thought 14(2):225–247.
* 
* David O. Brink (2003) &quot;Perfectionism and the Common Good: Themes in the Philosophy of T. H. Green&quot;, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
* 

==External links==

* Grave of Thomas Hill Green and Charlotte Byron Green in St Sepulchre&#x27;s Cemetery, Oxford, with biography
;Works online
* 
* &quot;Prolegomena to Ethics &quot; (1883)
* &quot;Lectures on the Principles of Political Obligation&quot; (1883)
* Works (excluding &quot;Prolegomena to Ethics&quot;) edited by R L Nettleship in three volumes (first published 1885): &quot;Volume 1: Introductions to Hume&#x27;s Treatise; and Mr Herbert Spencer and Mr G H Lewes: their application of the doctrine of Evolution to Thought&quot;; Volume 2: &quot;Lectures&quot;: on (a) the Philosophy of Kant; (b) Logic, including J S Mill&#x27;s &quot;System of Logic&quot;; (c) the different senses of &quot;freedom&quot; as applied to will and to moral progress; and (d) the Principles of Political Obligation; and &quot;Volume 3: Miscellanies and Memoir&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q369621" start="0" end="17" title="T. H. Green" label="Thomas Hill Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q369621" start="56" end="67" title="T. H. Green" label="T. H. Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="84" end="95" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q913401" start="107" end="114" title="Radicalism (historical)" label="radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q333247" start="119" end="129" title="Temperance movement" label="temperance"/>
<link wikidata="Q918561" start="160" end="176" title="British idealism" label="British idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="247" end="259" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q460501" start="260" end="271" title="historicism" label="historicism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="275" end="289" title="G. W. F. Hegel" label="G. W. F. Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="343" end="360" title="social liberalism" label="social liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904514" start="409" end="415" title="Birkin, North Yorkshire" label="Birkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934075" start="424" end="448" title="West Riding of Yorkshire" label="West Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="532" end="547" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143281" start="630" end="635" title="Rugby School" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="718" end="741" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994249" start="909" end="951" title="White&amp;#x27;s Chair of Moral Philosophy" label="Whyte&amp;#x27;s Professor of Moral Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="1398" end="1408" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1435" end="1446" title="Thomas Hodge Grose" label="T. H. Grose"/>
<link wikidata="Q73094" start="1458" end="1478" title="The Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q18592970" start="1612" end="1635" title="Charlotte Byron Green" label="Charlotte Byron Symonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660535" start="1754" end="1774" title="women&amp;#x27;s college" label="women&amp;#x27;s college"/>
<link wikidata="Q774489" start="1971" end="1986" title="Somerville Hall" label="Somerville Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318051" start="2182" end="2199" title="Second Reform Act" label="Second Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="2425" end="2448" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Ewart Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="2724" end="2732" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="2734" end="2746" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="2748" end="2754" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="2759" end="2779" title="political philosophy" label="political philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="3215" end="3230" title="blood poisoning" label="blood poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123849" start="3397" end="3432" title="City of Oxford High School for Boys" label="City of Oxford High School for Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="3461" end="3471" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="3487" end="3496" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q144535" start="3508" end="3523" title="Herbert Spencer" label="Herbert Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="3971" end="3980" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="4147" end="4157" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="5473" end="5486" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="6775" end="6780" title="John Locke" label="Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="7973" end="7989" title="moral philosophy" label="moral philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q878070" start="10507" end="10513" title="Duty" label="duties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759670" start="11801" end="11813" title="general will" label="general will"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="12406" end="12417" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="15805" end="15816" title="citizenship" label="citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="16074" end="16098" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703192" start="16124" end="16144" title="David George Ritchie" label="David George Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355816" start="16203" end="16223" title="Aristotelian Society" label="Aristotelian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q131805" start="16225" end="16235" title="John Dewey" label="John Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="16385" end="16399" title="social liberal" label="social liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q335218" start="16421" end="16435" title="Herbert Samuel, 1st Viscount Samuel" label="Herbert Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16440" end="16453" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q333692" start="16575" end="16589" title="Roy Hattersley" label="Roy Hattersley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818917" start="16879" end="16892" title="Andrew Cecil Bradley" label="A. C. Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16930" end="16946" title="R. L. Nettleship" label="R. L. Nettleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275943" start="17122" end="17133" title="G. H. Lewes" label="G. H. Lewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817456" start="17508" end="17519" title="Andrew Seth" label="Andrew Seth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817456" start="17521" end="17537" title="Pringle Pattison" label="Pringle Pattison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162861" start="17949" end="17972" title="Consent of the governed" label="Consent of the governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969734" start="17975" end="18007" title="Liberalism in the United Kingdom" label="Liberalism in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q19008" start="18103" end="18116" title="A. J. Balfour" label="A. J. Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q433076" start="18121" end="18135" title="Henry Sidgwick" label="Henry Sidgwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703192" start="18210" end="18230" title="David George Ritchie" label="David George Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q433076" start="18532" end="18546" title="Henry Sidgwick" label="Henry Sidgwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q433076" start="18653" end="18667" title="Henry Sidgwick" label="Henry Sidgwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648505" start="18733" end="18743" title="A. W. Benn" label="A. W. Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q521606" start="18994" end="19008" title="J. H. Muirhead" label="J. H. Muirhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896496" start="19561" end="19588" title="University of Toronto Press" label="University of Toronto Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q15793430" start="19759" end="19787" title="History of Political Thought (journal)" label="History of Political Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="19926" end="19941" title="Clarendon Press" label="Clarendon Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211628" wikidata="Q80040" url="?curid=211628" title="Kazakhs">
<text>The Kazakhs (Kazakh: , , , ) are a Turkic ethnic group native to Central Asia and Eastern Europe. There are Kazakh communities in Kazakhstan&#x27;s border regions in Russia, northern Uzbekistan, northwestern China (Ili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture), western Mongolia (Bayan-Ölgii Province) and Iran (Golestan province). The Kazakhs arose from the merging of various medieval tribes of Turkic and Mongolic origin in the 15th century.

Kazakh identity was shaped following the foundation of the Kazakh Khanate between 1456 and 1465, when following the disintegration of the Turkified state of Golden Horde, several tribes under the rule of the sultans Janibek and Kerei departed from the Khanate of Abu&#x27;l-Khayr Khan in hopes of forming a powerful khanate of their own.

The term &quot;Kazakh&quot; is used to refer to ethnic Kazakhs, while the term &quot;Kazakhstani&quot; refers to all citizens of Kazakhstan, regardless of ethnicity.

== Etymology ==
The Kazakhs likely began using the name Kazakh during the 15th century. There are many theories on the origin of the word Kazakh or Qazaq. Some speculate that it comes from the Turkic verb (&quot;wanderer, brigand, vagabond, warrior, free, independent&quot;) or that it derives from the Proto-Turkic word (a wheeled cart used by the Kazakhs to transport their yurts and belongings).

Another theory on the origin of the word Kazakh (originally ) is that it comes from the ancient Turkic word , first mentioned on the 8th century Turkic monument of Uyuk-Turan. According to Turkic linguist Vasily Radlov and Orientalist Veniamin Yudin, the noun &#x27; derives from the same root as the verb &#x27; (&quot;to obtain&quot;, &quot;to gain&quot;). Therefore, &quot;&quot; defines a type of person who wanders and seeks gain.

== History ==
Throughout history, Kazakhstan has been home to many nomadic societies of the Eurasian Steppe, including the Sakas (Scythian-related), the Xiongnu, the Western Turkic Khaganate, the Kimek–Kipchak Confederation, the Mongol Empire, the Golden Horde and the Kazakh Khanate, which was established in 1465.

The exact place of origins of the Turkic peoples has been a topic of much discussion. Early Medieval Turkic peoples who migrated into Central Asia displayed genetic affinities with Ancient Northeast Asians, deriving around 62% of their ancestry from a gene pool maximized among Neolithic hunter-gatherers in the Amur region. There is also evidence for contact with Iranian, Uralic and Yeniseian peoples. The Kazakhs emerged as an ethno-linguistic group during the early 15th century from a confederation of several, mostly Turkic-speaking pastoral nomadic groups of Northern Central Asia. The Kazakhs are the most northerly of the Central Asian peoples, inhabiting a large expanse of territory in northern Central Asia and southern Siberia known as the Kazakh Steppe. The tribal groups formed a powerful confederation that grew wealthy on the trade passing through the steppe lands along the fabled Silk Road.

Kazakh was a common term throughout medieval Central Asia, generally with regard to individuals or groups who had taken or achieved independence from a figure of authority. Timur described his own youth without direct authority as his (&quot;freedom&quot;, &quot;Qazaq-ness&quot;).

In Turco-Persian sources, the term &quot;Özbek-Qazaq&quot; first appeared during the middle of the 16th century, in the by Mirza Muhammad Haidar Dughlat, a Chagatayid prince of Kashmir. In this manuscript, the author locates Kazakh in the eastern part of &quot;Desht-i Qipchaq&quot;. According to Tarikh-i-Rashidi, the first Kazakh union was created 1465/1466 AD. The state was formed by nomads who settled along the border of Moghulistan, and was called &quot;Uzbeg-Kazák&quot;.

At the time of conquest of Central Asia, Abu&#x27;l-Khayr Khan, a descendant of Shiban, had disagreements with the sultans Kerei and Janibek, descendants of Urus Khan. These disagreements probably resulted from the crushing defeat of Abu&#x27;l-Khayr Khan at the hands of the Kalmyks. Kerei and Janibek moved with a large following of nomads to the region of Zhetysu on the border of Moghulistan and set up new pastures there with the blessing of the Chagatayid khan of Moghulistan, Esen Buqa II, who hoped for a buffer zone of protection against the expansion of the Oirats.

Regarding these events, Haidar Dughlat in his &quot;Tarikh-i-Rashidi&quot; reports:

In 15th-century Central Asia, the nomads of the Jochid Ulus (Golden Horde), including those who founded the Kazakh Khanate, were collectively called Uzbeks due to their conversion to Islam under Özbeg Khan (r. 1313–1341). These Uzbeks (also called Tatars by the Muscovites and Ottomans) arose from the merging of various tribes of Turkic and Mongol origin in the 13th and 14th centuries in the Qipchaq Steppe. It was from this Jochid/Özbeg ulus (Golden Horde) that the Kazakh identity emerged when the nomads of the eastern Qipchaq Steppe became divided into the Kazakhs and the Shibanid Uzbeks at the turn of the 16th century. Seen from a broader perspective, the Kazakhs belonged to the Chinggisid uluses, others being the Shibanid Uzbeks, Crimean Tatars, Manghits/Noghays, and Chaghatays (Moghuls and Timurids), who shared a common language (Turkic), political ideology (based on Mongol traditions), royal lineage (Chinggisids), ethnic identity, and religion (Sunni Islam), and who still dominated much of the vast region stretching from the Crimea in the west to the Tien Shan Mountains in the east, and from southern Siberia in the north to northern India in the south during the post-Mongol period.

One of the earliest mentions of the Kazakhs in Western literature was in Sigismund von Herberstein&#x27;s &quot;Notes on Muscovite Affairs&quot; (1549):
In the 17th century, Russian convention seeking to distinguish the Qazaqs of the steppes from the Cossacks of the Imperial Russian Army suggested spelling the final consonant with &quot;kh&quot; instead of &quot;q&quot; or &quot;k&quot;, which was officially adopted by the USSR in 1936.
* Kazakh - , /kazax/
* Cossack -  , /kazak/

The Ukrainian term Cossack probably comes from the same Kipchak etymological root, meaning wanderer, brigand, or independent free-booter.

=== Oral history ===
Like many people who live a nomadic lifestyle, Kazakhs keep an epic tradition of oral history which goes back centuries. It is most commonly relayed in the form of song (&quot;kyi&quot;) and poetry (&quot;zhyr&quot;), which typically tell the stories of Kazakh national heroes.

The Kazakh oral tradition is sometimes has political themes. The highly influential Kazakh poet Abai Qunanbaiuly viewed it as the ideal way to transmit the pro-Westernization ideals of his colleagues. The Kazakh oral tradition has also overlapped with ethnic nationalism, and has been used to transmit pride in Kazakh identity.

== Three Kazakh Jüz ==
In modern Kazakhstan, tribalism is fading away in business and government life. However, it is still common for Kazakhs to ask each other about the tribe they belong to when they become acquainted. It is more of a tradition than a necessity now, and there is no hostility between tribes. Kazakhs, regardless of their tribal origin, consider themselves one nation.

Modern-day Kazakhs who still remember their tribes know that their tribes belong to one of the three jüz, a term roughly translatable as &quot;horde&quot; or &quot;hundred&quot;:
* The Senior Horde (also called Elder or Great) (Uly juz)
* The Middle (also called Central) (Orta juz)
* The Junior (also called Younger or Lesser) (Kishi juz)

=== History of the Hordes ===
There is much debate surrounding the origins of the Hordes. Their age in extant historical texts is unknown, with the earliest mentions in the 17th century. The Turkologist Velyaminov-Zernov believed that it was the capture of the important cities of Tashkent, Yasi, and Sayram in 1598 by Tevvekel (Tauekel/Tavakkul) Khan that separated the Qazaqs, as they possessed the cities for only part of the 17th century. The theory suggests that the Qazaqs then divided among a wider territory after expanding from Zhetysu into most of the Dasht-i Qipchaq, with a focus on the trade available through the cities of the middle Syr Darya, to which Sayram and Yasi belonged. The Junior juz originated from the Nogais of the Nogai Horde.

== Language ==

The Kazakh language is a member of the Turkic language family, as are Uzbek, Kyrgyz, Tatar, Uyghur, Turkmen, modern Turkish, Azerbaijani and many other living and historical languages spoken in Eastern Europe, Central Asia, Xinjiang, and Siberia.

Kazakh belongs to the Kipchak (Northwestern) group of the Turkic language family. Kazakh is characterized, in distinction to other Turkic languages, by the presence of in place of reconstructed proto-Turkic and in place of ; furthermore, Kazakh has where other Turkic languages have .

Kazakh, like most of the Turkic language family lacks phonemic vowel length, and as such there is no distinction between long and short vowels.

Kazakh was written with the Arabic script until the mid-19th century, when a number of educated Kazakh poets from Muslim madrasahs incited a revolt against Russia. Russia&#x27;s response was to set up secular schools and devise a way of writing Kazakh with the Cyrillic alphabet, which was not widely accepted. By 1917, the Arabic script for Kazakh was reintroduced, even in schools and local government.

In 1927, a Kazakh nationalist movement sprang up against the Soviet Union but was soon suppressed. As a result, the Arabic script for writing Kazakh was banned and the Latin alphabet was imposed as a new writing system. In an effort to Russianize the Kazakhs, the Latin alphabet was in turn replaced by the Cyrillic alphabet in 1940 by Soviet interventionists. Today, there are efforts to return to the Latin script, and in January 2021 the government announced plans to switch to the Latin alphabet.

Kazakh is a state (official) language in Kazakhstan. It is also spoken in the Ili region of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region in the People&#x27;s Republic of China, where the Arabic script is used, and in western parts of Mongolia (Bayan-Ölgii and Khovd province), where Cyrillic script is in use. European Kazakhs use the Latin alphabet.

== Genetic studies ==

Genomic research confirmed that Kazakhs originated from the admixture of several tribes. Kazakhs have predominantly East Eurasian ancestry, and harbor two East Asian-derived components: one dominant component commonly found among Northeastern Asian populations (associated with the Northeast Asian &quot;Devil’s Gate Cave&quot; sample from the Amur region), and another minor component associated with historical Yellow River farmers, peaking among northern Han Chinese. According to one study, West Eurasian related admixture among Kazakhs is estimated at 35% to 37.5% in two Kazakh populations. Another study estimated a lower average Western admixture of slightly less than 30%. These results are inline with historical demographic information on northern Central Asia. Neighboring Karakalpaks, Kyrgyz, Tubalar, and the Xinjiang Ölöd tribe, have the strongest resemblance to the Kazakh genome.

A study on allele frequency and genetic polymorphism by Katsuyama &quot;et al.&quot;, found that Kazakhs cluster together with Japanese people, Hui people, Han Chinese, and Uyghurs in contrast to West Eurasian reference groups.

A 2020 genetic study on the Kazakh genome, by Seidualy et al., found that the Kazakh people formed from highly mixed historical Central Asian populations. Ethnic Kazakhs were modeled to derive about 63.2% ancestry from an East Asian-related population, specifically from a Northeast Asian source sample (Devil’s Gate 1), 30.8% ancestry from European-related populations (presumably from Scythians), and ~6% ancestry from a broadly South Asian population. Overall, Kazakhs show their closest genetic affinity with other Central Asian populations, namely the Kalmyks, Karakalpaks, Kyrgyz, and Altaians, but also Mongolians and Tuvans.

A total of 464 representatives of the Western Kazakh tribes of Kazakhstan (Western Kazakhs, n = 405) and Uzbekistan (Karakalpakstan Kazakhs, n = 59) were examined by the Yfiler Plus set. The data are available in the YHRD under accession numbers YA006010 and YA006009. Genetic analysis (AMOVA and MDS) did not show significant differences between the two groups (Kazakhstan and Karakalpakstan Kazakhs) in terms of Y-chromosome diversity. Both groups are characterized by haplogroup C2a1a2 as a founder effect, which dominated two of the three tribes: Alimuly (67%), Baiuly (74.6%), and Zhetiru (25.8%).

The study analyzed haplotype variation at 15 Y-chromosomal short-tandem-repeats obtained from 1171 individuals from 24 tribes representing the three socio-territorial subdivisions (Senior, Middle and Junior zhuz) in Kazakhstan to comprehensively characterize the patrilineal genetic architecture of the Kazakh Steppe. In total, 577 distinct haplotypes were identified belonging to one of 20 haplogroups; 16 predominant haplogroups were confirmed by SNP-genotyping. The haplogroup distribution was skewed towards C2-M217, present in all tribes at a global frequency of 51.9%. The structure analysis of the 1164 individuals indicated the presence of 20 ancestral groups and a complex three-subclade organization of the C2-M217 haplogroup in Kazakhs, a result supported by the multidimensional scaling analysis. Additionally, while the majority of the haplotypes and tribes overlapped, a distinct cluster of the O2 haplogroup, mostly of the Naiman tribe, was observed.

=== Maternal lineages ===
According to mitochondrial DNA studies (where sample consisted of only 246 individuals), the main maternal lineages of Kazakhs are: D (17.9%), C (16%), G (16%), A (3.25%), F (2.44%) of East-Eurasian origin (55%), and haplogroups H (14.1), T (5.5), J (3.6%), K (2.6%), U5 (3%), and others (12.2%) of West-Eurasian origin (41%).

Gokcumen &quot;et al.&quot; (2008) tested the mtDNA of a total of 237 Kazakhs from Altai Republic and found that they belonged to the following haplogroups: D(xD5) (15.6%), C (10.5%), F1 (6.8%), B4 (5.1%), G2a (4.6%), A (4.2%), B5 (4.2%), M(xC, Z, M8a, D, G, M7, M9a, M13) (3.0%), D5 (2.1%), G2(xG2a) (2.1%), G4 (1.7%), N9a (1.7%), G(xG2, G4) (0.8%), M7 (0.8%), M13 (0.8%), Y1 (0.8%), Z (0.4%), M8a (0.4%), M9a (0.4%), and F2 (0.4%) for a total of 66.7% mtDNA of Eastern Eurasian origin or affinity and H (10.5%), U(xU1, U3, U4, U5) (3.4%), J (3.0%), N1a (3.0%), R(xB4, B5, F1, F2, T, J, U, HV) (3.0%), I (2.1%), U5 (2.1%), T (1.7%), U4 (1.3%), U1 (0.8%), K (0.8%), N1b (0.4%), W (0.4%), U3 (0.4%), and HV (0.4%) for a total of 33.3% mtDNA of West-Eurasian origin or affinity. Comparing their samples of Kazakhs from Altai Republic with samples of Kazakhs from Kazakhstan and Kazakhs from Xinjiang, the authors have noted that &quot;haplogroups A, B, C, D, F1, G2a, H, and M were present in all of them, suggesting that these lineages represent the common maternal gene pool from which these different Kazakh populations emerged.&quot;

In every sample of Kazakhs, D (predominantly northern East Asian, such as Japanese, Okinawan, Korean, Manchu, Mongol, Han Chinese, Tibetan, &quot;etc.&quot;, but also having several branches among indigenous peoples of the Americas) is the most frequently observed haplogroup (with nearly all of those Kazakhs belonging to the D4 subclade), and the second-most frequent haplogroup is either H (predominantly European) or C (predominantly indigenous Siberian, though some branches are present in the Americas, East Asia, and northern and eastern Europe).

=== Paternal lineages ===

In a sample of 54 Kazakhs and 119 Altaian Kazakh, the main paternal lineages of Kazakhs are: C (66.7 and 59.5%), O (9 and 26%), N (2 and 0%), J (4 and 0%), R (9 and 1%) respectively.

== Population ==



== Kazakh minorities ==
=== Russia ===


In Russia, the Kazakh population lives primarily in the regions bordering Kazakhstan. According to latest census (2002) there are 654,000 Kazakhs in Russia, most of whom are in the Astrakhan, Volgograd, Saratov, Samara, Orenburg, Chelyabinsk, Kurgan, Tyumen, Omsk, Novosibirsk, Altai Krai and Altai Republic regions. Though ethnically Kazakh, after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, those people acquired Russian citizenship.

=== China ===
Kazakhs migrated into Dzungaria in the 18th century after the Dzungar genocide resulted in the native Buddhist Dzungar Oirat population being massacred.

Kazakhs, called &quot;&quot; in Chinese () are among 56 ethnic groups officially recognized by the People&#x27;s Republic of China. According to the census data of 2020, Kazakhs had a population of 1,562,518, ranking 18th among all ethnic groups in China. Thousands of Kazakhs fled to China during the 1932–1933 famine in Kazakhstan.

In 1936, after Sheng Shicai expelled 30,000 Kazakhs from Xinjiang to Qinghai, Hui led by General Ma Bufang massacred their fellow Muslim Kazakhs, until there were 135 of them left.

From Northern Xinjiang, over 7,000 Kazakhs fled to the Tibetan-Qinghai plateau region via Gansu and were wreaking massive havoc so Ma Bufang solved the problem by relegating Kazakhs to designated pastureland in Qinghai, but Hui, Tibetans, and Kazakhs in the region continued to clash against each other. Tibetans attacked and fought against the Kazakhs as they entered Tibet via Gansu and Qinghai. In northern Tibet, Kazakhs clashed with Tibetan soldiers, and the Kazakhs were sent to Ladakh. Tibetan troops robbed and killed Kazakhs east of Lhasa at Chamdo when the Kazakhs were entering Tibet.

In 1934, 1935, and from 1936 to 1938, Qumil Elisqan led approximately 18,000 Kerey Kazakhs to migrate to Gansu, entering Gansu and Qinghai.

In China there is one Kazakh autonomous prefecture, the Ili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region and three Kazakh autonomous counties: Aksai Kazakh Autonomous County in Gansu, Barkol Kazakh Autonomous County and Mori Kazakh Autonomous County in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region.

At least one million Uyghurs, Kazakhs and other Muslims in Xinjiang have been detained in mass detention camps, termed &quot;reeducation camps&quot;, aimed at changing the political thinking of detainees, their identities, and their religious beliefs. But authorities in China have defended that the detention centers were in fact vocational education &amp; training centers set up to deradicalize radicalized residents against the &quot;3 evil forces&quot; of religious extremism, terrorism and separatism.

=== Mongolia ===

In the 19th century, the advance of the Russian Empire troops pushed Kazakhs to neighboring countries. In around 1860, part of the Middle Jüz Kazakhs came to Mongolia and were allowed to settle down in Bayan-Ölgii, Western Mongolia and for most of the 20th century they remained an isolated, tightly knit community.
Ethnic Kazakhs (so-called Altaic Kazakhs or Altai-Kazakhs) live predominantly in Western Mongolia in Bayan-Ölgii Province (88.7% of the total population) and Khovd Province (11.5% of the total population, living primarily in Khovd city, Khovd sum and Buyant sum). In addition, a number of Kazakh communities can be found in various cities and towns spread throughout the country. Some of the major population centers with a significant Kazakh presence include Ulaanbaatar (90% in khoroo #4 of Nalaikh düüreg), Töv and Selenge provinces, Erdenet, Darkhan, Bulgan, Sharyngol (17.1% of population total) and Berkh cities.

=== United States ===
See Kazakh Americans page

=== Uzbekistan ===
As of the beginning of 2021, more than 821,000 ethnic Kazakhs lived in Uzbekistan. They live mostly in Karakalpakstan and northern Uzbekistan.

=== Iran ===
During the Qajar period, Iran bought Kazakh slaves who were falsely masqueraded as Kalmyks by Khivan and Turkmen slave traders.

Kazakhs of the Aday tribe inhabited the border regions of the Russian Empire with Iran since the 18th century. The Kazakhs made up 20% of the population of the Trans-Caspian region according to the 1897 census. As a result of the Kazakhs&#x27; rebellion against the Russian Empire in 1870, a significant number of Kazakhs became refugees in Iran.

Iranian Kazakhs live mainly in Golestan Province in northern Iran. According to ethnologue.org, in 1982 there were 3000 Kazakhs living in the city of Gorgan. Since the fall of the Soviet Union, the number of Kazakhs in Iran decreased because of emigration to their historical motherland.

=== Afghanistan ===
Kazakhs fled to Afghanistan in the 1930s escaping Bolshevik persecution. Kazakh historian Gulnar Mendikulova cites that there were between 20,000 and 24,000 Kazakhs in Afghanistan as of 1978. Some assimilated locally and cannot speak the Kazakh language.

According to official figures, 13,000 ethnic Kazakhs from Afghanistan have immigrated to Kazakhstan since the early 1990s.

As of 2021, there are about 200 Kazakhs remaining in Afghanistan according to Kazakhstan&#x27;s foreign ministry. Locals claim that many live in Kunduz and others in Takhar Province, Baghlan Province, Mazar-i-Sharif and Kabul.

Afghan Kypchaks are a group of Taymani Aimaqs who are of Kazakh origin. They mainly reside in Obe district to the east of the western Afghanistan&#x27;s province of Herat, between the rivers Farāh Rud and Hari Rud.

=== Turkey ===
Turkey received refugees from among the Pakistan-based Kazakhs, Turkmen, Kirghiz, and Uzbeks numbering 3,800 originally from Afghanistan during the Soviet–Afghan War. Kayseri, Van, Amasya, Çiçekdağ, Gaziantep, Tokat, Urfa, and Serinyol received via Adana the Pakistan-based Kazakh, Turkmen, Kirghiz, and Uzbek refugees numbering 3,800 with UNHCR assistance.

In 1954 and 1969, Kazakhs migrated into Anatolia&#x27;s Salihli, Develi and Altay regions. Turkey became home to refugee Kazakhs.

The Kazakh Turks Foundation (Kazak Türkleri Vakfı) is an organization of Kazakhs in Turkey.

== Culture ==

===Cuisine===

Traditional Kazakh cuisine revolves around lamb and horse meat, as well as a variety of dairy milk products. For hundreds of years, Kazakhs were herders who raised fat-tailed sheep, Bactrian camels, and horses, relying on these animals for transportation, clothing, and food. The cooking techniques and major ingredients have been strongly influenced by the nation&#x27;s nomadic way of life. For example, most cooking techniques are aimed at long-term preservation of food. There is a large practice of salting and drying meat so that it will last, and there is a preference for sour milk, as it is easier to save in a nomadic lifestyle.

&quot;Besbarmak&quot;, a dish consisting of boiled horse or lamb meat, is the most popular Kazakh dish. Besbarmak is usually eaten with a boiled pasta sheet, and a meat broth called &quot;shorpa&quot;, and is traditionally served in Kazakh bowls called &quot;kese&quot;. Other popular meat dishes are &quot;Qazı&quot; (which is a horse meat sausage that only the wealthy could afford), &quot;shuzhuk&quot; (horse meat sausages), &quot;kuyrdak&quot; (also spelled &quot;kuirdak&quot;, a dish made from roasted horse, sheep, or cow offal, such as heart, liver, kidneys, and other organs, diced and served with onions and peppers), and various horse delicacies, such as &quot;zhal&quot; (smoked lard from horse&#x27;s neck) and &quot;zhaya&quot; (salted and smoked meat from horse&#x27;s hip and hind leg). Pilaf (&quot;palaw&quot;) is the most common Kazakh rice dish, with vegetables (carrots, onions, or garlic) and chunks of meat. The national drinks are &quot;kumys&quot; (fermented mare&#x27;s milk) and tea.

===Clothing===
Traditional Kazakh clothing is often made of materials suited to the region&#x27;s extreme climate and the rural Kazakh&#x27;s nomadic lifestyle. It is commonly decorated with elaborate ornaments made from bird beaks, animal horns, hooves and feet. Although contemporary Kazakhs usually wear Western dress, they wear more traditional clothing for holidays and special occasions.

=== Religion ===
In the late 14th century, the Golden Horde propagated Islam in its state. Islam in Kazakhstan peaked during the era of the Kazakh Khanate, especially under rulers such as Ablai Khan and Kasym Khan. Another wave of conversions among the Kazakhs occurred during the 15th and 16th centuries via the efforts of Sufi orders. During the 18th century, Russian influence toward the region rapidly increased throughout Central Asia. Led by Catherine, the Russians initially demonstrated a willingness in allowing Islam to flourish as Muslim clerics were invited into the region to preach to the Kazakhs, whom the Russians viewed as &quot;savages&quot; and &quot;ignorant&quot; of morals and ethics. However, Russian policy gradually changed toward weakening Islam by introducing pre-Islamic elements of collective consciousness. Such attempts included methods of eulogizing pre-Islamic historical figures and imposing a sense of inferiority by sending Kazakhs to highly elite Russian military institutions. In response, Kazakh religious leaders attempted to bring in pan-Turkism, though many were persecuted as a result. During the Soviet era, Muslim institutions survived only in areas that Kazakhs significantly outnumbered non-Muslims, such as non-indigenous Russians, by everyday Muslim practices. In an attempt to conform Kazakhs into Communist ideologies, gender relations and other aspects of Kazakh culture were key targets of social change.

In more recent times, however, Kazakhs have gradually employed a determined effort in revitalizing Islamic religious institutions after the fall of the Soviet Union. Most Kazakhs continue to identify with their Islamic faith, and even more devotedly in the countryside. Those who claim descent from the original Muslim soldiers and missionaries of the 8th-century command substantial respect in their communities. Kazakh political figures have also stressed the need to sponsor Islamic awareness. For example, the Kazakh Foreign Affairs Minister, Marat Tazhin, recently emphasized that Kazakhstan attaches importance to the use of &quot;positive potential Islam, learning of its history, culture and heritage.&quot;

Pre-Islamic beliefs, such as worship of the sky, the ancestors, and fire, continued to a great extent to be preserved among the common people, however. Kazakhs believed in the supernatural forces of good and evil spirits, of wood goblins and giants. To protect themselves from them and from the evil eye, Kazakhs wore protection beads and talismans. Shamanic beliefs are still widely preserved among Kazakhs, as well as the belief in the strength of the bearers of that worship, the shamans, which Kazakhs call &quot;bakhsy&quot;. Unlike the Siberian shamans, who used drums during their rituals, Kazakh shamans, who could also be men or women, played (with a bow) on a stringed instrument similar to a large violin. At present both Islamic and pre-Islamic beliefs continue to be found among Kazakhs, especially among the elderly. According to 2009 national census 39,172 ethnic Kazakhs are Christians (0.4% of all Kazakhstani Kazakhs).

=== Traditions ===
Kazakhs are known for their hospitality, and so many Kazakh traditions are based on this ethnic feature. Some traditions have been lost, but some have been rediscovered. Below are some of the traditions that continue to play a role in the modern Kazakh society:

Konakasy (Kazakh: қонақасы; &quot;konak&quot; – guest, &quot;as&quot; – food) – a tradition to welcome a guest and make his stay as enjoyable as one can by providing food, lodge, entertainment. Depending on the circumstances under which a guest had come from, he is either called &quot;arnayy konak&quot; (Kazakh: арнайы қонақ) – a specially invited guest, &quot;kudayy konak&quot; (Kazakh: құдайы қонақ) – a casual traveller, or &quot;kydyrma konak&quot; (Kazakh: қыдырма қонақ) – an unexpected visitor.

Korimdik (Kazakh: көрімдік; &quot;koru&quot; – to see) – a tradition of presenting a person with a gift to congratulate him on a gain in his life. The custom is called &quot;korimdik&quot;, if a gain is related to a person or an animal (e.g. seeing a person&#x27;s daughter-in-law or a newborn animal for the first time), and &quot;baygazy&quot; (Kazakh: байғазы), if the gain is material.

Shashu (Kazakh: шашу – to scatter) – a tradition to shower heroes of an occasion with sweets during some festivity. Kazakhs believe that collected delights bring luck.

Bata (Kazakh: бата – blessing) – a form of poetic art, typically given by the most respected or the eldest person to express gratitude for the provided hospitality, give blessing to a person who is about to enter a new phase in life, go through a challenging experience or travel.

Tusau kesu (Kazakh: тұсау кесу – to cut ties) – a tradition to celebrate the first attempts of a child to walk. The legs of a child are tied with a string of white and black colors symbolizing the good and the bad in life. The tie is then cut by a female relative who is energetic and lively in nature, so that the child acquires her qualities. After the string has been cut, it is burnt.

Kyz uzatu (Kazakh: қыз ұзату) – the first wedding party organized by the parents of a bride. The literal translation is &quot;to see off a daughter&quot;.

Betashar (Kazakh: беташар; &quot;bet&quot; – face, &quot;ashu&quot; – to open) – the custom (often done at the wedding) to lift a veil from the face of a bride. Today it the mullah who is invited to perform an improvised song, in which he mentions relatives of the groom. During his performance, a bride has to bow every time she hears a name. After the song, the mother of the groom lifts the veil.

Shildehana (Kazakh: шілдехана) – celebration of a birth of a child.

Suinshi (Kazakh: сүйінші) – a tradition to give present to someone who has brought good news.

=== Music ===
One of the most commonly used traditional musical instruments of the Kazakhs is the &quot;dombra&quot;, a plucked lute with two strings. It is often used to accompany solo or group singing. Another popular instrument is &quot;kobyz&quot;, a bow instrument played on the knees. Along with other instruments, both instruments play a key role in the traditional Kazakh orchestra. A notable composer is Kurmangazy, who lived in the 19th century. After studying in Moscow, Gaziza Zhubanova became the first woman classical composer in Kazakhstan, whose compositions reflect Kazakh history and folklore. A notable singer of the Soviet epoch is Roza Rymbaeva, she was a star of the trans-Soviet-Union scale. A notable Kazakh rock band is Urker, performing in the genre of ethno-rock, which synthesises rock music with the traditional Kazakh music.

== Notable Kazakhs ==
== See also ==
* Chala Kazakh
* Kazakh Americans
* Kazakh Canadians
* Ethnic demography of Kazakhstan

== References ==
== External links ==

* Kazakh tribes
* ‘Contemporary Falconry in Altai-Kazakh in Western Mongolia’&quot;The International Journal of Intangible Heritage (vol. 7)&quot;, pp. 103–111. 2012. 
* ‘Ethnoarhchaeology of Horse-Riding Falconry’, &quot;The Asian Conference on the Social Sciences 2012 – Official Conference Proceedings&quot;, pp. 167–182. 2012. 
* ‘Intangible Cultural Heritage of Arts and Knowledge for Coexisting with Golden Eagles: Ethnographic Studies in “Horseback Eagle-Hunting” of Altai-Kazakh Falconers’, &quot;The International Congress of Humanities and Social Sciences Research&quot;, pp. 307–316. 2012. 
* ‘Ethnographic Study of Altaic Kazakh Falconers’, &quot;Falco: The Newsletter of the Middle East Falcon Research Group 41&quot;, pp. 10–14. 2013. 
* ‘Ethnoarchaeology of Ancient Falconry in East Asia’, &quot;The Asian Conference on Cultural Studies 2013 – Official Conference Proceedings&quot;, pp. 81–95. 2013. 
* Soma, Takuya. 2014. &#x27;Current Situation and Issues of Transhumant Animal Herding in Sagsai County, Bayan Ulgii Province, Western Mongolia&#x27;, E-journal GEO 9(1): pp. 102–119. 
* Soma, Takuya. 2015. Human and Raptor Interactions in the Context of a Nomadic Society: Anthropological and Ethno-Ornithological Studies of Altaic Kazakh Falconry and its Cultural Sustainability in Western Mongolia. University of Kassel Press, Kassel (Germany) .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80040" start="4" end="11" title="Kazakhs" label="Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="13" end="19" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="35" end="41" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="42" end="54" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="65" end="77" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="82" end="96" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="130" end="140" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="166" end="172" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="183" end="193" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="208" end="213" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q848127" start="215" end="247" title="Ili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture" label="Ili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="258" end="266" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191792" start="268" end="288" title="Bayan-Ölgii Province" label="Bayan-Ölgii Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="294" end="298" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q170041" start="300" end="317" title="Golestan province" label="Golestan province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433867" start="493" end="507" title="Kazakh Khanate" label="Kazakh Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q756921" start="572" end="581" title="Turkification" label="Turkified"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="591" end="603" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658842" start="650" end="657" title="Janibek Khan" label="Janibek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826541" start="662" end="667" title="Kerei Khan" label="Kerei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149056" start="697" end="718" title="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Khayr Khan" label="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Khayr Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="1133" end="1139" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657773" start="1243" end="1255" title="Proto-Turkic language" label="Proto-Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15680" start="1316" end="1320" title="yurt" label="yurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="1436" end="1442" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1504" end="1514" title="Uyuk-Turan" label="Uyuk-Turan"/>
<link wikidata="Q302970" start="1545" end="1558" title="Vasily Radlov" label="Vasily Radlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q476294" start="1563" end="1574" title="Oriental studies" label="Orientalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889090" start="1575" end="1589" title="Benjamin P. Yudin" label="Veniamin Yudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q77120" start="1869" end="1884" title="Eurasian Steppe" label="Eurasian Steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="1907" end="1915" title="Scythian" label="Scythian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="1930" end="1937" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q874357" start="1943" end="1967" title="Western Turkic Khaganate" label="Western Turkic Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477776" start="1973" end="2000" title="Kimek–Kipchak confederation" label="Kimek–Kipchak Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="2006" end="2019" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="2025" end="2037" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433867" start="2046" end="2060" title="Kazakh Khanate" label="Kazakh Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="2128" end="2142" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q118144644" start="2275" end="2298" title="Ancient Northeast Asian" label="Ancient Northeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886" start="2406" end="2417" title="Amur region" label="Amur region"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="2669" end="2681" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="2800" end="2812" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="2826" end="2833" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q602925" start="2847" end="2860" title="Kazakh Steppe" label="Kazakh Steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="3050" end="3062" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="3178" end="3183" title="Tamerlane" label="Timur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855464" start="3291" end="3304" title="Turco-Persian" label="Turco-Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080648" start="3411" end="3440" title="Mirza Muhammad Haidar Dughlat" label="Mirza Muhammad Haidar Dughlat"/>
<link wikidata="Q487543" start="3444" end="3454" title="Chagatai Khan" label="Chagatayid"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="3465" end="3472" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122052" start="3549" end="3564" title="Desht-i Qipchaq" label="Desht-i Qipchaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191125" start="3715" end="3726" title="Moghulistan" label="Moghulistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149056" start="3810" end="3831" title="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Khayr Khan" label="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Khayr Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q935963" start="3849" end="3855" title="Shiban" label="Shiban"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826541" start="3892" end="3897" title="Kerei Khan" label="Kerei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658842" start="3902" end="3909" title="Janibek Khan" label="Janibek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374159" start="3926" end="3935" title="Urus Khan" label="Urus Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190209" start="4045" end="4052" title="Kalmyks" label="Kalmyks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005407" start="4128" end="4135" title="Jetisu" label="Zhetysu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191125" start="4153" end="4164" title="Moghulistan" label="Moghulistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q487543" start="4220" end="4230" title="Chagatai Khan" label="Chagatayid"/>
<link wikidata="Q987896" start="4252" end="4264" title="Esen Buqa II" label="Esen Buqa II"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="4337" end="4343" title="Oirats" label="Oirats"/>
<link wikidata="Q335097" start="4626" end="4636" title="Özbeg Khan" label="Özbeg Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q117458" start="5173" end="5187" title="Crimean Tatars" label="Crimean Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q192616" start="5189" end="5205" title="Nogays" label="Manghits/Noghays"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231760" start="5349" end="5360" title="Chinggisids" label="Chinggisids"/>
<link wikidata="Q700720" start="5710" end="5735" title="Sigismund von Herberstein" label="Sigismund von Herberstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186693" start="5749" end="5775" title="Notes on Muscovite Affairs" label="Notes on Muscovite Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="5888" end="5896" title="Cossacks" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="5904" end="5925" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="6064" end="6068" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="6142" end="6149" title="Cossack" label="Cossack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339898" start="6179" end="6186" title="Kipchak languages" label="Kipchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="6311" end="6316" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="6346" end="6376" title="oral tradition" label="epic tradition of oral history"/>
<link wikidata="Q304890" start="6658" end="6674" title="Abai Qunanbaiuly" label="Abai Qunanbaiuly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498273" start="6722" end="6736" title="Westernization" label="Westernization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482645" start="6936" end="6945" title="tribalism" label="tribalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q931937" start="7380" end="7383" title="jüz" label="jüz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7464" end="7505" title="Zhuz#Senior zhuz" label="Senior Horde (also called Elder or Great)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7522" end="7550" title="Zhuz#Middle zhuz" label="Middle (also called Central)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7568" end="7606" title="Zhuz#Junior zhuz" label="Junior (also called Younger or Lesser)"/>
<link wikidata="Q269" start="7901" end="7909" title="Tashkent" label="Tashkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q848638" start="7911" end="7915" title="Turkestan (city)" label="Yasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q574555" start="7921" end="7927" title="Sayram (city)" label="Sayram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005407" start="8157" end="8164" title="Jetisu" label="Zhetysu"/>
<link wikidata="Q682597" start="8182" end="8197" title="Dasht-i Qipchaq" label="Dasht-i Qipchaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q483159" start="8268" end="8277" title="Syr Darya" label="Syr Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q192616" start="8349" end="8355" title="Nogais" label="Nogais"/>
<link wikidata="Q631210" start="8363" end="8374" title="Nogai Horde" label="Nogai Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="8432" end="8438" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="8439" end="8454" title="language family" label="language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q9264" start="8463" end="8468" title="Uzbek language" label="Uzbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9255" start="8470" end="8476" title="Kyrgyz language" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q25285" start="8478" end="8483" title="Tatar language" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13263" start="8485" end="8491" title="Uyghur language" label="Uyghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q9267" start="8493" end="8500" title="Turkmen language" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="8509" end="8516" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="8518" end="8529" title="Azeri language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="8587" end="8601" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="8603" end="8615" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="8617" end="8625" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="8631" end="8638" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q682597" start="8663" end="8670" title="Kipchak people" label="Kipchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110362" start="8990" end="9002" title="vowel length" label="vowel length"/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="9193" end="9202" title="madrasahs" label="madrasahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q64780" start="9489" end="9516" title="Alash (party)" label="Kazakh nationalist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="9539" end="9551" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="9646" end="9651" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="10021" end="10031" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q848127" start="10058" end="10061" title="Ili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture" label="Ili"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="10076" end="10084" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="10117" end="10148" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="10207" end="10215" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191792" start="10217" end="10228" title="Bayan-Ölgii" label="Bayan-Ölgii"/>
<link wikidata="Q194098" start="10233" end="10247" title="Khovd Province" label="Khovd province"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747877" start="10464" end="10486" title="Genetic history of East Asians" label="East Eurasian ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590768" start="10652" end="10669" title="Devil’s Gate Cave" label="Devil’s Gate Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886" start="10692" end="10703" title="Amur region" label="Amur region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="10761" end="10773" title="Yellow River" label="Yellow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="10806" end="10817" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q276315" start="11133" end="11144" title="Karakalpaks" label="Karakalpaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q484479" start="11146" end="11152" title="Kyrgyz people" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313979" start="11154" end="11161" title="Tubalar" label="Tubalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q161652" start="11373" end="11388" title="Japanese people" label="Japanese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="11390" end="11400" title="Hui people" label="Hui people"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="11402" end="11413" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="11419" end="11426" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590768" start="11779" end="11793" title="Devil’s Gate Cave" label="Devil’s Gate 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="11862" end="11871" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q190209" start="12032" end="12039" title="Kalmyks" label="Kalmyks"/>
<link wikidata="Q276315" start="12041" end="12052" title="Karakalpaks" label="Karakalpaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q484479" start="12054" end="12060" title="Kyrgyz people" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q244735" start="12066" end="12074" title="Altaians" label="Altaians"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="12085" end="12095" title="Mongolians" label="Mongolians"/>
<link wikidata="Q193067" start="12100" end="12106" title="Tuvans" label="Tuvans"/>
<link wikidata="Q920052" start="13838" end="13839" title="Haplogroup D (mtDNA)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381960" start="13849" end="13850" title="Haplogroup C (mtDNA)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544382" start="13858" end="13859" title="Haplogroup G (mtDNA)" label="G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584149" start="13867" end="13868" title="Haplogroup A (mtDNA)" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526359" start="13878" end="13879" title="Haplogroup F (mtDNA)" label="F"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584156" start="13935" end="13936" title="Haplogroup H (mtDNA)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501564" start="13945" end="13946" title="Haplogroup T (mtDNA)" label="T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375490" start="13954" end="13955" title="Haplogroup J (mtDNA)" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544376" start="13964" end="13965" title="Haplogroup K (mtDNA)" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584199" start="13974" end="13976" title="Haplogroup U (mtDNA)" label="U5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971" start="14117" end="14131" title="Altai Republic" label="Altai Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q920052" start="15199" end="15200" title="haplogroup D (mtDNA)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="15368" end="15402" title="indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous peoples of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584156" start="15562" end="15563" title="haplogroup H (mtDNA)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381960" start="15592" end="15593" title="haplogroup C (mtDNA)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="15695" end="15703" title="Northern Europe" label="northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="15708" end="15722" title="eastern Europe" label="eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651742" start="15846" end="15847" title="Haplogroup C-M217" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q428871" start="15866" end="15867" title="Haplogroup O-M175" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q49681" start="15881" end="15882" title="Haplogroup N-M231" label="N"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584175" start="15895" end="15896" title="Haplogroup J-P209" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q80658" start="15909" end="15910" title="Haplogroup R-M420" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="16001" end="16007" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3941" start="16179" end="16188" title="Astrakhan Oblast" label="Astrakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819" start="16190" end="16199" title="Volgograd Oblast" label="Volgograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334" start="16201" end="16208" title="Saratov Oblast" label="Saratov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727" start="16210" end="16216" title="Samara Oblast" label="Samara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338" start="16218" end="16226" title="Orenburg Oblast" label="Orenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714" start="16228" end="16239" title="Chelyabinsk Oblast" label="Chelyabinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741" start="16241" end="16247" title="Kurgan Oblast" label="Kurgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5824" start="16249" end="16255" title="Tyumen Oblast" label="Tyumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5835" start="16257" end="16261" title="Omsk Oblast" label="Omsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5851" start="16263" end="16274" title="Novosibirsk Oblast" label="Novosibirsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5942" start="16276" end="16286" title="Altai Krai" label="Altai Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971" start="16291" end="16305" title="Altai Republic" label="Altai Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="16351" end="16382" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q284027" start="16472" end="16481" title="Dzungaria" label="Dzungaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462644" start="16512" end="16528" title="Dzungar genocide" label="Dzungar genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q369870" start="16561" end="16574" title="Dzungars" label="Dzungar Oirat"/>
<link wikidata="Q476256" start="16657" end="16673" title="List of Chinese ethnic groups" label="56 ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="16703" end="16734" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q466972" start="16954" end="16966" title="Sheng Shicai" label="Sheng Shicai"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="17017" end="17020" title="Hui people" label="Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q649596" start="17036" end="17045" title="Ma Bufang" label="Ma Bufang"/>
<link wikidata="Q788104" start="17888" end="17909" title="autonomous prefecture" label="autonomous prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q848127" start="17915" end="17947" title="Ili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture" label="Ili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="17955" end="17988" title="Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region" label="Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336099" start="18006" end="18025" title="Autonomous county" label="autonomous counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q421446" start="18027" end="18057" title="Aksai Kazakh Autonomous County" label="Aksai Kazakh Autonomous County"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="18061" end="18066" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q808309" start="18068" end="18099" title="Barkol Kazakh Autonomous County" label="Barkol Kazakh Autonomous County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023497" start="18104" end="18133" title="Mori Kazakh Autonomous County" label="Mori Kazakh Autonomous County"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="18141" end="18149" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="18198" end="18205" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078412" start="18225" end="18232" title="Islam in China" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325796" start="18272" end="18287" title="List of concentration and internment camps" label="detention camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271479" start="18302" end="18319" title="Re-education through labor" label="reeducation camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="18744" end="18758" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="18862" end="18870" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191792" start="19121" end="19141" title="Bayan-Ölgii Province" label="Bayan-Ölgii Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q194098" start="19178" end="19192" title="Khovd Province" label="Khovd Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q731256" start="19245" end="19255" title="Khovd (city)" label="Khovd city"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874779" start="19257" end="19262" title="Khovd, Khovd" label="Khovd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518096" start="19263" end="19266" title="Sums of Mongolia" label="sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300847" start="19271" end="19277" title="Buyant, Khovd" label="Buyant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="19480" end="19491" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223411" start="19500" end="19506" title="khoroo" label="khoroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282418" start="19513" end="19520" title="Nalaikh" label="Nalaikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q546989" start="19521" end="19527" title="düüreg" label="düüreg"/>
<link wikidata="Q276195" start="19530" end="19533" title="Töv Province" label="Töv"/>
<link wikidata="Q234680" start="19538" end="19545" title="Selenge Province" label="Selenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q230628" start="19557" end="19564" title="Erdenet" label="Erdenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q235571" start="19566" end="19573" title="Darkhan (city)" label="Darkhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q945055" start="19575" end="19581" title="Bulgan (city)" label="Bulgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667639" start="19583" end="19592" title="Sharyngol" label="Sharyngol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874823" start="19625" end="19630" title="Berkh, Khentii" label="Berkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4208059" start="19662" end="19687" title="Kazakh Americans" label="See Kazakh Americans page"/>
<link wikidata="Q484245" start="19811" end="19825" title="Karakalpakstan" label="Karakalpakstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q63158027" start="19876" end="19881" title="Qajar" label="Qajar"/>
<link wikidata="Q190209" start="19948" end="19955" title="Kalmyks" label="Kalmyks"/>
<link wikidata="Q124731748" start="19959" end="19965" title="Khivan slave trade" label="Khivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q238931" start="20009" end="20013" title="Mangystau Region" label="Aday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960533" start="20154" end="20167" title="Transcaspian Oblast" label="Trans-Caspian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192007" start="20224" end="20247" title="Fort-Shevchenko" label="Kazakhs&amp;#x27; rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118494" start="20342" end="20357" title="Iranian Kazakhs" label="Iranian Kazakhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q170041" start="20373" end="20390" title="Golestan Province" label="Golestan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="20403" end="20407" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q188155" start="20492" end="20498" title="Gorgan" label="Gorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="20522" end="20534" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="20701" end="20710" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q108155" start="21176" end="21182" title="Kunduz" label="Kunduz"/>
<link wikidata="Q186395" start="21197" end="21212" title="Takhar Province" label="Takhar Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q170309" start="21214" end="21230" title="Baghlan Province" label="Baghlan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q130469" start="21232" end="21246" title="Mazar-i-Sharif" label="Mazar-i-Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="21251" end="21256" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689075" start="21259" end="21274" title="Afghan Kypchaks" label="Afghan Kypchaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249960" start="21290" end="21297" title="Taymani" label="Taymani"/>
<link wikidata="Q405435" start="21298" end="21304" title="Aimaqs" label="Aimaqs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714266" start="21353" end="21356" title="Obe District" label="Obe"/>
<link wikidata="Q182844" start="21424" end="21429" title="Herat Province" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091566" start="21450" end="21459" title="Farah Rud River" label="Farāh Rud"/>
<link wikidata="Q8505" start="21464" end="21472" title="Hari Rud" label="Hari Rud"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="21638" end="21655" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q388672" start="22115" end="22129" title="Kazakh cuisine" label="Kazakh cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q123122627" start="22146" end="22150" title="Lamb and mutton" label="lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124327" start="22155" end="22165" title="horse meat" label="horse meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q185217" start="22197" end="22210" title="Dairy product" label="milk products"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409306" start="22267" end="22283" title="fat-tailed sheep" label="fat-tailed sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q132922" start="22285" end="22299" title="Bactrian camel" label="Bactrian camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="22306" end="22311" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q173514" start="22556" end="22576" title="preservation of food" label="preservation of food"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="22626" end="22630" title="meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q253333" start="22683" end="22692" title="sour milk" label="sour milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q663306" start="22749" end="22758" title="Besbarmak" label="Besbarmak"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="22888" end="22893" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q948244" start="22931" end="22937" title="shorpa" label="shorpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453931" start="23002" end="23006" title="kese" label="kese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996379" start="23050" end="23054" title="Qazı" label="Qazı"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432724" start="23135" end="23142" title="shuzhuk" label="shuzhuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4250363" start="23178" end="23185" title="kuyrdak" label="kuyrdak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="23259" end="23264" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="23269" end="23272" title="cow" label="cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q157484" start="23273" end="23278" title="offal" label="offal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="23351" end="23357" title="onions" label="onions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548030" start="23362" end="23369" title="Bell pepper" label="peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124327" start="23416" end="23420" title="zhal" label="zhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q72827" start="23435" end="23439" title="lard" label="lard"/>
<link wikidata="Q485796" start="23547" end="23552" title="Pilaf" label="Pilaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="23599" end="23603" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="23615" end="23625" title="vegetables" label="vegetables"/>
<link wikidata="Q81" start="23627" end="23633" title="carrot" label="carrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="23647" end="23653" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q61081" start="23705" end="23710" title="kumys" label="kumys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104034" start="23728" end="23732" title="mare" label="mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="23750" end="23753" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12572977" start="23783" end="23798" title="Kazakh clothing" label="Kazakh clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="24198" end="24210" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433867" start="24291" end="24305" title="Kazakh Khanate" label="Kazakh Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q322100" start="24339" end="24349" title="Ablai Khan" label="Ablai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467956" start="24354" end="24364" title="Kasym Khan" label="Kasym Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="24475" end="24479" title="Sufi" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="24578" end="24590" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="24599" end="24608" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="24672" end="24677" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q430880" start="24962" end="24986" title="collective consciousness" label="collective consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="25135" end="25141" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83280" start="25226" end="25237" title="pan-Turkism" label="pan-Turkism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="25291" end="25297" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="25303" end="25309" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="25499" end="25508" title="Communist" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="25762" end="25774" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="25922" end="25928" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377798" start="26157" end="26169" title="Marat Tazhin" label="Marat Tazhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="27218" end="27228" title="Christianity" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="27557" end="27563" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="27853" end="27859" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="27930" end="27936" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="28004" end="28010" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="28063" end="28069" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="28400" end="28406" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="28452" end="28458" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="28619" end="28625" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="28907" end="28913" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="29296" end="29302" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="29451" end="29457" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q188942" start="29615" end="29621" title="mullah" label="mullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="29854" end="29860" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="29920" end="29926" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236973" start="30110" end="30116" title="dombra" label="dombra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778051" start="30246" end="30251" title="kobyz" label="kobyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046502" start="30419" end="30429" title="Kurmangazy Sagyrbayuly" label="Kurmangazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491329" start="30488" end="30504" title="Gaziza Zhubanova" label="Gaziza Zhubanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q45396" start="30658" end="30671" title="Roza Rymbaeva" label="Roza Rymbaeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740842" start="30751" end="30756" title="Urker" label="Urker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858883" start="30901" end="30913" title="Chala Kazakh" label="Chala Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4208059" start="30916" end="30932" title="Kazakh Americans" label="Kazakh Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q18165063" start="30935" end="30951" title="Kazakh Canadians" label="Kazakh Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404206" start="30954" end="30985" title="Ethnic demography of Kazakhstan" label="Ethnic demography of Kazakhstan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211629" wikidata="Q472546" url="?curid=211629" title="R. L. Nettleship">
<text>Richard Lewis Nettleship (17 December 1846 – 25 August 1892) was an English philosopher.

==Life==
The youngest brother of Henry Nettleship, he was educated at Uppingham and Balliol College, Oxford, where he held a scholarship. He won the Hertford scholarship, the Ireland, the Gaisford Prize for Greek verse, a Craven scholarship and the Arnold prize, but took only a second class in &quot;literae humaniores&quot;.

Nettleship became fellow and tutor of his college and succeeded to the work of T. H. Green, whose writings he edited with a memoir. He was fond of music and outdoor sports, and rowed in his college boat. He died on 25 August 1892, from the effects of exposure on Mont Blanc, and was buried at Chamonix.

==Works==
Nettleship left an unfinished work on Plato, part of which was published after his death, together with his lectures on logic and some essays. His long essay &quot;The Theory of Education in the Republic of Plato&quot; was published in &quot;Hellenica&quot;.

His thought was idealistic, embodying elements of Hegelianism but also, in its account of the Platonic Forms (&quot;eide&quot;, &quot;idiai&quot;), markedly influenced by a particular reading of the Kantian categories. Many saw him as a model and example of philosophical honest and persistent philosophical inquiry. This did not prevent the undergraduates of Balliol from a gentle parody in the 1880 Masque of Balliol:

&lt;poem&gt;
Roughly, so to say, you know,
I am N-TTL-SH-P or so;
You are gated after Hall,
That&#x27;s all. I mean that&#x27;s nearly all.
&lt;/poem&gt;

The inchoateness of Nettleship&#x27;s philosophical thinking is more apparent in the &quot;Philosophical Remains&quot; than in the separate volume of lectures on Plato&#x27;s &quot;Republic&quot;. From that volume a definite view of the aims, limits and scope of Plato&#x27;s text emerges clearly. Few historians of philosophy would now accept, however, Nettleship&#x27;s view of the analogy of the Line (509e-511c, 534a) 
as involving throughout a temporal progression.

===Selected bibliography===
* 

==See also==

* British idealism

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q472546" start="0" end="24" title="R. L. Nettleship" label="Richard Lewis Nettleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="68" end="75" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="76" end="87" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229884" start="123" end="139" title="Henry Nettleship" label="Henry Nettleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403302" start="160" end="169" title="Uppingham School" label="Uppingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="174" end="197" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q188823" start="215" end="226" title="scholarship" label="scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517361" start="278" end="292" title="Gaisford Prize" label="Gaisford Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647565" start="391" end="409" title="literae humaniores" label="literae humaniores"/>
<link wikidata="Q369621" start="497" end="508" title="T. H. Green" label="T. H. Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983" start="542" end="548" title="memoir" label="memoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="669" end="677" title="hypothermia" label="exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q583" start="681" end="691" title="Mont Blanc" label="Mont Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q83236" start="711" end="719" title="Chamonix" label="Chamonix"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="770" end="775" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q603773" start="840" end="848" title="lectures" label="lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="852" end="857" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35760" start="867" end="873" title="essays" label="essays"/>
<link wikidata="Q674638" start="974" end="983" title="Hellenica" label="Hellenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="1008" end="1018" title="idealism" label="idealistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="1042" end="1053" title="Hegelianism" label="Hegelianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068658" start="1086" end="1100" title="Platonic Forms" label="Platonic Forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724007" start="1191" end="1198" title="Kantian" label="Kantian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851774" start="1393" end="1410" title="Masque of Balliol" label="Masque of Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="1749" end="1757" title="The Republic (Plato)" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q918561" start="2088" end="2104" title="British idealism" label="British idealism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211630" wikidata="Q233588" url="?curid=211630" title="Chiang Mai province">
<text>Chiang Mai is the largest Province (&quot;changwat&quot;) of Thailand by area. It lies in upper northern Thailand and has a population of 1.78 million people. It is bordered by Chiang Rai to the northeast, Lampang and Lamphun to the south, Tak to the southwest, Mae Hong Son to the west, and Shan State of Burma to the north. The capital, Chiang Mai, is north of Bangkok.

==Geography==
Chiang Mai province is about from Bangkok in the Mae Ping River basin and is on average at elevation. Surrounded by the mountain ranges of the Thai highlands, it covers an area of approximately . The mountains of the Daen Lao Range () at the north end of the province, the Thanon Thong Chai Range () with the highest mountain in Thailand, Doi Inthanon at , stretching in a north–south direction, and the Khun Tan Range in the east of the province are covered by rain forest. The Mae Ping, one of the major tributaries of the Chao Phraya River, originates in the Daen Lao mountains. Several national parks are in the province: Doi Inthanon, Doi Suthep-Pui, Ob Luang, Sri Lanna, Huai Nam Dang, Mae Wang, and Pha Daeng. The total forest area is or 69.6 percent of provincial area.

===National parks===
There are fifteen national parks, making up region 16 of Thailand&#x27;s protected areas.
* Si Lanna National Park, 
* Huai Nam Dang National Park, 
* Pha Daeng National Park, 
* Mae Ping National Park, 
* Op Luang National Park, 
* Doi Pha Hom Pok National Park, 
* Doi Inthanon National Park, 
* Mae Tho National Park, 
* Mae Takrai National Park, 
* Doi Wiang Pha National Park, 
* Doi Suthep–Pui National Park, 
* Op Khan National Park, 
* Khun Khan National Park, 
* Mae Wang National Park, 
* Namtok Bua Tong–Namphu Chet Si National Park, 

===Wildlife sanctuaries===
There are four wildlife sanctuaries, make up region 16 of Thailand&#x27;s protected areas.
* Omkoi Wildlife Sanctuary, 
* Chiang Dao Wildlife Sanctuary, 
* Mae Lao–Mae Sae Wildlife Sanctuary, 
* Samoeng Wildlife Sanctuary, 

==Climate==
Chiang Mai has a tropical wet and dry climate (Köppen &quot;Aw&quot;), tempered by the low latitude and moderate elevation, with warm to hot weather year-round, though nighttime conditions during the dry season can be cool and are much lower than daytime highs. The maximum temperature ever recorded is in May 2005.

==History==

The city of Chiang Mai, the capital of Chiang Mai province, was also capital of the Lanna Kingdom after its founding in 1296, during the same period of time as the establishment of the Sukhothai Kingdom. From then, Chiang Mai not only became the capital and cultural core of the Lanna Kingdom, but also the centre of Buddhism in northern Thailand. King Meng Rai built many temples in the region.

In 1558, Chiang Mai became a colony of the First Toungoo Empire. Chiang Mai remained its colony for more than 200 years, until the Burmese–Siamese War (1775–1776). In 1774 the Burmese colonial regime were finally driven out of Chiang Mai by a coalition of Lanna and Siamese forces and it then became a tributary state of Siam, which later installed a Lanna chieftain ally, Kawila, to independently rule over Lampang and Chiang Mai region as a monarch.

In the reign of King Rama V of Siam, under his administrative centralization policy and due to the ineptitude of Chiang Mai&#x27;s ruling family, Chiang Mai eventually lost its independence, was annexed and became a second level subdivision of Siam. 

From 1933 on, Chiang Mai received its status as a &quot;province&quot; of Siam and has remained so until the present day.

==Demographics==
Of the population, 13.4 percent in the province are members of hill tribes

* Northern Thai people or Tai Yuan native to nine provinces in Northern Thailand, principally in the area of the former kingdom of Lan Na.
* Tai Lue live in dwellings of usually only a single room wooden house built on high poles. They are skilled in weaving.
* Tai Yai, Burmese in origin, harvest rice, farm, raise cattle and trade. Their craftsmanship lies in weaving, pottery, wood carving and bronze ware.
* Akha the largest population of any hill tribe in the region. Originating from Tibet and Southern China, they dwell on high ground around above sea-level. Within their villages they build a spirit gateway to protect them from evil spirits.
* Hmong from southern China. Prefer higher elevations. They raise livestock and grow rice, corn, tobacco, and cabbage. Known for their embroidery and silver.
* Karen occupy valleys and riverbanks.
* Lahu from southern China and live in high areas. They are known as hunters and planters.
* Lisu from southern China and Tibet are renowned for their colorful dress and also build their dwellings on high poles. They harvest rice and corn and their men are skilled in hunting.
* Yao reside on mountainsides and grow corn and other crops. They are skilled blacksmiths, silversmiths and embroiders.
* Mon native to Haripuñjaya Where the capital was at Lamphun

== Religion ==

==Symbols==
The seal of the province shows a white elephant in a glass pavilion. The white elephant is a royal symbol in Thailand, and it is depicted to remember the offering of a white elephant by Thammalangka, a ruler of Chiang Mai, to his overlord, King Rama II of Bangkok. The pavilion symbolizes that Buddhism prospered in Chiang Mai, especially when in 1477 the teachings of Buddha, the Tripitaka, were reviewed.

The provincial flower and tree is the &quot;flame of the forest&quot; (&quot;Butea monosperma&quot;). The edible cyprinid fish &quot;black sharkminnow&quot; (&quot;Labeo chrysophekadion&quot;) is the provincial aquatic life.

The provincial slogan is &quot;In the shadow of Mount Doi Suthep, blessed with rice customs and traditions, beautiful wild flowers, magnificent Nakhon Phing&quot;.

==Administrative divisions and postal codes==
Chiang Mai is subdivided into 25 districts (&quot;amphoe&quot;). The districts are further divided into 204 subdistricts (&quot;tambon&quot;) and 2,066 villages (&quot;muban&quot;).
# Mueang Chiang Mai: 50000
# Chom Thong: 50160
# Mae Chaem: 50270
# Chiang Dao: 50170
# Doi Saket: 50220
# Mae Taeng: 50150
# Mae Rim: 50180
# Samoeng: 50250
# Fang: 50110
# Mae Ai: 50280
# Phrao: 50190
# San Pa Tong: 50120
# San Kamphaeng: 50130
# San Sai: 50210
# Hang Dong: 50230
# Hot: 50240
# Doi Tao: 50260
# Omkoi: 50310
# Saraphi: 50140
# Wiang Haeng: 50350
# Chai Prakan: 50320
# Mae Wang: 50360
# Mae On: 50130
# Doi Lo: 50160
# Galyani Vadhana: 50270
===Local government===
As of 26 November 2019 there are: one Chiang Mai Provincial Administration Organisation (&quot;&quot;) and 121 municipal (&quot;thesaban&quot;) areas in the province. Chiang Mai has city (&quot;thesaban nakhon&quot;) status. Mae Jo, Mae Hia, Mueang Kaen Phatthana and Ton Pao have town (&quot;thesaban mueang&quot;) status. Further 116 subdistrict municipalities (&quot;thesaban tambon&quot;). The non-municipal areas are administered by 89 Subdistrict Administrative Organisations - SAO (&quot;ongkan borihan suan tambon&quot;).
==Human achievement index 2022==
Since 2003, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in Thailand has tracked progress on human development at sub-national level using the Human achievement index (HAI), a composite index covering all the eight key areas of human development. The National Economic and Social Development Board (NESDB) took over this task in 2017.

==Transportation==
* Road: Chiang Mai is on Highway 11, the only 2-digit road number in the province. Other roads connect the city of Chiang Mai with the north and south of the province, as well as with the east towards Chiang Rai province.
* Train: Chiang Mai railway station is the northern terminus of the Northern Line, operated by the State Railway of Thailand.
* Air: Chiang Mai International Airport (CNX) is one of the seven Thai international airports under the aegis of the Airports of Thailand Public Company Limited (AOT). As Chiang Mai International Airport is the major gateway to northern Thailand, it plays an important role in promoting travel and tourism throughout the northern region. Today, 14 airlines serve the airport and more than 3,000,000 passengers, 15,000 flights, and 16,000 tons of cargo are handled annually.
*Songthaew

== Tourism ==
Chiang Mai province is the tourist hub of the north and one of Thailand&#x27;s most important tourist destinations. It is considered one of the most scenic provinces in the country due to its mountain ranges, valleys, flora, and fauna. For example, the Hang Dong Canyon is coveted as a great tourist attraction. Furthermore, unlike most of Thailand, in some months, the climate in the north and Chiang Mai is cool, fresh, and misty.

== Health ==
Each amphoe of Chiang Mai has its own hospital, but among the largest are located in Mueang Chiang Mai District and include Maharaj Nakorn Chiang Mai Hospital and Nakornping Hospital.

== Local products ==
Chiang Mai is a handicrafts centre, with a variety of antiques, silver jewellery, and embroidery, Thai silks and cottons, basketry, celadon, silverware, furniture, lacquerware, woodcarvings, and parasols.

== Local culture ==
The north of Thailand&#x27;s culture is Lanna in origin and the people are proud of their northern roots. The region is home to distinctive foods, music, arts, way of life, and even language. Chiang Mai is home to various hill tribes and their own distinctive cultures.

=== Local food ===

* Nam phrik ong is a type of &quot;Nam phrik&quot; chili paste which is made of minced pork and tomatoes. It is usually eaten with soft-boiled vegetables, pork crackling, or deep-fried crunchy rice cakes.
* Nam phrik num meaning &quot;chili paste young man&quot;, is another kind of paste which can be eaten with pork crackling.
* Sai ua is a local sausage that is very aromatic and spicy and is usually eaten with sticky rice.
* Kaeng meaning &quot;curry&quot;, is not made with coconut milk in the north.
** Kaeng hang-le is northern-style pork curry
** Kaeng om is a spicy curry consisting of intestines
** Kaeng khae is a spicy curry consisting mainly of vegetables.
* Khanom chin nam ngiao is a traditional northern noodle dish with chicken or pork.
* Khao soi is a noodle dish which can be made from chicken, pork, or beef made with coconut milk and garnished with chopped fresh shallots, pickled cabbage, chilli paste to taste, and a slice of fresh lime.

== Sports ==
There are two main sport stadia in Chiang Mai and its environs: 700th Anniversary Stadium and Province Stadium. 700th Anniversary Stadium is on Klongchonpratan Road, from Chiang Mai University. There are swimming pools, diving pool, basketball arena, and 11 tennis courts.

==Sister cities==
The province is twinned with eight provinces/states.

* Shanghai, China (2000)
* Yogyakarta, Indonesia (2007)
* Qingdao, China (2008)
* Chongqing, China (2008)
* Hokkaido, Japan (2013)
* Bursa, Turkey (2013)
* Chiang Tung, Myanmar (2014)
* Chengdu, China (2015)

== Notable inhabitants ==

* Thaksin Shinawatra (Thai: ทักษิณ ชินวัตร) (born 1949), politician and businessman
* Yingluck Shinawatra (Thai: ยิ่งลักษณ์ ชินวัตร) (born 1967), politician

==Gallery==
== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==
* Chiang Mai Creative City Page
* Website of Chiang Mai provincial administration
* Website of Chiang Mai Provincial Administration Organization </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233588" start="0" end="10" title="Chiang Mai province" label="Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q50198" start="26" end="34" title="Provinces of Thailand" label="Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q50198" start="42" end="50" title="changwat" label="changwat"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="61" end="69" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90" end="113" title="Northern Thailand#Regional classification of northern Thailand" label="upper northern Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q236419" start="177" end="187" title="Chiang Rai province" label="Chiang Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q240495" start="206" end="213" title="Lampang province" label="Lampang"/>
<link wikidata="Q240540" start="218" end="225" title="Lamphun province" label="Lamphun"/>
<link wikidata="Q275758" start="240" end="243" title="Tak province" label="Tak"/>
<link wikidata="Q269270" start="262" end="274" title="Mae Hong Son province" label="Mae Hong Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q456847" start="292" end="302" title="Shan State" label="Shan State"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="306" end="311" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q52028" start="339" end="349" title="Chiang Mai" label="Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q592383" start="436" end="444" title="Ping River" label="Mae Ping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709187" start="530" end="544" title="Thai highlands" label="Thai highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208260" start="604" end="618" title="Daen Lao Range" label="Daen Lao Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710615" start="660" end="683" title="Thanon Thong Chai Range" label="Thanon Thong Chai Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140075" start="726" end="738" title="Doi Inthanon" label="Doi Inthanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6402981" start="791" end="805" title="Khun Tan Range" label="Khun Tan Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="849" end="860" title="rain forest" label="rain forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="912" end="929" title="Chao Phraya River" label="Chao Phraya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208260" start="949" end="957" title="Daen Lao Range" label="Daen Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969240" start="977" end="991" title="National parks (Thailand)" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q656576" start="1013" end="1025" title="Doi Inthanon National Park" label="Doi Inthanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q843034" start="1027" end="1041" title="Doi Suthep-Pui National Park" label="Doi Suthep-Pui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691460" start="1043" end="1051" title="Ob Luang National Park" label="Ob Luang"/>
<link wikidata="Q12672859" start="1053" end="1062" title="Sri Lanna National Park" label="Sri Lanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476495" start="1064" end="1077" title="Huai Nam Dang National Park" label="Huai Nam Dang"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340864" start="1079" end="1087" title="Mae Wang National Park" label="Mae Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764161" start="1093" end="1102" title="Pha Daeng National Park" label="Pha Daeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q105773345" start="1231" end="1240" title="Protected Areas Regional Offices of Thailand" label="region 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q12672859" start="1279" end="1301" title="Si Lanna National Park" label="Si Lanna National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476495" start="1306" end="1333" title="Huai Nam Dang National Park" label="Huai Nam Dang National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764161" start="1338" end="1361" title="Pha Daeng National Park" label="Pha Daeng National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525964" start="1366" end="1388" title="Mae Ping National Park" label="Mae Ping National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691460" start="1393" end="1415" title="Op Luang National Park" label="Op Luang National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q175708" start="1420" end="1449" title="Doi Pha Hom Pok National Park" label="Doi Pha Hom Pok National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q656576" start="1454" end="1480" title="Doi Inthanon National Park" label="Doi Inthanon National Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1485" end="1506" title="Mae Tho National Park" label="Mae Tho National Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1511" end="1535" title="Mae Takrai National Park" label="Mae Takrai National Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1540" end="1567" title="Doi Wiang Pha National Park" label="Doi Wiang Pha National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q843034" start="1572" end="1600" title="Doi Suthep–Pui National Park" label="Doi Suthep–Pui National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q15708582" start="1605" end="1626" title="Op Khan National Park" label="Op Khan National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652763" start="1631" end="1654" title="Khun Khan National Park" label="Khun Khan National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340864" start="1659" end="1681" title="Mae Wang National Park" label="Mae Wang National Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1686" end="1730" title="Namtok Bua Tong–Namphu Chet Si National Park" label="Namtok Bua Tong–Namphu Chet Si National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q105773345" start="1806" end="1815" title="Protected Areas Regional Offices of Thailand" label="region 16"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1854" end="1878" title="Omkoi Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Omkoi Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q20748949" start="1883" end="1912" title="Chiang Dao Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Chiang Dao Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1917" end="1951" title="Mae Lao–Mae Sae Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Mae Lao–Mae Sae Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1956" end="1982" title="Samoeng Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Samoeng Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="2015" end="2043" title="tropical wet and dry climate" label="tropical wet and dry climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="2045" end="2051" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q52028" start="2340" end="2350" title="Chiang Mai" label="Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059707" start="2412" end="2417" title="Lanna" label="Lanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="2513" end="2530" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q887732" start="2681" end="2689" title="Mangrai the Great" label="Meng Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q23039102" start="2768" end="2788" title="First Toungoo Empire" label="First Toungoo Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758978" start="2856" end="2887" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1775–1776)" label="Burmese–Siamese War (1775–1776)"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="3046" end="3050" title="Siam" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059707" start="3076" end="3081" title="Lanna" label="Lanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q885915" start="3098" end="3104" title="Kawila" label="Kawila"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="3194" end="3205" title="King Rama V" label="King Rama V"/>
<link wikidata="Q820410" start="3633" end="3644" title="Hill tribe (Thailand)" label="hill tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427065" start="3648" end="3668" title="Northern Thai people" label="Northern Thai people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427065" start="3672" end="3680" title="Northern Thai people" label="Tai Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q750014" start="3709" end="3726" title="Northern Thailand" label="Northern Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059707" start="3777" end="3783" title="Lan Na" label="Lan Na"/>
<link wikidata="Q840530" start="3787" end="3794" title="Dai people" label="Tai Lue"/>
<link wikidata="Q740417" start="3908" end="3915" title="Shan people" label="Tai Yai"/>
<link wikidata="Q417628" start="4058" end="4062" title="Akha people" label="Akha"/>
<link wikidata="Q219205" start="4299" end="4304" title="Hmong people" label="Hmong"/>
<link wikidata="Q271790" start="4457" end="4462" title="Karen people" label="Karen"/>
<link wikidata="Q750479" start="4496" end="4500" title="Lahu people" label="Lahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q857626" start="4587" end="4591" title="Lisu people" label="Lisu"/>
<link wikidata="Q370868" start="4773" end="4776" title="Yao people" label="Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q637909" start="4893" end="4896" title="Mon people" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q255931" start="4907" end="4918" title="Haripuñjaya" label="Haripuñjaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211214" start="4944" end="4951" title="Lamphun" label="Lamphun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819245" start="4985" end="5005" title="Seals of the provinces of Thailand" label="seal of the province"/>
<link wikidata="Q877152" start="5014" end="5028" title="white elephant" label="white elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581581" start="5167" end="5179" title="Thammalangka" label="Thammalangka"/>
<link wikidata="Q319675" start="5226" end="5233" title="Rama II of Siam" label="Rama II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321432" start="5362" end="5371" title="Tripitaka" label="Tripitaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q13019783" start="5415" end="5419" title="list of Thai provincial trees" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q942203" start="5466" end="5482" title="Butea monosperma" label="Butea monosperma"/>
<link wikidata="Q35047" start="5502" end="5510" title="cyprinid" label="cyprinid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889081" start="5522" end="5539" title="black sharkminnow" label="black sharkminnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889081" start="5553" end="5574" title="Labeo chrysophekadion" label="Labeo chrysophekadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q475061" start="5876" end="5882" title="Districts of Thailand" label="amphoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077097" start="5954" end="5960" title="tambon" label="tambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368879" start="5994" end="5999" title="muban" label="muban"/>
<link wikidata="Q476008" start="6010" end="6027" title="Mueang Chiang Mai district" label="Mueang Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q475411" start="6037" end="6047" title="Chom Thong district, Chiang Mai" label="Chom Thong"/>
<link wikidata="Q475922" start="6057" end="6066" title="Mae Chaem district" label="Mae Chaem"/>
<link wikidata="Q475381" start="6076" end="6086" title="Chiang Dao district" label="Chiang Dao"/>
<link wikidata="Q475465" start="6096" end="6105" title="Doi Saket district" label="Doi Saket"/>
<link wikidata="Q475968" start="6115" end="6124" title="Mae Taeng district" label="Mae Taeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q475955" start="6134" end="6141" title="Mae Rim district" label="Mae Rim"/>
<link wikidata="Q476611" start="6151" end="6158" title="Samoeng district" label="Samoeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q475498" start="6168" end="6172" title="Fang district" label="Fang"/>
<link wikidata="Q475919" start="6182" end="6188" title="Mae Ai district" label="Mae Ai"/>
<link wikidata="Q476457" start="6198" end="6203" title="Phrao district" label="Phrao"/>
<link wikidata="Q476622" start="6213" end="6224" title="San Pa Tong district" label="San Pa Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q476620" start="6234" end="6247" title="San Kamphaeng district" label="San Kamphaeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q476625" start="6257" end="6264" title="San Sai district" label="San Sai"/>
<link wikidata="Q475509" start="6274" end="6283" title="Hang Dong district" label="Hang Dong"/>
<link wikidata="Q475523" start="6293" end="6296" title="Hot district" label="Hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q475466" start="6306" end="6313" title="Doi Tao district" label="Doi Tao"/>
<link wikidata="Q476297" start="6323" end="6328" title="Omkoi district" label="Omkoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q476652" start="6338" end="6345" title="Saraphi district" label="Saraphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q477063" start="6355" end="6366" title="Wiang Haeng district" label="Wiang Haeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q475324" start="6376" end="6387" title="Chai Prakan district" label="Chai Prakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q475979" start="6397" end="6405" title="Mae Wang district" label="Mae Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q475945" start="6415" end="6421" title="Mae On district" label="Mae On"/>
<link wikidata="Q475458" start="6431" end="6437" title="Doi Lo district" label="Doi Lo"/>
<link wikidata="Q475503" start="6447" end="6462" title="Galyani Vadhana district" label="Galyani Vadhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155688" start="6687" end="6702" title="thesaban nakhon" label="thesaban nakhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155688" start="6786" end="6801" title="thesaban mueang" label="thesaban mueang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155688" start="6863" end="6878" title="thesaban tambon" label="thesaban tambon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7202" end="7225" title="Human achievement index" label="Human achievement index"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7416" end="7420" title="Thai highway network#Northern Thailand" label="Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408564" start="7439" end="7449" title="Thailand Route 11" label="Highway 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884773" start="7645" end="7671" title="Chiang Mai railway station" label="Chiang Mai railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q13015462" start="7704" end="7717" title="Northern Line (Thailand)" label="Northern Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165702" start="7735" end="7760" title="State Railway of Thailand" label="State Railway of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065082" start="7769" end="7801" title="Chiang Mai International Airport" label="Chiang Mai International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q409075" start="7879" end="7922" title="Airports of Thailand PLC" label="Airports of Thailand Public Company Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935247" start="8237" end="8246" title="Songthaew" label="Songthaew"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456124" start="8515" end="8531" title="Hang Dong Canyon" label="Hang Dong Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13026862" start="8833" end="8867" title="Maharaj Nakorn Chiang Mai Hospital" label="Maharaj Nakorn Chiang Mai Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q30270107" start="8872" end="8891" title="Nakornping Hospital" label="Nakornping Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q820410" start="9363" end="9374" title="Hill tribe (Thailand)" label="hill tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13016191" start="9434" end="9447" title="Nam phrik ong" label="Nam phrik ong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922876" start="9467" end="9476" title="Nam phrik" label="Nam phrik"/>
<link wikidata="Q27963676" start="9639" end="9652" title="Nam phrik num" label="Nam phrik num"/>
<link wikidata="Q6676694" start="9763" end="9769" title="Sai ua" label="Sai ua"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9942" end="9955" title="Kaeng hangle" label="Kaeng hang-le"/>
<link wikidata="Q6345991" start="10042" end="10052" title="Kaeng khae" label="Kaeng khae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360715" start="10105" end="10116" title="Khanom chin" label="Khanom chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130194" start="10117" end="10126" title="nam ngiao" label="nam ngiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922950" start="10189" end="10197" title="Khao soi" label="Khao soi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347394" start="10472" end="10497" title="700th Anniversary Stadium" label="700th Anniversary Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="10756" end="10764" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741" start="10781" end="10791" title="Special Region of Yogyakarta" label="Yogyakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q170322" start="10812" end="10819" title="Qingdao" label="Qingdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="10836" end="10845" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="10862" end="10870" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="10887" end="10892" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027111" start="10910" end="10921" title="Chiang Tung" label="Chiang Tung"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="10940" end="10947" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q164373" start="10992" end="11010" title="Thaksin Shinawatra" label="Thaksin Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q57670" start="11076" end="11095" title="Yingluck Shinawatra" label="Yingluck Shinawatra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211633" wikidata="Q1584645" url="?curid=211633" title="Torresian crow">
<text>The Torresian crow (Corvus orru), also called the Australian crow or Papuan crow, is a passerine bird in the crow family native to the north and west of Australia and nearby islands in Indonesia and Papua New Guinea. The species has a black plumage, beak and mouth with white irises. The base of the feathers on the head and neck are white. The Torresian crow is slightly larger with a more robust bill than the morphologically similar little crow.

==Taxonomy==

The Torresian crow was described by the French ornithologist Charles Lucien Bonaparte in 1850. The origin of the specific epithet &quot;orru&quot; is not known but may be derived from a Papuan name.

There are three subspecies:
* &quot;C. o. latirostris&quot; Meyer, AB, 1884 – east Lesser Sunda Islands 
* &quot;C. o. orru&quot; Bonaparte, 1850 – Maluku Islands, New Guinea, D&#x27;Entrecasteaux Islands. and Louisiade Archipelago 
* &quot;C. o. cecilae&quot; Mathews, 1912 – west, central and northern Australia

The Bismarck crow (&quot;Corvus insularis&quot;) on the Bismarck Archipelago was formerly considered a subspecies. In Central Australia southwest of Alice Springs, the Pitjantjatjara term for race &quot;ceciliae&quot; is &quot;kaanka&quot;. The term &quot;wati kaanka&quot; refers to a light-fingered man or someone who hangs around suspiciously.

==Description==
The Torresian crow is a large corvid, about the same size (48–53 cm in length) as the Eurasian carrion crow but with a more robust bill and slightly longer legs. The plumage of the Torresian crow is glossy black on the back and dull black on the breast with inconspicuous throat hackles. Its tail is broad and has a distinctive square-shaped tip. Its bill is dark grey and about the same length as the head. The legs and feet are a similar dark grey color with pink foot soles. The Torresian crow has the typical white iris of the other Australasian &quot;Corvus&quot; species with a fine, blue eye-ring. However, it can be distinguished from most except the little crow by the base of the head and neck feathers being white. The white feather bases are revealed when ruffled. Birds of this species characteristically shuffle their wings after alighting. Sexes are identical in their appearance; however, juveniles lack glossy dorsal feathers and have blue eyes, rather than white, up to about nine months of age.

The Torresian crow is not to be confused with the Australian raven the juveniles of which have a similar appearance. Adult ravens have distinctive long throat hackles which may not be visible in some postures. Despite their visual similarities, the Australian raven and crow have different and unique calls.

==Distribution and habitat==
The Torresian crow has an extensive distribution across Australia, Papua New Guinea in particular the Bismarck Archipelago and some islands in Indonesia, in particular the Moluccas. The range of the mainland Australian race &quot;C. orru ceciliae&quot; extends from the tropical north of Australia to as far south as Forster on the east coast of New South Wales and to between Geraldton and Norseman in South Western Australia.

The Torresian crow occupies almost any habitat within its geographic range where there is a permanent source of water. The species is common in habitats such as tropical rainforests, eucalyptus woodland, open scrub, beaches, swamps, offshore islands. The Torresian crow is also well adapted to fringe habitats including farmland, towns and cities. On farms in much of Northern Australia, they are the most numerous bird species and are considered a pest by farmers, as they damage crops such as sweetcorn, peanuts, wheat and many kinds of fruit. Torresian crows are common in urban landscapes and many cities and towns in Australia support large populations. In the arid zones of central Australia, the species is sparsely distributed and confined to areas with permanent water.

Two other races occur on various islands to the north: &quot;C. orru orru&quot; in Papua New Guinea and the Moluccas), and &quot;C. orru latirostris&quot; on Tanimbar and Babar Islands.

==Ecology==

===Expansion of the Torresian crow population in Australia===
The Torresian crow, similarly to many corvids, is an opportunistic species and has adapted to a broad range of habitats. The population size of Torresian crows in Australia is increasing, possibly owing to the expansion of agricultural activity in arid areas, as well as increased urbanization. Studies on the distribution of Torresian Crows across Australia, between 1993 and 2004, have shown that the geographic range of the species has expanded into highly urbanized regions including many of Australia&#x27;s largest cities, as well as further south into arid areas of central Australia. The continued urban growth of Australia in the past decades has resulted in large areas of natural subtropical and eucalypt sclerophyll forest to be replaced by suburbs and parkland, especially in the regions surrounding major cities. This increased urbanisation of land has been associated with the observed proliferation of Torresian crows. Over a long-term study in urban to suburban areas of South-East Queensland, the abundance of Torresian crows was observed to have increased by about 40%. The density of the species in Brisbane has become such that the noise resulting from the congregation of large numbers of individuals in communal roosting sites located in urban areas, has become a source of complaints by local residents.

The population of Torresian crows has also expanded in rural areas across Australia. Increased development of land for agricultural activities is likely to be a significant factor influencing the rising population size of the species outside urban areas. In rural areas, Torresian crows have been found to congregate in agricultural environments and form large flocks. Since the species is reliant on a permanent source of water for their survival, large groups of Torresian crows are most commonly observed on cultivated land in the tropics and in the East of the country where annual rainfall is relatively higher. Whilst the distribution of Torresian crows has expanded further across all of Australia, the density of the species in arid areas remains low due to a lack of sustainable water sources. In the arid centre, the species is primarily confined to localised areas where the amount of water in streams and waterholes is enhanced by high runoff in surrounding regions. However, the development of irrigation systems and wells by the cattle and farming industry may have provided the species with sufficiently stable sources of water to allow them to establish in areas that were previously untenable.

===Edge species===
The expansion of corvid species populations in urban areas worldwide is due to their ability to exploit edge habitats. This has allowed corvids including the Torresian crow to take advantage of urban growth by exploiting the associated increase in anthropogenic food resources and by dominating the resulting urban habitat, reducing the competition imposed by other species.

One of the reasons the Torresian crow is able to take advantage of increased urbanisation is its diet; a significant proportion of the diet of the species consists of carrion, which is abundant in urban environments due to road kill. Anthropogenic waste also provides Torresian crows with a plentiful source of food requiring minimal foraging. Furthermore, food resources of the Torresian crow may be indirectly supplemented by the modification of land coverage, where native forests are replaced by lawns and parkland that are rich in invertebrates which also represent a significant part of the species&#x27; diet. The abundance of food means that little intra-specific aggression is observed since resources are not economically defensible. Finally, the large size of Torresian crows allows them to dominate food resources and hence experience little competition from other smaller urban bird species.

A second aspect allowing the Torresian crow to expand into urban areas is its breeding requirements. The species only requires very minimal breeding space making it well adapted to living in a dense urban landscape. This allows the formation of large communal roosts resulting in a high population density. Therefore, the carrying capacity of urban habitats for Torresian crows is comparatively much higher than that of rural areas where resources are more limited.

The urban sprawl in Australia is continually creating new habitat for the species and is likely to be a strong contributing factor in the observed increase in population size. Even relatively small urban developments on previously untouched land can represent significant increases in breeding space for Torresian crows to colonize, given the large carrying capacity of these habitats.

==Behaviour==
Like other corvids, Torresian crows are intelligent and adaptable and have been known to steal food from larger birds by working in teams, and to feed on poisonous prey without ingesting poison (see below) among other behaviours. Torresian crows are large and aggressive birds, with females displaying the more aggressive behaviour and dominating most other species except large birds of prey and the Australian magpie. They have been observed to attack larger birds of prey, particularly wedge-tailed eagles and most owl species in defence of their nest or territory. Smaller birds will therefore attack crows in defence of their nests, with willie wagtails and pied butcherbirds being notable examples. Noisy miners and Australian magpies are among the few birds that are successful in driving Torresian crows out of their territories, with the latter species being one of the smaller bird species that dominate and displace crows where they meet. Between the months of January and August, large groups of crows congregate and roam nomadically across farmlands, forests and city suburbs. These groups consist of crows of all ages; however, from September to December, many leave these flocks to breed in temporary territories, with the nomadic flock sizes reducing significantly to only young and old crows. Each pair of crows returns to the same territory each year, but territories may be taken over by other pairs from year to year.

===Diet ===
Torresian crows are omnivores and consume a wide range of foods. Their diet varies significantly between habitats with birds living in urban environments relying to a greater extent on anthropogenically related food sources compared to those living in natural habitats. Outside urbanised areas, the diet of Torresian crows primarily consists of invertebrates, berries and carrion. Birds of this species have also been observed to take stranded fish on the seashore, roadkill, fruit, grain, smaller birds and rodents. In Northern Australia Torresian crows have developed a technique to kill and eat the introduced poisonous cane toad without ingesting the poison it secretes from its skin and poison glands on either side of its head, by flipping it onto its back. The crows only feed on the intestines and part of the thighs of the toad, thus avoiding the poison. This predation and consumption technique is culturally transmitted amongst crows of the species.

&quot;For further information on the adaptation of Torresian crows to cane toads see: Adaptations of Australian animals to cane toads&quot;

===Nesting===
The main breeding period occurs from August to January, with most eggs being laid in September and October. The stick nest is built high in a tree, usually a eucalypt, however other locations such as power pylons and tall buildings are occasionally chosen. Two to four eggs are laid which the female incubates for roughly twenty days and then is assisted by the male in rearing the chicks for around forty days until they leave the nest. Young Torresian crows then stay with their parents for several months after fledging, before joining the nomadic flock. Torresian crows aggressively defend their nest from goannas, snakes and birds of prey with aggressive dive-bombs. Dogs, cats and humans are also occasionally swooped in nest defence, however not nearly as aggressively as notorious species such as Australian magpies and masked lapwings.

===Voice===
Their voice is quite different from the Australian raven: whilst the more standard loud penetrating Australian raven/crow call &quot;Fark! Fark!&quot; may occur there is often a more nasal, metallic clattering &quot;uk-uk-uk-uk-uk&quot; or sometimes an &quot;ok-ok-ok-ok&quot; or &quot;Ar-ar-argh&quot;, sometimes with an upward inflection, somewhat like a cat meow. This may be following the more standard call or may be delivered in isolation.

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==

*xeno-canto: Sound recordings of the Torresian crow</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1584645" start="4" end="18" title="Torresian crow" label="Torresian crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584645" start="50" end="65" title="Torresian crow" label="Australian crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584645" start="69" end="80" title="Torresian crow" label="Papuan crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="87" end="96" title="passerine" label="passerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25565" start="109" end="120" title="Corvidae" label="crow family"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="153" end="162" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="185" end="194" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="199" end="215" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q178748" start="276" end="280" title="iris (anatomy)" label="iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="412" end="427" title="Morphology (biology)" label="morphologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299703" start="436" end="447" title="Little crow (bird)" label="little crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q157521" start="525" end="549" title="Charles Lucien Bonaparte" label="Charles Lucien Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q908437" start="577" end="593" title="Specific name (zoology)" label="specific epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="680" end="690" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q63167" start="724" end="733" title="Adolf Bernhard Meyer" label="Meyer, AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3803" start="747" end="767" title="Lesser Sunda Islands" label="Lesser Sunda Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="812" end="826" title="Maluku Islands" label="Maluku Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q855297" start="840" end="868" title="D&amp;#x27;Entrecasteaux Islands" label="D&amp;#x27;Entrecasteaux Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127200" start="874" end="895" title="Louisiade Archipelago" label="Louisiade Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q933124" start="925" end="932" title="Gregory Mathews" label="Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q374500" start="983" end="996" title="Bismarck crow" label="Bismarck crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q154628" start="1035" end="1055" title="Bismarck Archipelago" label="Bismarck Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q18103669" start="1097" end="1114" title="Central Australia" label="Central Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17872" start="1128" end="1141" title="Alice Springs" label="Alice Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982063" start="1147" end="1161" title="Pitjantjatjara language" label="Pitjantjatjara"/>
<link wikidata="Q25565" start="1373" end="1379" title="Corvidae" label="corvid"/>
<link wikidata="Q26198" start="1438" end="1450" title="carrion crow" label="carrion crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="1880" end="1891" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43365" start="1899" end="1905" title="Corvus (biology)" label="Corvus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299703" start="2002" end="2013" title="little crow (bird)" label="little crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584072" start="2408" end="2424" title="Australian raven" label="Australian raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q154628" start="2798" end="2818" title="Bismarck Archipelago" label="Bismarck Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="2868" end="2876" title="Maluku Islands" label="Moluccas"/>
<link wikidata="Q918036" start="2915" end="2919" title="Race (biology)" label="race"/>
<link wikidata="Q581879" start="3013" end="3020" title="Forster, New South Wales" label="Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="3042" end="3057" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q605267" start="3073" end="3082" title="Geraldton" label="Geraldton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016823" start="3087" end="3095" title="Norseman, Western Australia" label="Norseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q199403" start="3286" end="3306" title="tropical rainforests" label="tropical rainforests"/>
<link wikidata="Q45669" start="3308" end="3318" title="eucalyptus" label="eucalyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="3620" end="3629" title="maize" label="sweetcorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="3631" end="3637" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="3640" end="3645" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="4013" end="4021" title="Moluccas" label="Moluccas"/>
<link wikidata="Q766271" start="4883" end="4894" title="sclerophyll" label="sclerophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156520" start="6831" end="6844" title="Edge effects" label="edge habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q45767" start="7957" end="7968" title="Competition (biology)" label="competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q866283" start="8331" end="8348" title="carrying capacity" label="carrying capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="9256" end="9269" title="bird of prey" label="birds of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140949" start="9278" end="9295" title="Australian magpie" label="Australian magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q752465" start="9366" end="9384" title="wedge-tailed eagle" label="wedge-tailed eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="9395" end="9398" title="owl" label="owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q642235" start="9520" end="9534" title="willie wagtail" label="willie wagtail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301153" start="9540" end="9556" title="pied butcherbird" label="pied butcherbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q998616" start="9582" end="9593" title="Noisy miner" label="Noisy miner"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="10093" end="10104" title="Territory (animal)" label="territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q120997" start="10123" end="10128" title="Flock (birds)" label="flock"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="10348" end="10356" title="omnivore" label="omnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q321087" start="10951" end="10960" title="cane toad" label="cane toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007160" start="11236" end="11246" title="Cultural transmission in animals" label="culturally"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11376" end="11423" title="Adaptations of Australian animals to cane toads#Foraging tactics in birds" label="Adaptations of Australian animals to cane toads"/>
<link wikidata="Q45669" start="11603" end="11611" title="Eucalyptus" label="eucalypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351221" start="12055" end="12061" title="goanna" label="goanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q839366" start="12273" end="12287" title="masked lapwing" label="masked lapwing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211634" wikidata="Q257968" url="?curid=211634" title="Joan of Acre">
<text>Joan of Acre (April 1272 – 23 April 1307) was an English princess, a daughter of Edward I of England and Eleanor of Castile. The name &quot;Acre&quot; derives from her birthplace in the Holy Land while her parents were on a crusade.

She was married twice; her first husband was Gilbert de Clare, 7th Earl of Gloucester, one of the most powerful nobles in her father&#x27;s kingdom; her second husband was Ralph de Monthermer, a squire in her household whom she married in secret.

Joan is most notable for the claim that miracles have allegedly taken place at her grave, and for the multiple references to her in literature.

==Birth and childhood==
Joan (or Joanna, as she is sometimes called) of Acre was born in the spring of 1272 in the Kingdom of Acre, Outremer, now in modern Israel, while her parents, Edward I and Eleanor of Castile, were on crusade. At the time of Joan&#x27;s birth, her grandfather, Henry III, was still alive and thus her father was not yet king of England. Her parents departed from Acre shortly after her birth, travelling to Sicily and Spain before leaving Joan with Eleanor&#x27;s mother, Joan, Countess of Ponthieu, in France. Joan lived for several years in France where she spent her time being educated by a bishop and &quot;being thoroughly spoiled by an indulgent grandmother.&quot; Joan was free to play among the &quot;vine clad hills and sunny vales&quot; surrounding her grandmother&#x27;s home, although she required &quot;judicious surveillance.&quot;

As Joan was growing up with her grandmother, her father was back in England, already arranging marriages for his daughter. He hoped to gain both political power and more wealth with his daughter&#x27;s marriage, so he conducted the arrangement in a very &quot;business-like style&quot;. He finally found a man suitable to marry Joan (aged 5 at the time), Hartman, son of King Rudolph I of Germany. Edward then brought her home from France for the first time to meet him. As she had spent her entire life away from Edward and Eleanor, when she returned she &quot;stood in no awe of her parents&quot; and had a fairly distanced relationship with them.

Before he was able to meet or marry Joan, Hartman died. It was reported that he had fallen through a patch of shallow ice while &quot;amusing himself in skating&quot; while a letter sent to the King himself stated that Hartman had set out on a boat to visit his father amidst a terrible fog and the boat had smashed into a rock, drowning him.

==First marriage==
Edward arranged a second marriage almost immediately after the death of Hartman. Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester, who was almost 30 years older than Joan and newly divorced, was his first choice. The earl resigned his lands to Edward upon agreeing to get them back when he married Joan, as well as agreed on a dower of 2,000 silver marks. By the time all of these negotiations were finished, Joan was 12 years old. Gilbert de Clare became very enamoured with Joan, and even though she had to marry him regardless of how she felt, he still tried to woo her. He bought her expensive gifts and clothing to try to win favour with her. The couple were married 30 April 1290 at Westminster Abbey, and had four children together. They were:

# Gilbert de Clare, 7th Earl of Hertford
# Eleanor de Clare
# Margaret de Clare
# Elizabeth de Clare

Joan&#x27;s first husband, Gilbert de Clare, died on 7 December 1295.

==Secret second marriage==
Joan had been a widow for a little over a year when she caught the eye of Ralph de Monthermer, a squire in Joan&#x27;s father&#x27;s household. Joan fell in love and convinced her father to have Monthermer knighted. It was unheard of in European royalty for a noble lady to even converse with a man who had not won or acquired importance in the household. However, Joan secretly married Ralph in January 1297. Joan&#x27;s father was already planning another marriage for Joan to Amadeus V, Count of Savoy, to occur on 16 March 1297. Being already married, unbeknownst to her father, Joan was in a dangerous predicament.

Joan sent her four young children to their grandfather, in hopes that their sweetness would win Edward&#x27;s favor, but her plan did not work. The king soon discovered his daughter&#x27;s intentions, but not yet aware that she had already committed to them, he seized Joan&#x27;s lands and continued to arrange her marriage to Amadeus of Savoy. Soon after the seizure of her lands, Joan told her father that she had married Ralph. The king was enraged and retaliated by immediately imprisoning Monthermer at Bristol Castle. The people of the land had differing opinions on Joan&#x27;s predicament. It has been argued that the noblemen who were most upset were those who wanted her hand in marriage.

With regard to the matter, Joan famously said, &quot;It is not considered ignominious, nor disgraceful, for a great earl to take a poor and mean woman to wife; neither, on the other hand, is it worthy of blame, or too difficult a thing for a countess to promote to honour a gallant youth.&quot; Coming at the time of a pregnancy which may have been obvious, Joan&#x27;s statement seemed to soften Edward&#x27;s attitude towards the situation. Her first child by Monthermer was born in October 1297; by the summer of 1297, when the marriage was revealed to the king, Joan&#x27;s condition would certainly have been apparent, helping to convince Edward that he had no choice but to recognise his daughter&#x27;s second marriage. Edward I eventually relented, for the sake of his daughter, and released Monthermer from imprisonment in August 1297. Monthermer paid homage on 2 August, was granted the titles of Earl of Gloucester and Earl of Hertford, and rose in the King&#x27;s favour during Joan&#x27;s lifetime.

Joan and Monthermer had four children:

# Mary de Monthermer, born October 1297. In 1306 her grandfather King Edward I arranged for her to marry Duncan Macduff, 8th Earl of Fife
# Joan de Monthermer, born 1299, became a nun at Amesbury.
# Thomas de Monthermer, 2nd Baron Monthermer, born 1301.
# Edward de Monthermer, born 1304 and died 1339.

== Relationship with family ==
Joan was the seventh of Edward I and Eleanor&#x27;s fourteen children. Most of her elder siblings died before the age of seven, and many of her younger siblings died before adulthood. Those who survived to adulthood were Joan, her younger brother, Edward of Caernarfon (later Edward II), and four of her sisters: Eleanor, Margaret, Mary, and Elizabeth.

Joan, like her siblings, was raised outside her parents&#x27; household. She lived with her grandmother in Ponthieu for four years, and was then entrusted to the same caregivers who looked after her siblings. Edward I did not have a close relationship with most of his children while they were growing up, yet &quot;he seemed fonder of his daughters than his sons.&quot;

However, Joan of Acre&#x27;s independent nature caused numerous conflicts with her father. Her father disapproved of her leaving court after her marriage to the Earl of Gloucester, and in turn &quot;seized seven robes that had been made for her&quot;. He also strongly disapproved of her second marriage to Ralph de Monthermer, a squire in her household, even to the point of attempting to force her to marry someone else. While Edward ultimately developed a cordial relationship with Monthermer, even granting him two earldoms, there appears to have been a notable difference in Edward&#x27;s treatment of Joan as compared to the treatment of the rest of her siblings. For instance, her father famously paid messengers substantially when they brought news of the birth of grandchildren, but did not do this upon the birth of Joan&#x27;s daughter.

Joan retained a fairly tight bond with her siblings. She and Monthermer both maintained a close relationship with her brother, Edward, which was maintained through letters. After Edward became estranged from his father and lost his royal seal, &quot;Joan offered to lend him her seal&quot;.

==Death==
Joan died 23 April 1307, at the manor of Clare in Suffolk. The cause of her death remains unclear, though one popular theory is that she died during childbirth, a common cause of death at the time. While Joan&#x27;s age in 1307 (about 35) and the chronology of her earlier pregnancies with Ralph de Monthermer suggest that this could well be the case, historians have not confirmed the cause of her death.

Less than four months after her death, Joan&#x27;s father died. Joan&#x27;s widower, Ralph de Monthermer, lost the title of Earl of Gloucester soon after the deaths of his wife and father-in-law. The earldom of Gloucester was given to Joan&#x27;s son from her first marriage, Gilbert, who was its rightful holder. Monthermer continued to hold a nominal earldom in Scotland, which had been conferred on him by Edward I, until his death.

Joan&#x27;s burial place has been the cause of some interest and debate. She is interred in the Augustinian priory at Clare, which had been founded by her first husband&#x27;s ancestors and where many of them were also buried. Allegedly, in 1357, Joan&#x27;s daughter, Elizabeth De Burgh, claimed to have &quot;inspected her mother&#x27;s body and found the corpse to be intact&quot;, which in the eyes of the Roman Catholic Church is an indication of sanctity. This claim was only recorded in a fifteenth-century chronicle, however, and its details are uncertain, especially the statement that her corpse was in such a state of preservation that &quot;when her paps [breasts] were pressed with hands, they rose up again.&quot; Some sources further claim that miracles took place at Joan&#x27;s tomb, but no cause for her beatification or canonisation has ever been introduced.

==Joan in fiction==
Joan of Acre makes an appearance in Virginia Henley&#x27;s historical romance &quot;Infamous&quot;. In the book, Joan, known as Joanna, is described as a promiscuous young princess, vain, shallow and spoilt. In the novel she is only given one daughter, when she historically had eight children. There is no evidence that supports this picture of Joan.

In &quot;The Love Knot&quot; by Vanessa Alexander, Joan of Acre is an important character. The author portrays a completely different view of the princess from the one in Henley&#x27;s novel. &quot;The Love Knot&quot; tells the story of the love affair between Ralph de Monthermer and Joan of Acre through the discovery of a series of letters the two had written to each other.

Between historians and novelists, Joan has appeared in various texts as either an independent and spirited woman or a spoiled brat. In &quot;Lives of the Princesses of England&quot; by Mary Anne Everett Green, Joan is portrayed as a &quot;giddy princess&quot; and neglectful mother. Many have agreed to this characterisation; however, some authors think there is little evidence to support the assumption that Joan of Acre was a neglectful or uncaring mother.

In &quot;Gracious Gift&quot; by Abiah Patterson, Joan is a mother figure to her younger siblings. After her marriage, she is kind and caring towards her children and step-children. She becomes interested in the political landscape of her father&#x27;s kingdom.

==Ancestry==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* Costain, Thomas. A History of the Plantagenets, Vol III.
* Green, Mary Anna Everett. &quot;Lives of the Princesses of England&quot;. London: Henry Colburn, 1850. Google Books full text
* 
* 
* Parsons, John Carmi. &quot;Eleanor of Castile&quot;. New York: St. Martin&#x27;s Press, 1995.
* Patterson, Abiah (2024). Gracious Gift. Amazon Publishing. ISBN 979-8327886223.
* 
* Wilkinson, L. (2020). Royal Daughters and Diplomacy at the Court of Edward I. In A. King &amp; A. Spencer (Eds.), &quot;Edward I: New Interpretations&quot; (pp. 84-104). Boydell &amp; Brewer. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781787446144
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q257968" start="0" end="12" title="Joan of Acre" label="Joan of Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="81" end="100" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q59604" start="105" end="123" title="Eleanor of Castile" label="Eleanor of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="140" end="144" title="Acre, Israel" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="186" end="195" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="224" end="231" title="crusade" label="crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360375" start="279" end="319" title="Gilbert de Clare, 7th Earl of Gloucester" label="Gilbert de Clare, 7th Earl of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5992313" start="406" end="425" title="Ralph de Monthermer, 1st Baron Monthermer" label="Ralph de Monthermer"/>
<link wikidata="Q579516" start="429" end="435" title="squire" label="squire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170774" start="522" end="530" title="miracles" label="miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="742" end="757" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="759" end="767" title="Outremer" label="Outremer"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="783" end="789" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="810" end="818" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q59604" start="823" end="841" title="Eleanor of Castile" label="Eleanor of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="851" end="858" title="crusade" label="crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="911" end="920" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="1057" end="1063" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q603883" start="1122" end="1148" title="Joan, Countess of Ponthieu" label="Joan, Countess of Ponthieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q76956" start="1874" end="1894" title="Rudolph I of Germany" label="Rudolph I of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002601" start="3254" end="3292" title="Gilbert de Clare, 7th Earl of Hertford" label="Gilbert de Clare, 7th Earl of Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160835" start="3295" end="3311" title="Eleanor de Clare" label="Eleanor de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609611" start="3314" end="3331" title="Margaret de Clare" label="Margaret de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002250" start="3334" end="3352" title="Elizabeth de Clare" label="Elizabeth de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5992313" start="3526" end="3545" title="Ralph de Monthermer, 1st Baron Monthermer" label="Ralph de Monthermer"/>
<link wikidata="Q451989" start="3931" end="3956" title="Amadeus V, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus V, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968836" start="4582" end="4596" title="Bristol Castle" label="Bristol Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277294" start="5681" end="5699" title="Earl of Gloucester" label="Earl of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647030" start="5704" end="5720" title="Earl of Hertford" label="Earl of Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781019" start="5829" end="5847" title="Mary de Monthermer" label="Mary de Monthermer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296546" start="5932" end="5964" title="Duncan Macduff, 8th Earl of Fife" label="Duncan Macduff, 8th Earl of Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q470299" start="6014" end="6022" title="Amesbury" label="Amesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795487" start="6026" end="6068" title="Thomas de Monthermer, 2nd Baron Monthermer" label="Thomas de Monthermer, 2nd Baron Monthermer"/>
<link wikidata="Q275128" start="6420" end="6430" title="Caernarfon Castle" label="Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="6438" end="6447" title="Edward II" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q292321" start="6475" end="6482" title="Eleanor of England (1269-1298)" label="Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667593" start="6484" end="6492" title="Margaret of England (1275–1333)" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216185" start="6494" end="6498" title="Mary of Woodstock" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435894" start="6504" end="6513" title="Elizabeth of Rhuddlan" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9103" start="9545" end="9549" title="Breasts" label="paps"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="9705" end="9718" title="beatification" label="beatification"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="9722" end="9734" title="canonization" label="canonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235282" start="11287" end="11302" title="Thomas B. Costain" label="Costain, Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11304" end="11342" title="A History of the Plantagenets, Vol III" label="A History of the Plantagenets, Vol III"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211640" wikidata="Q1299703" url="?curid=211640" title="Little crow (bird)">
<text>The little crow (Corvus bennetti) is an Australian species of crow, very similar to the Torresian crow in having white bases to the neck and head feathers (shown when ruffled in strong wind) but slightly smaller (38–45 cm in length) and with a slightly smaller bill. It has the same white iris that distinguish the Australian species from all other &quot;Corvus&quot; except a few island species to the north of Australia, and one from Eurasia, the jackdaw (&quot;Corvus monedula&quot;). Like the Australian raven, this species has a blue ring around the pupil.

==Distribution and habitat==
It ranges over western and central Australia, often inhabiting very dry, near desert areas. It frequents small country towns and cultivated areas, where its flocks have reminded people of
the European rook.

== Etymology ==
&quot;C. bennetti&quot; was named in honour of the New South Wales ornithologist and collector of natural history specimens, Kenric Harold Bennett.

== Behaviour ==

===Diet===
Its food is mainly taken from the ground and includes insects, cereals and other seeds. It is less of a scavenger than the Torresian crow.

===Nesting===
It usually nests in small, loose colonies, building stick nests lined with mud (the only Australian species of Corvid known to do this).

===Call===
The little crow&#x27;s calls range from a harsh &quot;hark-hark-hark-hark&quot; to a more raven-like &quot;ah-ah-ah&quot;.

==Image links==
* Little Crow 1
* Little Crow 2
* Little crow series

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1299703" start="4" end="15" title="Little crow (bird)" label="little crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q388450" start="62" end="66" title="crow" label="crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584645" start="88" end="102" title="Torresian crow" label="Torresian crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="315" end="324" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="436" end="443" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234846" start="449" end="456" title="jackdaw" label="jackdaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584072" start="497" end="513" title="Australian raven" label="Australian raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q25386" start="793" end="797" title="rook (bird)" label="rook"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="941" end="962" title="Kenric Harold Bennett" label="Kenric Harold Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="1047" end="1053" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="1056" end="1062" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584645" start="1116" end="1130" title="Torresian crow" label="Torresian crow"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211641" wikidata="Q1176720" url="?curid=211641" title="David Starkey">
<text>David Robert Starkey (born 3 January 1945) is an English historian, radio and television presenter, with views that he describes as conservative. The only child of Quaker parents, he attended Kendal Grammar School before reading history at Cambridge on a scholarship. There he specialised in Tudor history, writing a thesis on King Henry VIII&#x27;s household. From Cambridge, he moved to the London School of Economics, where he was a lecturer in history until 1998. He has written several books on the Tudors.

Starkey first appeared on television in 1977. While a regular contributor to the BBC Radio 4 debate programme &quot;The Moral Maze&quot;, his acerbic tongue earned him the sobriquet of &quot;rudest man in Britain&quot;; his frequent appearances on &quot;Question Time&quot; have been received with criticism and applause. Starkey has presented several historical documentaries. In 2002, he signed a £2 million contract with Channel 4 for 25 hours of programming, and in 2011 was a contributor on the Channel 4 series &quot;Jamie&#x27;s Dream School&quot;.

Starkey was widely censured for a comment he made during a podcast interview with Darren Grimes in June 2020 that was said to be racist, for which he later apologised. Immediately afterwards, he resigned as an honorary fellow of his alma mater, Fitzwilliam College, had several honorary doctorates and fellowships revoked, book contracts and memberships of learned societies cancelled, and his Medlicott Medal withdrawn.

==Early years and education==

Starkey was born on 3 January 1945 in Kendal, Westmorland. He is the only child of Robert Starkey and Elsie Lyon, Quakers who had married 10 years previously in Bolton, at a Friends meeting house. His father, the son of a cotton spinner, was a foreman in a washing-machine factory, while his mother followed in her father&#x27;s footsteps and became a cotton weaver and later a cleaner. They were both born in Oldham and moved to Kendal in the 1930s during the Great Depression. He was raised in an austere and frugal environment of near-poverty, with his parents often unemployed for long periods of time; an environment which, he later stated, taught him &quot;the value of money&quot;. Starkey is equivocal about his mother, describing her as both &quot;wonderful&quot;, in that she helped develop his ambition, and &quot;monstrous&quot;, intellectually frustrated and living through her son. &quot;She was a wonderful but also very frightening parent. Finally, she was a Pygmalion. She wanted a creature, she wanted something she had made.&quot; Her dominance contrasted sharply to his father, who was &quot;poetic, reflective, rather solitary...as a father he was weak.&quot; Their relationship was &quot;distant&quot;, but improved after his mother&#x27;s death in 1977.

Starkey was born with two club feet. One was fixed early, while the other had to be operated on several times. He also suffered from polio. He suffered a nervous breakdown at secondary school, aged 13, and was taken by his mother to a boarding house in Southport, where he spent several months recovering. Starkey blamed the episode on the unfamiliar experience of being in a &quot;highly competitive environment&quot;. He ultimately excelled at Kendal Grammar School, winning debating prizes and appearing in school plays.

Although he showed an early inclination towards science, he chose instead to study history. A scholarship enabled his entry into Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge, where he gained a first-class degree, a PhD and a fellowship.

Starkey was fascinated by King Henry VIII, and his doctoral thesis focused on the Tudor monarch&#x27;s inner household. His supervisor was Professor Sir Geoffrey Elton, an expert on the Tudor period. Starkey claimed that with age his mentor became &quot;tetchy&quot; and &quot;arrogant&quot;. In 1983, when Elton was awarded a knighthood, Starkey derided one of his essays, &quot;Cromwell Redivivus&quot;, and Elton responded by writing an &quot;absolutely shocking&quot; review of a collection of essays Starkey had edited. Starkey later expressed his remorse over the spat: &quot;I regret that the thing happened at all.&quot;

==Career==

Starkey was a fellow at Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge from 1970 to 1972. Bored at Cambridge and attracted to London&#x27;s gay scene, he secured a position as a lecturer in the Department of International History at the London School of Economics in 1972. He claimed to be an &quot;excessively enthusiastic advocate of promiscuity&quot;, seeking to liberate himself from his mother, who strongly disapproved of his homosexuality. He ended his 30-year career as a university teacher in 1998, later citing boredom and irritation with the administrative demands of modern academic life. Having already written and presented the 1984 Channel 4 documentary series &quot;This Land of England&quot;, he began to write and present several history documentaries for BBC television, beginning with the Indie Award winning &quot;Henry VIII&quot; (1998).

Starkey had already achieved notoriety as a panellist on the BBC Radio 4 debate programme &quot;The Moral Maze&quot;, debating moral issues of the day alongside fellow panellists Rabbi Hugo Gryn, Sir Roger Scruton and the journalist Janet Daley since 1992. He soon acquired a reputation for abrasiveness. He explained in 2007 that his personality possesses &quot;a tendency towards showmanship... towards self-indulgence and explosion and repartee and occasional silliness and going over the top.&quot; The &quot;Daily Mail&quot; gave him the sobriquet of &quot;the rudest man in Britain&quot;, to which Starkey was said to have told friends, &quot;Don&#x27;t worry darlings, it&#x27;s worth at least £100,000 a year&quot;, claiming that his character was part of a &quot;convenient image&quot;. He once attacked George Austin, the Archdeacon of York, over &quot;his fatness, his smugness, and his pomposity&quot;, but after a nine-year stint on the programme he left, citing his boredom with being &quot;Dr. Rude&quot; and its move to an evening slot.

From 1995, he also spent three years at Talk Radio UK, presenting &quot;Starkey on Saturday&quot;, later &quot;Starkey on Sunday&quot;. An interview with Denis Healey proved to be one of his most embarrassing moments: &quot;I mistakenly thought that he had become an amiable old buffer who would engage in amusing conversation, and he tore me limb from limb. I laugh about it now, but I didn&#x27;t feel like laughing about it at the time.&quot;

His first television appearance was in 1977, on Granada Television&#x27;s &quot;Behave Yourself&quot; with Russell Harty. He was a prosecution witness in the 1984 ITV programme &quot;The Trial of Richard III&quot;, whose jury acquitted the king of the murder of the Princes in the Tower on the grounds of insufficient evidence. His television documentaries on &quot;The Six Wives of Henry VIII&quot; and Elizabeth I were ratings successes. His breathless delivery of the script, with noticeable breaths and choppy cadence, is widely imitated.

In 2002, he signed a £2 million contract with Channel 4 to produce 25 hours of television, including &quot;Monarchy&quot;, a chronicle of the history of English kings and queens from Anglo-Saxon times onward. He presented the 2009 series &quot;Henry: Mind of a Tyrant&quot;, which Brian Viner, a reviewer for the &quot;Independent&quot;, called &quot;highly fascinating&quot;, although A. A. Gill was less complimentary, calling it &quot;Hello! history&quot;. In an interview about the series for the &quot;Radio Times&quot;, Starkey complained that too many historians had focused not on Henry, but on his wives. Referring to a &quot;feminised history&quot;, he said: &quot;so many of the writers who write about this are women and so much of their audience is a female audience.&quot; This prompted the historian Lucy Worsley to describe his comments as misogynistic. More recently, in 2011, he taught five history lessons in Channel 4&#x27;s &quot;Jamie&#x27;s Dream School&quot;, after which he criticised the state education system.

In 1984, Starkey was elected a Fellow of the Royal Historical Society and in 1994 a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London. He was also made an Honorary Fellow by his Cambridge College, Fitzwilliam College in 2006. From 2007 to 2015 he was Honorary Visiting Professor of History at the University of Kent and subsequently Lecturer at Goldsmiths&#x27; College (2017), Visiting Professor of History of Canterbury Christ Church University (2018–20) and Honorary Professor of History at the University of Buckingham (2019–20). He has worked as curator on several exhibitions, including an exhibit in 2003 on Elizabeth I, following which he had lunch with her namesake, Elizabeth II. Several years later he told a reporter that the monarch had no interest in her predecessors, other than those who followed her great-grandfather, Edward VII. &quot;I don&#x27;t think she&#x27;s at all comfortable with anybody – I would hesitate to use the word intellectual – but it&#x27;s useful. I think she&#x27;s got elements a bit like Goebbels in her attitude to culture – you remember: &#x27;every time I hear the word culture I reach for my revolver.&#x27; I think the queen reaches for her mask.&quot; His remarks were criticised by Penny Junor, a royal biographer, and Robert Lacey, a royal historian.

On 25 June 2012, Starkey gave his lecture &#x27;Head of Our Morality: why the twentieth-century British monarchy matters&#x27; at The Marc Fitch Lectures.

==Views==

=== Politics ===

Starkey&#x27;s political views have changed over the years from what he called &quot;middle-of-the-road Labour left until the end of the 1970s&quot; to a conservative outlook, that he attributed to economic failures of the Callaghan government. He is a supporter of one-nation conservatism and believes that Victorian Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli was a great symbol of this. He has written that Disraeli was &quot;exotic, slippery and had a gift for language and phrase-making&quot;, drawing similarities with the rhetorical style of former UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson. He argues that the working classes need more explicit &quot;nationalism&quot; of the type demonstrated by Disraeli. He believes that Disraelianism could strengthen the Anglo-American &quot;conservative&quot; alliance between US and the UK. However, he suspects that despite Boris Johnson being a Conservative Prime Minister, he is actually &quot;a liberal&quot;, so he doubts whether Johnson would ever take this view.

Starkey blames the Callaghan administration for &quot;blow[ing] the nation&#x27;s finances&quot;. During the 1980s he was an active Conservative Party member, and he was a Conservative candidate for Islington Borough Council in 1986 in Tollington ward, and in 1990 in Hillrise ward.

He bemoaned the Conservatives when they were in opposition, criticising Michael Howard in particular: &quot;I knew Michael Howard was going to be a disaster as soon as he opposed top-up fees, either out of sentimentality or calculated expediency so that it might get him a bit of the student vote...Instead of backing Tony Blair, causing revolution in the Labour Party, the Conservatives have been whoring after strange gods, coming up with increasingly strange policies.&quot; He likened Gordon Brown to the fictional Kenneth Widmerpool, continuing, &quot;It seems to me that with Brown there is a complete sense of humour and charm bypass.&quot; Of Ed Miliband, in 2015 he said &quot;He is a man of high ambition and low talent – the worst possible combination. His whole language at the moment is soak the rich, hate the rich.&quot;

During the 2011 Conservative Party Conference he spoke at a fringe meeting, declaring Mayor Boris Johnson to be a &quot;jester-despot&quot; and the Prime Minister, David Cameron, as having &quot;absolutely no strategy&quot; for running the country. He urged the party to re-engage with the working class rather than the &quot;&quot;Guardian&quot;-reading middle class&quot;. In 2015 he claimed that while Cameron and his Chancellor, George Osborne, had introduced some meaningful reforms to education and welfare policies, they had not made large enough cuts to the UK&#x27;s budget deficit.

Starkey prefers radical changes to the UK&#x27;s constitution in line with the federal system used by the United States, although in an interview with Iain Dale he expressed his support for the monarchy, the Queen and Prince Charles. In the run-up to the UK Alternative Vote referendum, he was a signatory on a letter to &quot;The Times&quot;, which urged people to vote against the proposals. Starkey thinks the modern UK House of Commons has become a weak political institution and that it should return to its core value of being in defiance of state authority, as it was in its origin. He believes the House too often gives way to the state, such as with the police being allowed to search the place without a warrant. This occurred in 2008 with the searching of the Westminster office of Conservative politician Damian Green after the custodians of the House, the Speaker and the Serjeant at Arms, allowed the police to search the place without a warrant.

Starkey was a supporter of the Tory Campaign for Homosexual Equality (&quot;Torche&quot;), and during one of many appearances on the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Question Time&quot; he attacked Jeffrey Archer over his views on the age of homosexual consent. However, in 2012 he described himself as &quot;torn&quot; on the issue of same-sex marriage, describing marriage as &quot;part of the baggage of heterosexual society.&quot;

In 2009, Mike Russell, then the Scottish Government Minister for Culture and External Affairs, called on him to apologise for his declaration on the programme that Scotland, Ireland and Wales are &quot;feeble little countries&quot;. Starkey responded that it had been a joke regarding the lack of necessity for the English to outwardly celebrate their nationalism, approvingly quoting H. G. Wells&#x27;s observation that &quot;the English are the only nation without national dress&quot;. He described Alex Salmond, then Scottish First Minister, as a &quot;Caledonian Hitler&quot; who thinks that &quot;the English, like the Jews, are everywhere&quot;. In August 2014, Starkey was one of 200 public figures who were signatories to a letter to &quot;The Guardian&quot; expressing their hope that Scotland would vote to remain part of the United Kingdom in September&#x27;s referendum on that issue. In June 2015 in an interview for &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; Starkey compared the Scottish National Party (SNP) with the Nazi Party. He said:

You have as a symbol the twisted cross: the saltire or the swastika. You have a passionate belief in self-sufficiency: known by the Nazis as autarky and the Scots as oil. And also you have the propensity of your elderly and middle-aged supporters to expose their knees.

SNP member of parliament Kirsten Oswald described Starkey&#x27;s comments as &quot;deeply offensive&quot; to the Jewish community and SNP voters, and described Starkey as a &quot;serial utterer of bile and bilge&quot;.

=== European Union ===

Starkey is very critical of the European Union (EU). As a result, he supported the &quot;Leave&quot; vote in the 2016 EU referendum. This is because, Starkey argues, the United Kingdom is best off as a self-governing nation, and the EU conflicts with this notion of self-government. Furthermore, he believes that the continuing support for the ideas of national pride and sovereignty, not xenophobia, in the UK were the biggest factors behind the UK&#x27;s decision to leave the EU. He argues that the support for these ideas is what makes the UK different from the other EU member states which, as a result of the legacy of World War Two, tend to believe that nationalism is the cause of war and so joined the EU to prevent this.

As a historian, Starkey presents Brexit in a wider historical context to try to show its importance in British history. He makes comparisons between Brexit and Henry VIII&#x27;s split from Rome and the Reformation that followed. He believes the Reformation sowed the seeds of Euroscepticism, particularly in England, and the nation&#x27;s &quot;semi-detached relationship with continental Europe&quot;. This had its origin with Henry VIII because &quot;nobody before Henry would make any argument about England being much different from the rest of Europe. It was Henry who turns England into a defensible island, who literally fortifies the English coastline. It really is Henry that turns England into a genuine island.&quot; He claimed that Henry VIII could be considered the first Brexiteer. As Starkey explained in an interview in 2018, &quot;The Roman Church was a super-national organisation with its own system of law, its own language, governance and own system of taxation. In other words, exactly like the European Union! And it&#x27;s no accident at all that the EU was founded by the Treaty of Rome.&quot; He explains that Henry VIII fought on the grounds of England ruling itself, which is analogous to the Brexit debates.

Starkey argues that &quot;Remainers have somehow got the notion that we get our rights and liberties from Europe&quot; but that, in fact, the English created their own values over their 800-year history. He believes that Brexit was a reaffirmation of those values, but was nevertheless a &quot;deeply irrational vote, not about what will make us better off, but rather, &#x27;we&#x27;ll be poorer, but we&#x27;ll be free.

=== Religion ===

Starkey is an atheist. He has described the Catholic Church as being &quot;riddled with corruption&quot;. However, he has often defended the right for Christians to hold their beliefs, arguing that they should have the right to their views and penalising them for it is &quot;intolerant, oppressive and tyrannical&quot;.

=== Magna Carta ===

Starkey believes the royal charter of rights Magna Carta is of great importance. He has often spoken about it and has written about it most notably in his book &quot;Magna Carta: The True Story Behind the Charter&quot; (2015). He also presented a television documentary on the subject &quot;David Starkey&#x27;s Magna Carta&quot;, in which he argued that Magna Carta is a steadying force for constitutions. He believes that Magna Carta is essential in keeping peace and constraints on the state and the public and says that it is this rather shaky but very important 800 year old document that has led to a &quot;constitutional edifice&quot; developing in the UK.

Starkey often speaks about the political implications of Magna Carta in present-day politics. He believes the modern UK state appears to be fragmenting and would be helped by the core principles of the charter with a new charter of liberties or a new William Marshal figure. In a review of Starkey&#x27;s book on Magna Carta, medieval historian James Masschaele said that Starkey viewed the barons as republican figures.

=== England riots and black culture ===

In August 2011, Starkey attracted criticism for some comments made on the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Newsnight&quot; programme where he was a panel member together with Owen Jones and Dreda Say Mitchell. The programme discussed the 2011 England riots. Starkey condemned &quot;this language which is wholly false, which is this Jamaican patois that&#x27;s been intruded in England, and this is why so many of us have this sense of literally a foreign country&quot;, that listening to the voice of the black MP for Tottenham where the riots occurred &quot;you would think he was white&quot; and that &quot;The whites have become black. A particular sort of violent, destructive, nihilistic, gangster culture.&quot;

The comments were criticised by MPs and some media presenters and described as a &quot;career ending moment&quot;. He was criticised by fellow panellist Dreda Say Mitchell for focusing on &quot;black culture&quot;, since &quot;Black communities are not homogenous. So there are black cultures. Lots of different black cultures.&quot; The then-leader of the Labour Party, Ed Miliband, spoke about Starkey&#x27;s remarks, saying that &quot;they are racist comments, frankly&quot;. The author Toby Young, blogging in the &quot;Telegraph&quot;, defended Starkey by saying that Starkey had not been talking about black culture in general. &quot;The Spectator&quot; columnist Rod Liddle argued in support of the remarks. Jones described the comments as &quot;one of the ugliest episodes of the backlash&quot;. Writing in &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;, Starkey argued his views had been distorted, he referred only to a &quot;particular sort&quot; of &quot;black culture&quot;, and that the &quot;black educationalists&quot; Tony Sewell and Katharine Birbalsingh supported the substance of his &quot;Newsnight&quot; comments.

The BBC received more than 700 complaints (and broadcast regulator Ofcom a further 103) about the comments. A petition to demand a public apology from the BBC attracted more than 3,600 signatures. Ofcom deemed the comments to have been part of a &quot;serious and measured discussion&quot; and took no action, and Starkey described the reaction as &quot;hysteria about race&quot;.

In the aftermath of the &quot;Newsnight&quot; broadcast, 102 university historians wrote an open letter that demanded Starkey no longer be described as a &quot;historian&quot; on anything but his specialist subject, the Tudors. The letter stated that &quot;[h]is crass generalisations about black culture and white culture as oppositional, monolithic entities demonstrate a failure to grasp the subtleties of race and class that would disgrace a first-year history undergraduate.&quot; The letter also criticised his supposed &quot;lack of professionalism&quot; and &quot;some of the worst practices of an academic&quot; in shouting down, belittling, and mocking, opposing views, rather than meeting them with evidence.

=== Other comments on race and British culture ===

In a June 2012 debate Starkey was criticised for stating that the perpetrators of the Rochdale child sex abuse ring had values &quot;entrenched in the foothills of the Punjab or wherever it is&quot; and were &quot;acting within their cultural norm&quot;. He was accused by his fellow panelist writer Laurie Penny, of &quot;playing xenophobia and national prejudice for laughs&quot;. In 2013, he criticised the inclusion of the British-Jamaican nurse Mary Seacole in British school history curriculums, which he argued
unduly promoted her and her work.

In January 2015, Starkey, on a television programme, called political journalist Mehdi Hasan &quot;Ahmed&quot; and said that &quot;nothing important&quot; had been written in Arabic for 500 years. He also appeared to imply that a female victim of a child sexual abuse grooming gang was at fault for the abuse she had experienced. He received a large amount of criticism on Twitter for these comments.

In November 2015, the University of Cambridge dropped a fundraising video featuring Starkey after a backlash from staff and students. A letter signed by hundreds of students and staff criticised Starkey&#x27;s involvement in the video due to him &quot;repeatedly making racist statements&quot;.

In May 2023, speaking to GB News, Starkey expressed his belief that prime minister Rishi Sunak was &quot;not fully grounded in&quot; British culture. When the host, Andrew Pierce, asked him to clarify Starkey confirmed that he attributed this to Sunak&#x27;s Hindu religion. Sunak was born in Southampton, Hampshire. Starkey later denied his comments were racist, saying he was referring to the prime minister being a &quot;typical international liberal&quot; with no interest in British &quot;values&quot;.

=== Black Lives Matter and slavery ===

====2020 comments====

On 30 June 2020, in a podcast interview with Darren Grimes, Starkey spoke about the Black Lives Matter movement. Starkey suggested that people should not &quot;go on about&quot; slavery because it had been abolished in 1833 and that &quot;slavery was not genocide, otherwise there wouldn&#x27;t be so many damn blacks in Africa or in Britain would there? An awful lot of them survived&quot;. He had made the same point in a column eight days earlier except without the use of the word &quot;damn&quot;. Starkey&#x27;s comments were rebuffed by former Chancellor Sajid Javid, who said they were racist and that they serve as &quot;a reminder of the appalling views that still exist&quot;, and they were widely described as racist in the media. Historian David Olusoga, praised by Starkey in the same broadcast, described the comments as &quot;truly disgusting. And by the same ridiculous, twisted logic the Holocaust would not be counted as a genocide&quot;.

As a result, the Mary Rose Trust accepted his resignation from the board of trustees and the Historical Association announced on Twitter that it would withdraw the Medlicott Medal it had awarded him 20 years previously. Fitzwilliam College of Cambridge University distanced themselves from his comments and later accepted his resignation as an honorary fellow on 3 July 2020. Canterbury Christ Church University, where Starkey had been a visiting professor, removed him from that role in response to his &quot;completely unacceptable&quot; remarks. The magazine &quot;History Today&quot; also removed him from their editorial board. Lancaster University revoked Starkey&#x27;s honorary degree after an investigation found that his comments were &quot;racist and contradictory to the values of the University&quot;. The University of Kent launched a formal review of his honorary graduate status. HarperCollins terminated its book deal with Starkey and his previous publisher, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, has also said that they &quot;will not be publishing any further books by him&quot;. Vintage Books announced it would be reviewing the status of books by Starkey in their back catalogue. Also on 3 July 2020, at a meeting of the Royal Historical Society, the society&#x27;s council resolved that Starkey should be asked to resign his fellowship with immediate effect. On 6 July 2020, Starkey resigned his fellowship of the Society of Antiquaries of London at the request of its council.

On 25September 2020, the Metropolitan Police opened an investigation into the interview over an allegation of a public order offence. In October, Starkey was investigated by the police for &quot;stirring up racial hatred&quot; through the comments he made in the podcast with Darren Grimes. In regard to the allegations, Starkey said that he did not &quot;intend to stir up racial hatred and there was nothing about the circumstances of the broadcast which made it likely to do so&quot; and also that the investigation by the police was &quot;neither proportionate nor in the best interests of preserving proper freedom of expression&quot;.

On 14October the police dropped their investigation saying that &quot;it is no longer proportionate that this investigation continues&quot;. This followed a free speech backlash from several major UK politicians such as then Home Secretary Priti Patel who said the law should protect freedom of speech as a &quot;general principle&quot; which should not be violated. Following the news of the ending of the investigation, Starkey said: &quot;The investigation should never of course have begun. From the beginning it was misconceived, oppressive and designed to misuse the criminal law to curtail the proper freedom of expression and debate... freedom is our birthright; and it is more important than ever at this critical juncture in our nation&#x27;s history.&quot;

Grimes and Starkey subsequently launched a formal complaint against the Metropolitan Police accusing them of being biased against them and acting in &quot;deference&quot; to the Black Lives Matter movement.

====2023 comments====

In May 2023 at the National Conservatism Conference, organised by the Edmund Burke Foundation, Starkey said that &quot;white culture&quot; is under threat from the Black Lives Matter movement and proponents of critical race theory who are &quot;not what they pretend to be&quot; and who he described are attempting to destroy &quot;the entire legitimacy of the Western cultural tradition&quot;. He stated that said conservatives had to defend the &quot;uniqueness of the Anglo-American tradition&quot; against &quot;barbarians&quot;.

He disputed the &quot;idea that they are there to defend black lives&quot; as &quot;preposterous&quot;, saying that &quot;they only care about the symbolic destruction of white culture&quot; that they see as &quot;fundamentally morally defective&quot;, comparing it to &quot;exactly what was done to German culture because of Nazism and the Holocaust&quot;.

Starkey commented that &quot;the determination is to replace the Holocaust with slavery&quot; and &quot;this is why Jews are under such attack from the left&quot;, because &quot;there is jealousy of the moral primacy of the Holocaust and a determination to replace it with slavery&quot;.

==Personal life==

Starkey lived for many years with his partner, James Brown, a publisher and book designer, until the latter&#x27;s death in 2015. The couple had three homes: a house in Highbury, a manor house in Kent, and another in Chestertown, Maryland, US. Starkey previously lived at John Spencer Square in Canonbury, Islington.

==Honours==

Starkey was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2007 Birthday Honours for services to history.

===Commonwealth honours===

===Scholastic===



===Memberships and fellowships===

==Awards==

==Work==

===Books===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (published in North America as &quot;Elizabeth: The struggle for the throne&quot;)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (A compilation of &quot;The Monarchy of England: The Beginnings&quot;, &quot;Monarchy: From the Middle Ages to Modernity&quot; and some new material)
* 
* 

===Television===
* &quot;Henry VIII&quot; (1998, revised 2001)
* &quot;Elizabeth&quot; (2000)
* &quot;The Six Wives of Henry VIII&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Edward and Mary: The Unknown Tudors&quot; (2002)
* &quot;David Starkey: Reinventing the Royals&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Monarchy by David Starkey&quot; (2004–2007)
* &quot;Henry VIII: The Mind of a Tyrant&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Kate and William: Romance and the Royals&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Jamie&#x27;s Dream School&quot; (2011)
* &quot;The Churchills&quot; (2012)
* &quot;David Starkey&#x27;s Music and Monarchy&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Britain&#x27;s Tudor Treasure: A Night at Hampton Court&quot;, co-presented with Lucy Worsley (2015)
* &quot;David Starkey&#x27;s Magna Carta&quot; (2015)
* &quot;Reformation: Europe&#x27;s Holy War&quot; (2017)

===Applications===
* &quot;Kings and Queens by David Starkey&quot; for iPhone and iPad (2011)

==References==
;Footnotes
;Notes
===Further reading===

==External links==

* &quot;Dr David Starkey, CBE, FSA Authorised Biography&quot;, &quot;Debrett&#x27;s People of Today&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1176720" start="0" end="20" title="David Starkey" label="David Robert Starkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="57" end="66" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="132" end="144" title="conservative" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="164" end="170" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15238582" start="192" end="213" title="Kirkbie Kendal School" label="Kendal Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="240" end="249" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q188823" start="255" end="266" title="scholarship" label="scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q101978" start="292" end="305" title="House of Tudor" label="Tudor history"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="327" end="342" title="King Henry VIII" label="King Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="393" end="419" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="594" end="605" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752224" start="629" end="643" title="The Moral Maze" label="The Moral Maze"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="767" end="780" title="Question Time (TV programme)" label="Question Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="937" end="946" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146521" start="1036" end="1061" title="Jamie&amp;#x27;s Dream School" label="Jamie&amp;#x27;s Dream School"/>
<link wikidata="Q60297962" start="1089" end="1097" title="cancel culture" label="censured"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="1129" end="1136" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q55973808" start="1152" end="1165" title="Darren Grimes" label="Darren Grimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q797897" start="1315" end="1334" title="Fitzwilliam College" label="Fitzwilliam College"/>
<link wikidata="Q955824" start="1427" end="1444" title="learned societies" label="learned societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126380" start="1464" end="1479" title="Medlicott Medal" label="Medlicott Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q994575" start="1561" end="1567" title="Kendal" label="Kendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23326" start="1569" end="1580" title="Westmorland" label="Westmorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="1637" end="1644" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q184579" start="1684" end="1690" title="Bolton" label="Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504247" start="1697" end="1718" title="Friends meeting house" label="Friends meeting house"/>
<link wikidata="Q202628" start="1933" end="1939" title="Oldham" label="Oldham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599058" start="1984" end="2000" title="Great Depression in the United Kingdom" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q192343" start="2498" end="2507" title="Pygmalion (mythology)" label="Pygmalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162164" start="2827" end="2836" title="club feet" label="club feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="2934" end="2939" title="polio" label="polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="2955" end="2972" title="nervous breakdown" label="nervous breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q868647" start="3054" end="3063" title="Southport" label="Southport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15238582" start="3247" end="3268" title="Kirkbie Kendal School" label="Kendal Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q797897" start="3455" end="3485" title="Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge" label="Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="3576" end="3591" title="King Henry VIII" label="King Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q101978" start="3632" end="3637" title="House of Tudor" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="3689" end="3698" title="Professor" label="Professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q89433" start="3699" end="3717" title="Geoffrey Elton" label="Sir Geoffrey Elton"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="4413" end="4439" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="4823" end="4832" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="4950" end="4953" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="5098" end="5109" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752224" start="5133" end="5147" title="The Moral Maze" label="The Moral Maze"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="5216" end="5221" title="Rabbi" label="Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946853" start="5222" end="5231" title="Hugo Gryn" label="Hugo Gryn"/>
<link wikidata="Q445939" start="5237" end="5250" title="Roger Scruton" label="Roger Scruton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153282" start="5270" end="5281" title="Janet Daley" label="Janet Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="5550" end="5560" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q30122770" start="5850" end="5863" title="George Austin (priest)" label="George Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561941" start="5869" end="5887" title="Archdeacon of York" label="Archdeacon of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679885" start="6131" end="6144" title="Talk Radio UK" label="Talk Radio UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q332360" start="6245" end="6257" title="Denis Healey" label="Denis Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476957" start="6586" end="6604" title="Granada Television" label="Granada Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381550" start="6645" end="6658" title="Russell Harty" label="Russell Harty"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="6734" end="6745" title="Richard III" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q648580" start="6804" end="6824" title="Princes in the Tower" label="Princes in the Tower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6904" end="6931" title="The Six Wives of Henry VIII (2001 TV series)" label="The Six Wives of Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="6942" end="6953" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="7128" end="7137" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7189" end="7197" title="Monarchy (TV series)" label="Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965541" start="7363" end="7374" title="Brian Viner" label="Brian Viner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647471" start="7468" end="7478" title="A. A. Gill" label="A. A. Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461827" start="7589" end="7600" title="Radio Times" label="Radio Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698586" start="7897" end="7909" title="Lucy Worsley" label="Lucy Worsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445958" start="8152" end="8190" title="Fellow of the Royal Historical Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417893" start="8205" end="8251" title="Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London" label="Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q797897" start="8315" end="8334" title="Fitzwilliam College" label="Fitzwilliam College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516684" start="8415" end="8433" title="University of Kent" label="University of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q528231" start="8463" end="8487" title="Goldsmiths&amp;#x27; College" label="Goldsmiths&amp;#x27; College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="8733" end="8744" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="8794" end="8806" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="8954" end="8964" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164394" start="9350" end="9361" title="Penny Junor" label="Penny Junor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12213812" start="9387" end="9399" title="Robert Lacey" label="Robert Lacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204981" start="9551" end="9574" title="The Marc Fitch Lectures" label="The Marc Fitch Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="9710" end="9716" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="9829" end="9849" title="James Callaghan" label="Callaghan government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728959" start="9872" end="9895" title="one-nation conservatism" label="one-nation conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="9914" end="9923" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="9924" end="9938" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="9939" end="9956" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="10169" end="10182" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="10203" end="10216" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="10244" end="10255" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q541576" start="10352" end="10366" title="Anglosphere" label="Anglo-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="10458" end="10471" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="10480" end="10492" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="10532" end="10539" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="10623" end="10632" title="James Callaghan" label="Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="10736" end="10754" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q205817" start="10803" end="10812" title="London Borough of Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q325381" start="10960" end="10974" title="Michael Howard" label="Michael Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q325381" start="11003" end="11017" title="Michael Howard" label="Michael Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="11206" end="11216" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="11377" end="11389" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779723" start="11407" end="11425" title="Kenneth Widmerpool" label="Kenneth Widmerpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q216594" start="11539" end="11550" title="Ed Miliband" label="Ed Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195226" start="11741" end="11770" title="Conservative Party Conference" label="Conservative Party Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="11811" end="11816" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="11817" end="11830" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="11889" end="11902" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="12146" end="12156" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q332493" start="12158" end="12172" title="George Osborne" label="George Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q980036" start="12397" end="12437" title="Federalism in the United States" label="federal system used by the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980420" start="12469" end="12478" title="Iain Dale" label="Iain Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="12512" end="12520" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="12526" end="12531" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="12536" end="12550" title="Prince Charles" label="Prince Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788922" start="12573" end="12603" title="UK Alternative Vote referendum" label="UK Alternative Vote referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="12738" end="12757" title="UK House of Commons" label="UK House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q391960" start="13135" end="13147" title="Damian Green" label="Damian Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q464103" start="13183" end="13194" title="Speaker of the House of Commons (United Kingdom)" label="the Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454937" start="13203" end="13219" title="Serjeant at Arms of the House of Commons (United Kingdom)" label="Serjeant at Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q24060532" start="13311" end="13348" title="Tory Campaign for Homosexual Equality" label="Tory Campaign for Homosexual Equality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13430" end="13443" title="Question Time (TV programme)" label="Question Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q313489" start="13462" end="13476" title="Jeffrey Archer" label="Jeffrey Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033330" start="13600" end="13617" title="same-sex marriage in the United Kingdom" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929110" start="13709" end="13721" title="Michael Russell (Scottish politician)" label="Mike Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="14085" end="14096" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q10652" start="14202" end="14214" title="Alex Salmond" label="Alex Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="14449" end="14461" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="14572" end="14596" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="referendum on that issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="14637" end="14653" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="14681" end="14704" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="14720" end="14730" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q201960" start="14786" end="14793" title="saltire" label="saltire"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="14801" end="14809" title="swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q309070" start="14883" end="14890" title="autarky" label="autarky"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874839" start="15038" end="15052" title="Kirsten Oswald" label="Kirsten Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="15289" end="15303" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="15346" end="15351" title="Brexit" label="Leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="15370" end="15388" title="2016 EU referendum" label="2016 EU referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241" start="15610" end="15624" title="national pride" label="national pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="15629" end="15640" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="15646" end="15656" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15882" end="15895" title="World War Two" label="World War Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="15918" end="15929" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="16022" end="16028" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="16149" end="16159" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="16191" end="16202" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="16265" end="16279" title="Euroscepticism" label="Euroscepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q78844648" start="16774" end="16783" title="Glossary of Brexit terms" label="Brexiteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q167457" start="17086" end="17100" title="Treaty of Rome" label="Treaty of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q78844648" start="17253" end="17261" title="Remainer" label="Remainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="17712" end="17727" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="17819" end="17829" title="Christianity" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="18032" end="18045" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="18056" end="18067" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18177" end="18223" title="Magna Carta: The True Story Behind the Charter" label="Magna Carta: The True Story Behind the Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="18403" end="18415" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q348911" start="18927" end="18942" title="William Marshal" label="William Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25869" start="19230" end="19239" title="Newsnight" label="Newsnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518861" start="19298" end="19308" title="Owen Jones" label="Owen Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306837" start="19313" end="19331" title="Dreda Say Mitchell" label="Dreda Say Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q29065" start="19361" end="19379" title="2011 England riots" label="2011 England riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="19456" end="19463" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q534727" start="19635" end="19651" title="David Lammy" label="MP for Tottenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q216594" start="20214" end="20225" title="Ed Miliband" label="Ed Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992122" start="20333" end="20343" title="Toby Young" label="Toby Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790750" start="20483" end="20496" title="The Spectator" label="The Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356281" start="20513" end="20523" title="Rod Liddle" label="Rod Liddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q97467298" start="20863" end="20874" title="Tony Sewell" label="Tony Sewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736052" start="20879" end="20900" title="Katharine Birbalsingh" label="Katharine Birbalsingh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="21032" end="21037" title="Ofcom" label="Ofcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q697279" start="21075" end="21083" title="petition" label="petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353825" start="22206" end="22235" title="Rochdale child sex abuse ring" label="Rochdale child sex abuse ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="22288" end="22294" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5414163" start="22420" end="22432" title="Laurie Penny" label="Laurie Penny"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="22451" end="22461" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970177" start="22547" end="22563" title="British Jamaicans" label="British-Jamaican"/>
<link wikidata="Q963703" start="22570" end="22582" title="Mary Seacole" label="Mary Seacole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809310" start="22754" end="22765" title="Mehdi Hasan" label="Mehdi Hasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="22848" end="22854" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716206" start="22959" end="23001" title="victim blaming" label="at fault for the abuse she had experienced"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="23097" end="23120" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q100300992" start="23396" end="23403" title="GB News" label="GB News"/>
<link wikidata="Q20055561" start="23454" end="23465" title="Rishi Sunak" label="Rishi Sunak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758274" start="23536" end="23549" title="Andrew Pierce" label="Andrew Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="23630" end="23635" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="23664" end="23675" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q55973808" start="23988" end="24001" title="Darren Grimes" label="Darren Grimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600530" start="24027" end="24045" title="Black Lives Matter" label="Black Lives Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q727798" start="24505" end="24516" title="Sajid Javid" label="Sajid Javid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086136" start="24696" end="24709" title="David Olusoga" label="David Olusoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="24849" end="24858" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431969" start="24919" end="24934" title="Mary Rose Trust" label="Mary Rose Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773836" start="24995" end="25017" title="Historical Association" label="Historical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="25031" end="25038" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126380" start="25066" end="25081" title="Medlicott Medal" label="Medlicott Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q797897" start="25122" end="25141" title="Fitzwilliam College" label="Fitzwilliam College"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="25145" end="25165" title="Cambridge University" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182956" start="25278" end="25313" title="Canterbury Christ Church University" label="Canterbury Christ Church University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138561" start="25470" end="25483" title="History Today" label="History Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q262854" start="25535" end="25555" title="Lancaster University" label="Lancaster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516684" start="25721" end="25739" title="University of Kent" label="University of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="25772" end="25789" title="Honorary degree" label="honorary graduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="25798" end="25811" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q14175176" start="25878" end="25900" title="Hodder &amp;amp; Stoughton" label="Hodder &amp;amp; Stoughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560313" start="25987" end="26000" title="Vintage Books" label="Vintage Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445958" start="26130" end="26154" title="Royal Historical Society" label="Royal Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417893" start="26324" end="26356" title="Society of Antiquaries of London" label="Society of Antiquaries of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="26414" end="26433" title="Metropolitan Police" label="Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923459" start="26501" end="26521" title="public order offence" label="public order offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="27256" end="27270" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q575733" start="27271" end="27282" title="Priti Patel" label="Priti Patel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="27315" end="27332" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="27872" end="27891" title="Metropolitan Police" label="Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q118444745" start="28050" end="28082" title="National Conservatism Conference" label="National Conservatism Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662371" start="28101" end="28124" title="Edmund Burke Foundation" label="Edmund Burke Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186753" start="28241" end="28261" title="critical race theory" label="critical race theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q124394" start="29402" end="29410" title="Highbury" label="Highbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="29414" end="29425" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="29429" end="29433" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q755851" start="29450" end="29471" title="Chestertown, Maryland" label="Chestertown, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q110124028" start="29505" end="29524" title="John Spencer Square" label="John Spencer Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="29586" end="29630" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608076" start="29644" end="29665" title="2007 Birthday Honours" label="2007 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764565" start="30182" end="30209" title="The Six Wives of Henry VIII (documentary)" label="The Six Wives of Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898055" start="30347" end="30372" title="Monarchy (TV series)" label="Monarchy by David Starkey"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30399" end="30431" title="Henry VIII: The Mind of a Tyrant" label="Henry VIII: The Mind of a Tyrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146521" start="30515" end="30540" title="Jamie&amp;#x27;s Dream School" label="Jamie&amp;#x27;s Dream School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954121" start="30562" end="30576" title="The Churchills (TV series)" label="The Churchills"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30598" end="30637" title="David Starkey&amp;#x27;s Music and Monarchy" label="David Starkey&amp;#x27;s Music and Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698586" start="30740" end="30752" title="Lucy Worsley" label="Lucy Worsley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211643" wikidata="Q978564" url="?curid=211643" title="William Wycherley">
<text>William Wycherley (April 16411 January 1716) was an English Army officer and playwright best known for writing the plays &quot;The Country Wife&quot; and &quot;The Plain Dealer&quot;.

==Early life==
Wycherley was born at Clive near Shrewsbury, Shropshire, at a house called Clive Hall, although his birthplace has also been said (by Lionel Cust) to be Trench Farm to the north near Wem , later the birthplace of another writer, John Ireland, who was said to have been adopted by Wycherley&#x27;s widow following the death of Ireland&#x27;s parents. He was baptised on 8 April, 1641, at Whitchurch, Hampshire. He was the son of Daniel Wycherley (1617–1697) and his wife Bethia, daughter of William Shrimpton. His family was settled on a moderate estate of about £600 a year, and his father was in the business service of the Marquess of Winchester. Wycherley lived during much of his childhood at Trench Farm, one of his paternal family&#x27;s Shropshire properties, and also probably in his earliest years at Whitchurch Farm, which his father leased until 1649, in Hampshire.

After being educated at home, he spent three years of his adolescence in France, where he was sent to be educated at the age of fifteen. While in France, Wycherley converted to Roman Catholicism. He returned to England shortly before the restoration of King Charles II and lived at The Queen&#x27;s College, Oxford, where Thomas Barlow was provost. Under Barlow&#x27;s influence, Wycherley returned to the Church of England. Wycherley left Oxford and took up residence at the Inner Temple, which he initially entered in October 1659, but he gave little attention to studying law and ceased to live there after 1670. He served in Ireland in 1662 as a soldier with the Earl of Ancram&#x27;s Regiment of Guards. During 1664–65 he was attached on a diplomatic mission by Sir Richard Fanshawe in Madrid, and he claimed to have fought in the Second Anglo-Dutch War in 1665.

==First two plays and Third Anglo-Dutch War==

Wycherley&#x27;s play, &quot;Love in a Wood&quot;, was produced in early 1671 at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. It was published the following year. Wycherley claimed to have written the play at the age of nineteen (in 1660 or 1661) before going to Oxford, but Thomas Macaulay points to the allusions in the play to gentlemen&#x27;s periwigs, to guineas, to the vests that King Charles II ordered to be worn at court, to the Great Fire of London, etc. as showing that the comedy could not have been written the year before Wycherley went to Oxford.

Wycherley was commissioned on 19 June 1672 during the Third Anglo-Dutch War as a captain lieutenant in a company of the English Army&#x27;s 4th (The Holland) Regiment raised by the Duke of Buckingham. He was sent on an expedition that ended with his company being stationed on the Isle of Wight to counter potential Dutch landings there in July 1673. Wycherley was promoted to the rank of captain on 26 February 1674, but resigned his commission on 6 March and returned home. His time in the Army was plagued by difficulties obtaining pay and supplies for his troops, some of whom after his departure complained of &quot;ill-usage&quot; at Wycherley&#x27;s hands.

==Last two plays==
&quot;The Country Wife&quot; was produced in 1672 or 1673 and published in 1675. The play reflects an aristocratic and anti-Puritan ideology and was controversial for its sexual explicitness. The title itself contains a lewd pun on the first syllable of &quot;country&quot;. The play is based on several plays by Molière, with additions to suit the tastes of 1670s London audiences: colloquial prose dialogue in place of Molière&#x27;s verse, a complicated, fast-paced plot tangle, and many sex jokes. It uses two plot devices: a rake&#x27;s trick of pretending impotence to avoid suspicion while having clandestine affairs with married women, and the arrival in London of an inexperienced young &quot;country wife&quot;, with her discovery of the joys of town life, especially London men.

&quot;The Plain Dealer&quot;, based on Molière&#x27;s &quot;Le Misanthrope&quot;, was highly praised by John Dryden and John Dennis, though it was also condemned for its obscenity by many. The title character is Captain Manly, a sailor who doubts the motives of everyone he meets except for his sweetheart, Olivia, and his friend, Vernish. When Olivia jilts him and marries Vernish, Captain Manly attempts to gain revenge by sending a pageboy (who, unknown to him, is a girl in disguise and is in love with him) to seduce Olivia. When the truth of the page&#x27;s identity is discovered, Manly marries her instead.

Wycherley had no title or wealth, but by 1675 he had been admitted to the inner court circle, sharing the conversation and sometimes the mistresses of King Charles II, who &quot;was extremely fond of him upon account of his wit&quot;. In 1679, Charles engaged Wycherley as tutor for his bastard son, the Duke of Richmond, born in 1672.

==First marriage==
In the spring of 1678, while in a bookshop at Tunbridge Wells, Wycherley heard &quot;The Plain Dealer&quot; asked for by the Countess of Drogheda (Letitia Isabella Robartes, eldest daughter of the 1st Earl of Radnor and widow of the 2nd Earl of Drogheda). They married on 29 September, 1679, in secret because Wycherley feared losing his income from the King&#x27;s patronage. The King was displeased when he learned of Wycherley&#x27;s secret marriage and ended his tutorship of the Duke of Richmond.

The Countess died by July 1685, leaving Wycherley her fortune. However, the title to her property was disputed and the costs of the litigation were so heavy that Wycherley&#x27;s father was either unable or unwilling to financially aid him. He was imprisoned in Fleet Prison as a debtor until he was released by King James II, who paid off Wycherley&#x27;s execution creditor and provided Wycherley a pension of £200 a year. In 1689, Wycherley fled back to Shropshire after the accession of King William III displaced James II. He feuded with his father over his debts but eventually achieved a settlement to pay off £1,000 of them, enabling him to return to London.

==Later life==

Wycherley still had other debts, and they were not paid off even after he succeeded to a life estate in the family property at Clive after his father&#x27;s death in 1697. He took a mortgage of £1000 from lands there to pay further debts and continued to live in London, only calling on the estate to collect rents.

At the age of 74, in poor health, and by special licence dated 20 December, 1715, he married young Elizabeth Jackson, who was the mistress of Wycherley&#x27;s cousin, Thomas Shrimpton, who had collusively and somewhat coercively introduced her to Wycherley. Wycherley was said to have married in order to spite his nephew, the next in succession, knowing that he would shortly die and that the jointure would impoverish the estate. After receiving last rites as an acknowledged Roman Catholic, (which he professed to be in letter to the young Alexander Pope) Wycherley died at his lodging house in Bow Street, London, in the early hours of 1 January, 1716, and was buried in the vault of St. Paul&#x27;s, Covent Garden, on 5 January.

There was a lawsuit by Wycherley&#x27;s nephew to overturn the validity of the marriage, but the marriage was upheld on the grounds that Wycherley was sane at the time. Three months after Wycherley&#x27;s death, Elizabeth Jackson married Thomas Shrimpton.

==Legacy==
The language and content of Wycherley&#x27;s plays led to the restriction of their publication and performance for nearly two centuries, and over most of that time the original versions were replaced with bowdlerised versions, such as an adaptation of &quot;The Plain Dealer&quot; by Isaac Bickerstaffe and a version of &quot;The Country Girl&quot; by David Garrick.

The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; cites Wycherley as the first user of the phrase &quot;happy-go-lucky&quot;, in 1672.

Voltaire was a great admirer of Wycherley&#x27;s plays and once said of them, &quot;&quot; (It seems that the Englishmen take too much liberty and the Frenchwomen don&#x27;t take enough).

In 1952, composer Malcolm Arnold and librettist Joe Mandoza turned &quot;The Gentleman Dancing Master&quot; into a one-act opera called &quot;The Dancing Master&quot;. It was originally intended as a television opera, but was rejected as &quot;too racy&quot; and had its first fully staged performance in 2015.

==Notes==
==References==
*
*

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q978564" start="0" end="17" title="William Wycherley" label="William Wycherley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378171" start="52" end="64" title="English Army" label="English Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q734639" start="127" end="143" title="The Country Wife" label="The Country Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203701" start="160" end="176" title="The Plain Dealer (play)" label="The Plain Dealer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254403" start="222" end="227" title="Clive, Shropshire" label="Clive"/>
<link wikidata="Q201970" start="233" end="243" title="Shrewsbury" label="Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555603" start="334" end="345" title="Lionel Cust" label="Lionel Cust"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="383" end="387" title="Wem " label="Wem "/>
<link wikidata="Q1700559" start="429" end="441" title="John Ireland (writer)" label="John Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q632258" start="587" end="608" title="Whitchurch, Hampshire" label="Whitchurch, Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411940" start="825" end="847" title="Marquess of Winchester" label="Marquess of Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1151" end="1157" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1255" end="1272" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="1331" end="1346" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q73094" start="1360" end="1392" title="The Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="The Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787391" start="1400" end="1413" title="Thomas Barlow (bishop)" label="Thomas Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1484" end="1501" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233784" start="1554" end="1566" title="Inner Temple" label="Inner Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="1707" end="1714" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q947693" start="1845" end="1865" title="Sir Richard Fanshawe, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Richard Fanshawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="1869" end="1875" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q916495" start="1914" end="1936" title="Second Anglo-Dutch War" label="Second Anglo-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q108083660" start="2023" end="2037" title="Love in a Wood (play)" label="Love in a Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756626" start="2079" end="2092" title="Theatre Royal, Drury Lane" label="Theatre Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261392" start="2094" end="2104" title="Drury Lane" label="Drury Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q315989" start="2255" end="2270" title="Thomas Macaulay" label="Thomas Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q105507" start="2327" end="2334" title="periwig" label="periwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q918094" start="2340" end="2347" title="Guinea (coin)" label="guineas"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="2419" end="2439" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342568" start="2598" end="2619" title="Third Anglo-Dutch War" label="Third Anglo-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561545" start="2625" end="2643" title="captain lieutenant" label="captain lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378171" start="2664" end="2676" title="English Army" label="English Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899477" start="2684" end="2710" title="Buffs (Royal East Kent Regiment)" label="4th (The Holland) Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q336101" start="2725" end="2743" title="George Villiers, 2nd Duke of Buckingham" label="Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="2825" end="2838" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="3330" end="3342" title="Aristocracy" label="aristocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="3352" end="3359" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q687" start="3541" end="3548" title="Molière" label="Molière"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286558" start="3758" end="3762" title="Rake (character)" label="rake"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="3790" end="3799" title="impotence" label="impotence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053387" start="4079" end="4093" title="Le Misanthrope" label="Le Misanthrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="4123" end="4134" title="John Dryden" label="John Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q326716" start="4139" end="4150" title="John Dennis (dramatist)" label="John Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q625369" start="4772" end="4782" title="Mistress (lover)" label="mistresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q938207" start="4939" end="4955" title="Charles Lennox, 1st Duke of Richmond" label="Duke of Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q665489" start="5037" end="5052" title="Tunbridge Wells" label="Tunbridge Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255053" start="5188" end="5206" title="John Robartes, 1st Earl of Radnor" label="1st Earl of Radnor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326259" start="5228" end="5244" title="Earl of Drogheda" label="Earl of Drogheda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427716" start="5756" end="5768" title="Fleet Prison" label="Fleet Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="5985" end="6001" title="William III of Great Britain" label="King William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254403" start="6305" end="6310" title="Clive, Shropshire" label="Clive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12809489" start="6536" end="6551" title="Marriage license" label="special licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269581" start="6889" end="6897" title="jointure" label="jointure"/>
<link wikidata="Q164047" start="7038" end="7052" title="Alexander Pope" label="Alexander Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922699" start="7093" end="7103" title="Bow Street" label="Bow Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q385521" start="7183" end="7213" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s, Covent Garden" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s, Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333546" start="7703" end="7714" title="Thomas Bowdler" label="bowdlerised"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575474" start="7782" end="7800" title="Isaac Bickerstaffe" label="Isaac Bickerstaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q222390" start="7850" end="7863" title="David Garrick" label="David Garrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="7876" end="7901" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="7994" end="8002" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q313554" start="8201" end="8215" title="Malcolm Arnold" label="Malcolm Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865477" start="8325" end="8343" title="The Dancing Master (opera)" label="The Dancing Master"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211644" wikidata="Q475510" url="?curid=211644" title="Intestinal parasite infection">
<text>An intestinal parasite infection is a condition in which a parasite infects the gastro-intestinal tract of humans and other animals. Such parasites can live anywhere in the body, but most prefer the intestinal wall.

Routes of exposure and infection include ingestion of undercooked meat, drinking infected water, fecal–oral transmission and skin absorption.

Some types of helminths and protozoa are classified as intestinal parasites that cause infection—those that reside in the intestines. These infections can damage or sicken the host (humans or other animals). If the intestinal parasite infection is caused by helminths, the infection is called helminthiasis.

==Signs and symptoms==
Signs and symptoms depend on the type of infection. Intestinal parasites produce a variety of symptoms in those affected, most of which manifest themselves in gastrointestinal complications and general weakness. Gastrointestinal conditions include inflammation of the small and/or large intestine, diarrhea/dysentery, abdominal pains, and nausea/vomiting. These symptoms negatively impact nutritional status, including decreased absorption of micronutrients, loss of appetite, weight loss, and intestinal blood loss that can often result in anemia. It may also cause physical and mental disabilities, delayed growth in children, and skin irritation around the anus and vulva.

== Cause ==
The prevalence of intestinal parasites is the highest among children that are living in the poorest communities in developing nations. The most common causes of intestinal parasites are through consumption of contaminated water, infected soil, inadequate sanitation and hygiene, and improper hygiene. Specifically, lack of access to facilities for safe disposal of human waste can result in intestinal parasites and disease. Poor hygiene habits or lacking available hygiene resources, such as hand washing facilities, also negatively impact rates of disease. Parasitic contamination can also occur from eating raw produce, soil-eating behaviour, and low availability of safe drinking water.

Parasites can get into the intestines by going through the mouth from uncooked or unwashed food, contaminated water or hands, or by skin contact with larva infected soil; they can also be transferred by the sexual act of anilingus in some cases. When the organisms are swallowed, they move into the intestines, where they can reproduce and cause symptoms. Children are particularly susceptible if they are not thoroughly cleaned after coming into contact with infected soil that is present in environments that they may frequently visit such as sandboxes and school playgrounds. People in developing countries are also at particular risk due to drinking water from sources that may be contaminated with parasites that colonize the gastrointestinal tract.

== Diagnosis ==

Due to the wide variety of intestinal parasites, a description of the symptoms rarely is sufficient for diagnosis. Instead, medical personnel use one of two common tests: they search stool samples for the parasites, or apply an adhesive to the anus to search for eggs.
===Types===
Major groups of parasites include protozoans (organisms having only one cell) and parasitic worms (helminths). Of these, protozoans, including cryptosporidium, microsporidia, and isospora, are most common in HIV-infected persons. Each of these parasites can infect the digestive tract, and sometimes two or more can cause infection at the same time.

==Prevention==
Good hygiene is necessary to avoid reinfection. The Rockefeller Foundation&#x27;s hookworm campaign in Mexico in the 1920s was extremely effective at eliminating hookworm from humans with the use of anthelmintics. However, preventative measures were not adequately introduced to the people that were treated. Therefore, the rate of reinfection was extremely high and the project evaluated through any sort of scientific method was a marked failure. More education was needed to inform the people of the importance of wearing shoes, using latrines (better access to sanitation), and good hygiene.

Intestinal parasite prevention methods are not isolated to specific geographical areas; however, many of the research-based interventions have primarily taken place in underdeveloped countries and regions, where sanitation is a large concern for spreading disease.Current best practice behaviors that prevent intestinal parasites include: using proper hand washing practices, using correctly-built latrines with ample ventilation, having a piped water source, and wearing shoes. Currently, in some parts of Ethiopia where disease prevalence is high, up to 80% of people in a population lack access to washing facilities. While this is high, 93% did have access to a latrine, but only 29.2% of those latrines had proper construction to decrease parasitic infections. Behavioral interventions have focused on promoting washing, sometimes with soap, in context of education at schools and child care facilities. In recent studies, the best interventions follow a multidisciplinary approach by:
* Increasing environmental sanitation to promote hand washing and shoe wearing habits
* Educating children at young ages at school and at home
Specific evidence-based interventions that may lower disease prevalence include:
* Interventions at schools, focusing on the construction of pit latrines (ventilated and improved), providing clean drinking water and educating the students about hygiene
* The SAFE (surgery, antibiotics, facial cleanliness, environmental sanitation) strategy to address trachoma, primarily the facial cleanliness and the environmental sanitation components
* Hand-washing with soap at critical times and nail clipping to decrease reinfection rates, although further research is needed to develop and implement similar interventions at scale
* Programs combining anthelmintic drug administration with interventions to increase environmental sanitation (such as decreasing fecal contamination)

== Treatment ==
Drugs are frequently used to kill parasites in the host. In earlier times, turpentine was often used for this, but modern drugs do not poison intestinal worms directly. Rather, anthelmintic drugs now inhibit an enzyme that is necessary for the worm to make the substance that prevents the worm from being digested.

For example, tapeworms are usually treated with a medicine taken by mouth. The most commonly used medicine for tapeworms is praziquantel.
== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q475510" start="3" end="32" title="Intestinal parasite infection" label="intestinal parasite infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="59" end="67" title="parasite" label="parasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="80" end="103" title="gastro-intestinal tract" label="gastro-intestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272069" start="314" end="337" title="fecal–oral transmission" label="fecal–oral transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129936" start="374" end="383" title="helminths" label="helminths"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="388" end="396" title="protozoa" label="protozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="482" end="492" title="intestines" label="intestines"/>
<link wikidata="Q578994" start="653" end="666" title="helminthiasis" label="helminthiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="940" end="952" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q854353" start="960" end="965" title="Enteritis" label="small"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453464" start="973" end="988" title="Colitis" label="large intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="990" end="998" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="999" end="1008" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="1010" end="1024" title="abdominal pain" label="abdominal pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="1031" end="1037" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="1038" end="1046" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q531507" start="1135" end="1148" title="micronutrient" label="micronutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="1233" end="1239" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q407784" start="1293" end="1307" title="delayed growth" label="delayed growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q552461" start="1874" end="1886" title="hand washing" label="hand washing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349107" start="2004" end="2025" title="Geophagia" label="soil-eating behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="2183" end="2188" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259911" start="2205" end="2209" title="Human skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="2223" end="2228" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="2238" end="2242" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q210749" start="2294" end="2303" title="anilingus" label="anilingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q497" start="3090" end="3094" title="anus" label="anus"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="3161" end="3170" title="protozoan" label="protozoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129936" start="3209" end="3223" title="helminths" label="parasitic worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q133078" start="3270" end="3285" title="cryptosporidium" label="cryptosporidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q132652" start="3287" end="3300" title="microsporidia" label="microsporidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154157" start="3306" end="3314" title="isospora" label="isospora"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="3335" end="3338" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="3541" end="3567" title="The Rockefeller Foundation" label="The Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q572294" start="3692" end="3704" title="anthelmintic" label="anthelmintic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615741" start="4031" end="4039" title="latrines" label="latrines"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="4058" end="4068" title="sanitation" label="sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193216" start="5577" end="5585" title="trachoma" label="trachoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q201382" start="6091" end="6101" title="turpentine" label="turpentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280912" start="6345" end="6353" title="tapeworm" label="tapeworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q424145" start="6456" end="6468" title="praziquantel" label="praziquantel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211646" wikidata="Q1280722" url="?curid=211646" title="Catboat">
<text>A catboat (alternate spelling: cat boat) is a sailboat with a single sail on a single mast set well forward in the bow of a very beamy and (usually) shallow draft hull. Typically they are gaff rigged, though Bermuda rig is also used. Most are fitted with a centreboard, although some have a keel. The hull can be long with a beam half as wide as the hull length at the waterline. The type is mainly found on that part of the Eastern seaboard of the USA from New Jersey to Massachusetts.

Advantages of this sail plan include the economies derived from a rig with a limited number of component parts. It is quick to hoist sail and get underway. The cat rig sails well to windward, especially in calmer water. As a working boat, the forward mast placement gave ample room in the cockpit for fishing gear. Cruising versions can provide a large usable cabin space in a relatively short hull.

Disadvantages of the rig include the limited deck space around the mast, which can be problematical when raising or lowering sail, or when reefing; halyards are often led back to the cockpit, so partially mitigating this problem. It is usually wise to reef early in a rising wind to avoid an excess of weather helm. The weight of the mast in the bow has to be allowed for in the hull design – if this is got wrong the bow may be &quot;buried&quot; when sailing downwind. The narrow beam where the mast is stepped makes it difficult to gain any benefit from shrouds, so the mast has to be stronger, and so heavier. Despite the simplicity of the rig, a good level of skill is required to design a balanced catboat, since there are limited options to correct any slight errors.

Some catboat one-design classes in current use include the Beetle Cat, the Redden Catboat, the Nonsuch, the Inland Cat, the Zijlsloep, the Cape Cod Cat, Com-Pac Trailerable, Marshall, Menger, and the APBY cat boat.

From the 1850s to the early 1900s catboats were the dominant inshore boat on the New England coast, both for work and for pleasure. They were used for fishing and coastal transportation. Their popularity declined in the commercial world where they were replaced by motorized boats. In boat racing the tendency was for larger sails, which favored other rigging styles.
A typical New England style has a very long boom that extends over the transom and may carry foresails stayed from a bowsprit.

==History==
Around the turn of the 20th century, catboats were adapted for racing, and long booms and gaffs, bowsprits and large jibs were fitted to capture as much wind as possible. The decline of racing and advent of small, efficient gasoline engines eliminated the need for large sail plans, and catboats today are used as pleasure craft for day sailing and cruising, and have the virtues of roominess, stability and simple handling.

It is generally accepted that the origin of the catboat type was in New York around 1840 and from there spread east and south as the virtues of the type — simplicity, ease of handling, shallow draft, large capacity — were discovered. Historically, they were used for fishing and transport in the coastal waters around Cape Cod, Narragansett Bay, New York and New Jersey. Some were fitted with bowsprits for swordfishing and others were used as &#x27;party boats&#x27; with canvas-sided, wood-framed summer cabins that could be rolled up.

One of the most well-known catboats is the Beetle Cat daysailer. Fleets of these one-design boats are found in harbors all across New England, often competing in races. In the 1960s, Breck Marshall based his fiberglass &quot;Sanderling&quot; upon an existing, wooden design. The &quot;Sanderling&quot; has since become a very popular boat, with more than 700 built, and it has helped to rekindle interest in the catboat. To honor Marshall and his contribution to the type, the Catboat Association funded the construction of the &quot;Breck Marshall&quot;, a catboat built and berthed at Mystic Seaport.

==Features==
Designer Fenwick Williams summarized the original design philosophy as: &quot;The ample beam made the use of stone ballast feasible … the high bow provided good support for the unstayed mast … the barn door rudder provided adequate strength … high coamings served to keep water out of the large open cockpit … side decks provided a handy ledge on which to set a lobster trap.&quot;

Modern catboat fans appreciate the catboat&#x27;s traditional design and classic appearance and the features that make it a versatile recreational boat:
simplicity, large capacity, shallow draft, stability, and safety in a boat that is easy to sail.

==Catboats in Europe==
===Great Britain and Ireland===
In 1851, during the &#x27;Great Exhibition&#x27; a Catboat called &#x27;The Una&#x27; was put on display at The Serpentine, Hyde Park. She was seen by Dixon Kemp who was much impressed with her. After &#x27;Una&#x27; sailed at Cowes, she impressed many of the sailors who built a fleet of them. After 1907 &#x27;Una&#x27; raced at the Upper Thames yacht Club.

In Bray, Co. Wicklow, south of Dublin a fleet of one-design catboats, in length and beam were designed and built in 1897, and they continued to race for several years at home and at local east coast regattas.

==Gallery==
== See also ==
* Beetle Cat, a small &quot;daysailer&quot; catboat
* Nonsuch, a series of modern catboats
* Inland Cat, , designed and built in Northern Indiana.
* Snark sailboat, a lightweight, two-person catboat

==References==
* 

==Further reading==
* 

== External links ==
* 
* World of Boats (EISCA) Collection ~ Cayman Islands Cat Boat
* The Catboat Association a non-profit organization dedicated to preserving the history, and promoting the use, of catboats.
* MengerCat.com a resource for information about Menger Catboats built between 1976 and 2005. Now owned and supported by Wagner Boat Works.
* Selina II the largest surviving vintage catboat.
* New England Beetle Cat Boat Association a non-profit organization dedicated to promoting the maintenance, restoration, preservation and just plain sailing the Beetle Cat Boat.
* &quot;Catboat moments&quot; an article about catboats in the August 2005 issue of Soundings Magazine.

===Manufacturers===
* Mahone Bay Boatworks designer and builder of the Redden Catboat 14&#x27;. This wooden traditional 14&#x27; daysailer has mahogany decks, ash trim and spruce hull and spars.
* Cape Cod Shipbuilding builders of fine sailboats for over 100 years.
* Com-Pac Yachts Cat Boats builders of the trailerable catboats Picnic Cat, Sun Cat, and Horizon Cat.
* Wagner Boat Works a manufacturer of traditionally-styled fiberglass catboats from 15 to long.
* Marshall Marine Corporation a manufacturer of traditionally-styled fiberglass catboats from 15 to long.
* Thompson Boatworks a manufacturer of 15- and long traditionally-styled fiberglass catboats. Now owned and supported by Wagner Boat Works.
* Arey&#x27;s Pond Boat Yard a manufacturer of traditionally-styled fiberglass catboats from 12 to long.
* Beetle, Inc. manufacturer of the Beetle catboat.
* Howard Boats manufacturer of the Barnstable catboat, a fiberglass version of the traditional wooden Beetle catboat.

==External links==
* &quot;Nine Lives: The Story of the Catboat&quot; (documentary film, 50 min.)
* Selina II, the largest vintage catboat</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1280722" start="2" end="9" title="Catboat" label="catboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q331744" start="86" end="90" title="mast (sailing)" label="mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q301897" start="115" end="118" title="Bow (ship)" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="129" end="134" title="Glossary of nautical terms (A-L)#beam" label="beamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q244777" start="157" end="162" title="Draft (hull)" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723168" start="188" end="196" title="gaff rig" label="gaff rig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548312" start="208" end="219" title="Bermuda rig" label="Bermuda rig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571036" start="257" end="268" title="centreboard" label="centreboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q582062" start="291" end="295" title="keel" label="keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q116986945" start="507" end="516" title="sail plan" label="sail plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880204" start="1724" end="1734" title="Beetle Cat" label="Beetle Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343382" start="1760" end="1767" title="Nonsuch (sailboat)" label="Nonsuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034847" start="1773" end="1783" title="Inland Cat" label="Inland Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q811491" start="2293" end="2297" title="Boom (sailing)" label="boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593084" start="2320" end="2327" title="Transom (nautical)" label="transom"/>
<link wikidata="Q538850" start="2342" end="2350" title="foresail" label="foresail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723168" start="2479" end="2484" title="gaff rig" label="gaffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="2613" end="2621" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q44167" start="2622" end="2628" title="engine" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179166" start="2722" end="2733" title="Day sailer" label="day sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q374666" start="2738" end="2746" title="cruising (maritime)" label="cruising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="2883" end="2891" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49152" start="3133" end="3141" title="Cape Cod" label="Cape Cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241943" start="3143" end="3159" title="Narragansett Bay" label="Narragansett Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="3161" end="3169" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="3174" end="3184" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q523831" start="3208" end="3216" title="bowsprit" label="bowsprit"/>
<link wikidata="Q164327" start="3222" end="3231" title="swordfish" label="swordfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880204" start="3397" end="3407" title="Beetle Cat" label="Beetle Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307792" start="3435" end="3445" title="one-design" label="one-design"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="3484" end="3495" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q125306050" start="3537" end="3551" title="Breck Marshall" label="Breck Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q125306050" start="3888" end="3902" title="Breck Marshall" label="Breck Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890082" start="3941" end="3955" title="Mystic Seaport" label="Mystic Seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q356727" start="4219" end="4226" title="coaming" label="coaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880204" start="5260" end="5270" title="Beetle Cat" label="Beetle Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343382" start="5312" end="5319" title="Nonsuch (sailboat)" label="Nonsuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034847" start="5351" end="5361" title="Inland Cat" label="Inland Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q246762" start="5407" end="5421" title="Snark sailboat" label="Snark sailboat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211647" wikidata="Q155630" url="?curid=211647" title="Giardia duodenalis">
<text>Giardia duodenalis, also known as Giardia intestinalis and Giardia lamblia, is a flagellated parasitic protozoan microorganism of the genus &quot;Giardia&quot; that colonizes the small intestine, causing a diarrheal condition known as giardiasis. The parasite attaches to the intestinal epithelium by a ventral disc (&quot;syn&quot;. adhesive disc or sucker), and reproduces via binary fission. &quot;G. duodenalis&quot; is a non-invasive parasite, that does not spread to other parts of the gastrointestinal tract, but remains confined to the lumen of the small intestine. The parasite exists in two forms; trophozoites and cysts. The microorganism can undergo encystation, transforming into a dormant cyst that enables it to survive outside of its host. &quot;Giardia&quot; trophozoites are anaerobic, and absorb their nutrients from the intestinal lumen. If the organism is stained, its characteristic pattern resembles the familiar &quot;smiley face&quot; symbol.

Chief pathways of human infection include ingestion of untreated drinking water (which is the most common method of transmission for this parasite), food, soil contaminated with human feces, and sewage, a phenomenon particularly common in many developing countries. Contamination of natural waters also occurs in watersheds where intensive grazing occurs.

&quot;Giardia&quot; infections occur worldwide. It is the most commonly identified intestinal parasite among children in day-care centers, hikers and immunocompromised patients. About 20,000 cases per year in the United States are reported.

Almost half of those infected with giardiasis remain asymptomatic. For those who do experience symptoms, they usually appear 1 to 2 weeks after infection. Common symptoms include abdominal pain, nausea, and bloating, along with large, watery, foul-smelling, and greasy stools. Due to frequent loose stools, individuals with giardiasis often experience dehydration. It has also been shown that &quot;G. intestinalis&quot; damages the intestinal epithelium, which directly affects nutrient absorption. In severe cases, giardiasis can lead to chronic diarrhea, chronic fatigue syndrome and cognitive impairment in children.

==Life cycle==

&quot;G. duodenalis&quot; takes on two morphologically distinct forms during its lifecycle. Trophozoites are the replicative stage of the parasite, characterized by a pear-shaped, motile, flagellated cell that survives only in the small intestine of the host. The trophozoites do not penetrate host cells, but rather attaches to the intestinal epithelium cells to establish an infection. A cyst is the environmentally stable stage of the parasite, that facilitates transmission between hosts.

The infection process in the host begins with the ingestion of cysts, which pass through the stomach into the first part of small intestine, or the duodenum. Exposure to digestive enzymes and an acidic pH triggers excystation, where the cysts release trophozoites. Trophozoites swim through the intestinal mucus until they eventually adhere to the intestinal epithelium using their ventral disc. Adhered trophozoites can then feed, divide by binary fission and cause the disease. Trophozoites cause structural and functional damage to the host epithelial cells, impairing the intestine&#x27;s ability to absorb nutrients effectively. Some trophozoites differentiate back into cysts under specific conditions, such as high organism density. As the trophozoites travel through the intestinal lumen to the large intestine, the alkaline environment and the presence of pancreatic proteases trigger the encystation. Trophozoites develop into cysts through encystation, which involves specialized vesicles (ESVs) that facilitate the formation of the cyst wall.

Cysts and trophozoites pass through the host&#x27;s large intestine and are shed in the feces. Trophozoites cannot survive outside of the host, whereas cysts can remain viable in the external environment for several months. The cysts remain dormant until ingested by a host animal. When a new potential host ingests water or food contaminated with this feces, the cysts gain entry to the gastrointestinal tract of the new host, repeating the cycle.

==Structure==
The trophozoite has an elaborate structure with two nuclei and four pairs of flagella which allow it to swim within the intestinal lumen of the host. It also has an adhesive disk on its ventral surface that is associated with the parasite&#x27;s attachment to the intestinal epithelium. The adhesive disk is composed of microtubules, and is found only in &quot;Giardia&quot;. The parasite lacks Golgi apparatus and mitochondria but has mitosomes, which probably evolved from mitochondria. The mitosome is a double-membraned organelle, that lacks the enzymatic components required for classic mitochondrial functions, such as ATP synthesis and lipid metabolism. However, they do contain certain mitochondrial genes associated with iron-sulfur complex biosynthesis, which suggests that this organism likely lost its mitochondria during evolution. 

The cyst contains four nuclei, axonemes, median bodies as well as the rigid cyst wall. Additionally, the cysts contain fragments of the adhesive disc within the cytoplasm. The two-layered cyst wall protects the parasite against different environmental conditions such as chemical treatments. The metabolic activity of the cyst is significantly lower compared to that of the trophozoites, which allows the parasite to survive for longer periods in harsh conditions, such as in cold environments. 

==Prevalence and epidemiology ==
&quot;G. duodenalis&quot; causes an infection called giardiasis. This disease is the cause of both endemic and epidemic disease worldwide and is the most frequently identified intestinal parasite in the United States and Canada. An infected individual can excrete between 1 million and 1 billion cysts daily, and the infectious dose can be as low as 10 cysts. This makes &quot;Giardia&quot; extremely infectious. 

It is estimated to infect over 280 million people world every year resulting in over 500,000 deaths. The most affected demographic is children 0 to 4 years of age. Globally &quot;G. duodenalis&quot; is the most commonly identified protozoal intestinal parasite. Giardia has common seasonal patterns in the distribution of infection rates with highest peaks in the late summer to early fall.

The cyst can survive for weeks to months in cold water, so the parasite can be present in contaminated wells and water systems, especially in stagnant water sources, such as naturally occurring ponds, storm-water storage systems, and even clean-looking mountain streams. Cysts can also be found on contaminated surfaces, soil and food. They may also occur in city reservoirs and persist after water treatment, as the cysts are resistant to conventional water-treatment methods, such as chlorination and ozonolysis. Zoonotic transmission is also possible, but is less frequent. &quot;Giardia&quot; infection is a concern for people camping in the wilderness or swimming in contaminated streams or lakes, especially the artificial lakes formed by beaver dams (hence the popular name for giardiasis, &quot;beaver fever&quot;).

In addition to waterborne sources, &quot;Giardia&quot; infections are more commonly found in children compared to adults, this is believed to be due to fecal-oral transmission of the cysts. For example, in developed countries it affects approximately 2% of adults and 8% of children. In developing countries the prevalence rates reach 15% to 20% in children under 10 years old. Thus, there is a significant variation in infection rates based on geographical area. 

Those who work with children are also at risk of being infected, as are family members of infected individuals. 7% of children aged 1 to 3 years and 11% of infants and toddlers tested for admission to day-care centers were found to be infected. Not all &quot;Giardia&quot; infections are symptomatic, and many people can unknowingly serve as carriers of the parasite. Re-infection and chronic infections of the parasite can occur. 

=== Geographical prevalence ===
&quot;G. duodenalis&quot; is the most widespread intestinal parasite affecting humans. The parasite &quot;Giardia duodenalis&quot; can be found all over the world, in both developing and industrialized nations. However, human infections are most common in tropical and subtropical climates. &quot;Giardia duodenalis&quot; is common around the world because the parasite resides in bodies of water; typically rivers, lakes, and recreational swimming pools. Giardiasis is more prevalent in developing countries, where the sanitation and overall hygiene is poorer compared to developed countries. In developed nations, giardiasis has a prevalence of 2–5%, whereas in developing nations it is significantly higher, ranging from 20% to 30%. In the United States, it has been discovered that a majority of whom are infected by the &quot;Giardia duodenalis&quot; parasite tend to reside in more urban areas, and, patients who are infected are more likely to live in the Southern United States.

== Ecology ==
&quot;Giardia&quot; infects humans, but is also one of the most common parasites infecting cats, dogs, and birds. Mammalian hosts also include dozens of species, including cattle, sheep, and goats.

Cats can be cured easily, and lambs usually simply lose weight, but in calves, the parasites can be fatal and often are not responsive to antibiotics or electrolytes. Carriers among calves can also be asymptomatic. This parasite is deadly for chinchillas, so extra care must be taken by providing them with safe water. Dogs have a high infection rate, as 30% of the population under one year old are known to be infected in kennels. The infection is more prevalent in puppies than in adult dogs. Infected dogs can be isolated and treated, or the entire pack at a kennel can be presumptively treated together. Kennels and areas used for exercise should be considered contaminated for at least one month after dogs show signs of infection, as cysts can survive in the environment for long periods of time. Prevention can be achieved by quarantine of infected dogs for at least 20 days and careful management and maintenance of a clean water supply.

==Cell biology==

&quot;G. duodenalis&quot; trophozoites are pear-shaped cells, 10 to 20 μm long, 7 to 10 μm across, and 2 to 4 μm thick. They are motile by way of four pairs of flagella, which propel the trophozoites through the intestine. Notably, each &quot;G. duodenalis&quot; cell has two nuclei, both of which actively transcribe genes. Adjacent to the nucleus, &quot;G. duodenalis&quot; cells have an endoplasmic reticulum that extends through much of the cell. Trophozoites about to differentiate into cysts also contain prominent vesicles termed encystation-specific vesicles that disappear once cyst wall construction begins. Unlike most other eukaryotes, &quot;G. duodenalis&quot; cells contain no visible mitochondria, but instead contains a substantially reduced metabolic organelle known as a mitosome. Additionally, cells appear to contain no Golgi bodies, and instead the secretory system consists entirely of the endoplasmic reticulum and numerous vesicles dispersed throughout the cell, termed peripheral vesicles. Peripheral vesicles are responsible both for taking up extracellular nutrients, and expelling waste outside the cell. Each cell also contains a pair of rigid structures called median bodies which make up part of the &quot;G. lamblia&quot; cytoskeleton. Trophozoites adhere to host epithelial cells via a specialized disk-shaped organelle called the ventral disk.

Cysts are oval-shaped cells slightly smaller than trophozoites. They lack flagella, and are covered by a smooth, clear cyst wall. Each cyst contains four nuclei and fragments of the ventral disc.

===Metabolism===
&quot;G. duodenalis&quot; primarily generates its energy by breaking down glucose via glycolysis, as well as the arginine deiminase pathway. It is unable to synthesize nucleotides on its own, instead salvaging them from its host. Synthesis of iron–sulfur clusters is done in a double-membrane-bound compartment called the mitosome, which is likely a remnant of mitochondria. Each cell contains 25 to 100 mitosomes divided into two categories - peripheral mitosomes, which are scattered throughout the cell, and central mitosomes, which gather at the center of the cell for unknown reasons. As in mitochondria, proteins with a certain peptide signal sequence are trafficked to and imported into the mitosome. Unlike mitochondria, mitosomes have no genome of their own. All mitosomal genes are encoded by the &quot;Giardia&quot; nuclear genome.

===Genetics===
&quot;Giardia&quot; and the other diplomonads are unique in their possession of two cell nuclei that are similar in appearance, DNA content, transcription, and time of replication. &quot;Giardia&quot; is a polyploid organism, with at least four, and perhaps eight or more, copies of each of five chromosomes per organism. The genome has been sequenced and was published in 2007, although the sequence contains several gaps. The sequence is about 12 million base pairs and contains about 5000 protein-coding genes. The GC-content is 46%. Trophozoites have a ploidy of four and the ploidy of cysts is eight, which in turn raises the question of how &quot;Giardia&quot; maintains homogeneity between the chromosomes of the same and opposite nuclei. Modern sequencing technologies have been used to resequence different strains.

==Immunology==
Infections with &quot;Giardia&quot; are self-limited in immunocompetent individuals, while people with immunodeficiency disorders may develop chronic giardiasis. During the infection different mechanisms from the innate and adaptive immune system are activated. The first physical barrier is the mucus layer where the organism interacts with epithelial, immune cells, and some antimicrobial peptides released by those cells as well as nitric oxide and inflammatory cytokines like interleukin 6. TLR2 and TLR4 also can be activated by &quot;Giardia&quot;. The T-cell response in giardiasis includes T helper cells and cytotoxic T cells, and the production of IgA by B cells also helps to eliminate the infection.

==Evolution==
&quot;Giardia&quot; had been assumed to be primitively asexual and with no means of transferring DNA between nuclei. These assumptions made explaining the remarkably low level of allelic heterozygosity (&lt; 0.01%) in the genome isolate, WB, very difficult, but all those assumptions of asexuality are now in doubt, with population genetics providing evidence for recombination and the identification of meiotic genes, evidence for recombination among isolates and the evidence for exchange of genetic material between nuclei during the process of encystation.

These findings on sexuality in &quot;Giardia&quot;, above, have important implications for understanding the origin of sexual reproduction in eukaryotes. Though sexual reproduction is widespread among extant eukaryotes, until recently, sex seemed unlikely to be a primordial and fundamental feature of eukaryotes. A probable reason for the view that sex may not be fundamental to eukaryotes was that sexual reproduction previously appeared to be lacking in certain human pathogenic single-celled eukaryotes (e.g. &quot;Giardia&quot;) that diverged from early ancestors in the eukaryotic lineage.

In addition to the evidence cited above for recombination in &quot;Giardia&quot;, Malik et al. reported that many meiosis specific genes occur in the &quot;Giardia&quot; genome, and further that homologs of these genes also occur in another unicellular eukaryote, &quot;Trichomonas vaginalis&quot;. Because these two species are descendants of lineages that are highly divergent among eukaryotes, Malik et al. suggested that these meiotic genes were present in a common ancestor of all eukaryotes. Thus, on this view, the earliest ancestor of eukaryotes was likely capable of sexual reproduction. Furthermore, Dacks and Roger proposed, based on phylogenetic analysis, that facultative sex was present in the common ancestor of all eukaryotes. Bernstein et al. also reviewed evidence in support of this view.

Eight genotype assemblages of &quot;G. duodenalis&quot; have been recognized to date (A-H). Genotyping of &quot;G. duodenalis&quot; isolated from various hosts has shown that assemblages A and B infect the largest range of host species, and appear to be the main (or possibly only) &quot;G. duodenalis&quot; assemblages that undeniably infect human subjects.

==Research==
Frances Gillin of the University of California, San Diego, and her colleagues cultivated the entire lifecycle of this parasite in the laboratory, and identified biochemical cues in the host&#x27;s digestive system that trigger &quot;Giardia&quot;&#x27;s lifecycle transformations. They also uncovered several ways in which the parasite evades the defenses of the infected organism. One of these is by altering the proteins on its surface, which confounds the ability of the infected animal&#x27;s immune system to detect and combat the parasite (called antigenic variation). Gillin&#x27;s work reveals why &quot;Giardia&quot; infections are extremely persistent and prone to recur. In addition, these insights into its biology and survival techniques may enable scientists to develop better strategies to understand, prevent, and treat &quot;Giardia&quot; infections.

In December 2008, &quot;Nature&quot; published an article showing the discovery of an RNA interference mechanism that allows &quot;Giardia&quot; to switch variant-specific surface proteins to avoid host immune response. The discovery was made by the team working at the Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Laboratory, School of Medicine, Catholic University of Cordoba, Argentina, led by Dr. Hugo Lujan.

The main congress about &quot;Giardia&quot; is the International Giardia and Cryptosporidium Conference. A summary of results presented at the most recent edition (2019, in Rouen, France) is available.

In 2022, a study conducted by Elisa Barroeta-Echegaray and colleagues concluded that &quot;Giardia duodenalis&quot; secretes enolase as a monomer during the interaction, or attachment, of trophozoites with intestinal epithelial cells. This interaction was shown to activate plasminogen and induce necroptotic damage in intestinal epithelial cells. The researchers demonstrated that blocking the enolase inhibited trophozoite attachment to intestinal epithelial cells. Furthermore, enolase was shown to enhance plasmin activity, leading to significant cell damage characterized by vacuolization and intercellular separation. Enolase also induced necroptosis in epithelial cells via tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) and apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF), independent of caspase-3 activity. These findings suggest that Giardia enolase is a critical virulence factor in host-pathogen interactions. 

==History==
The first likely description of &quot;Giardia&quot; was in 1681 by Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, who in a letter to Robert Hooke, described &quot;animalcules&quot; resembling &quot;Giardia&quot; trophozoites in his stool. The next known description of &quot;Giardia&quot; wasn&#x27;t until 1859, when Czech physician Vilém Lambl published a description of the trophozoite stages he saw in the stool of a pediatric patient. Lambl termed the organism &quot;Cercomonas intestinalis&quot;. In 1888, Raphaël Blanchard renamed the parasite &quot;Lamblia intestinalis&quot; in Lambl&#x27;s honor. In 1915, Charles Stiles renamed the organism &quot;Giardia lamblia&quot; in honor of both Lambl and Professor Alfred Mathieu Giard of Paris. In 1921, Charles E. Simon published a detailed description of the parasite&#x27;s morphology.

==See also==
* List of parasites of humans
* 1998 Sydney water crisis

==References==
==External links==

* Giardia lamblia image library 
* GiardiaDB: The Giardia lamblia genome sequencing project
* Washington State Department of Health fact sheet on Giardia.
* Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Giardia Information
* United States Environmental Protection Agency fact sheet on Giardia in water
* Giardia article at MicrobeWiki
* Video of Giardia Life Cycle 
* Giardia and the Sierra Nevada
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q240433" start="81" end="91" title="flagellate" label="flagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="93" end="102" title="Parasitism" label="parasitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="103" end="111" title="protozoa" label="protozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469628" start="146" end="153" title="Giardia" label="Giardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11090" start="179" end="194" title="small intestine" label="small intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q326071" start="235" end="245" title="giardiasis" label="giardiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q509615" start="276" end="297" title="intestinal epithelium" label="intestinal epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923890" start="334" end="357" title="sucker (zoology)" label="adhesive disc or sucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11990" start="364" end="373" title="reproduction" label="reproduce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="379" end="393" title="Fission (biology)#Binary_fission" label="binary fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="492" end="514" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141325" start="544" end="549" title="lumen (anatomy)" label="lumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455499" start="608" end="620" title="Trophozoite" label="trophozoites"/>
<link wikidata="Q245998" start="625" end="630" title="Microbial cyst" label="cysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q245998" start="703" end="707" title="Microbial cyst" label="cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q221673" start="750" end="754" title="Host (biology)" label="host"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455499" start="776" end="787" title="trophozoite" label="trophozoite"/>
<link wikidata="Q189790" start="793" end="802" title="Anaerobic organism" label="anaerobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412684" start="877" end="884" title="Giemsa stain" label="stained"/>
<link wikidata="Q11241" start="942" end="953" title="Smiley" label="smiley face"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058719" start="1024" end="1033" title="Water treatment" label="untreated"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966166" start="1164" end="1170" title="sewage" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="1213" end="1233" title="Developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="1282" end="1292" title="Drainage basin" label="watersheds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239189" start="1309" end="1316" title="grazing" label="grazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q641307" start="1476" end="1493" title="Immunodeficiency" label="immunocompromised"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455499" start="2298" end="2310" title="Trophozoite" label="Trophozoites"/>
<link wikidata="Q33596" start="2386" end="2392" title="Motility" label="motile"/>
<link wikidata="Q240433" start="2394" end="2404" title="flagellate" label="flagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q134955" start="2848" end="2856" title="duodenum" label="duodenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q419557" start="2870" end="2887" title="Digestive enzyme" label="digestive enzymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="2902" end="2904" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q509615" start="3048" end="3069" title="intestinal epithelium" label="intestinal epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923890" start="3082" end="3094" title="Sucker (zoology)" label="ventral disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q929080" start="3142" end="3156" title="Fission (biology)" label="binary fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083" start="3503" end="3518" title="large intestine" label="large intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12646453" start="3565" end="3585" title="Pancreatic protease E" label="pancreatic proteases"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083" start="3808" end="3823" title="large intestine" label="large intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q162267" start="3997" end="4004" title="Dormancy" label="dormant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4297" end="4305" title="Flagellum#Eukaryotic" label="flagella"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="4406" end="4413" title="Anatomical terms of location" label="ventral"/>
<link wikidata="Q189933" start="4540" end="4552" title="Microtubule" label="microtubules"/>
<link wikidata="Q83181" start="4615" end="4630" title="Golgi apparatus" label="Golgi apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="4635" end="4647" title="Mitochondrion" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q22329064" start="4656" end="4664" title="mitosome" label="mitosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q792605" start="5098" end="5106" title="Axoneme" label="axonemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431049" start="5914" end="5929" title="Minimal infective dose" label="infectious dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075344" start="6890" end="6902" title="Water chlorination" label="chlorination"/>
<link wikidata="Q898508" start="6907" end="6917" title="ozonolysis" label="ozonolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182672" start="6919" end="6927" title="Zoonosis" label="Zoonotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542" start="7149" end="7155" title="beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272069" start="7381" end="7391" title="Fecal–oral route" label="fecal-oral"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="8416" end="8424" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="8429" end="8440" title="subtropical" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="8648" end="8668" title="Developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="8733" end="8752" title="Developed country" label="developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="9334" end="9340" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="9342" end="9347" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="9353" end="9357" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q192930" start="9604" end="9614" title="chinchilla" label="chinchilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724542" start="9785" end="9791" title="kennel" label="kennel"/>
<link wikidata="Q182899" start="10195" end="10205" title="quarantine" label="quarantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="10398" end="10400" title="micrometre" label="μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="10487" end="10495" title="Flagellum" label="flagella"/>
<link wikidata="Q40260" start="10603" end="10609" title="Cell nucleus" label="nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="10634" end="10644" title="Transcription (biology)" label="transcribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q79927" start="10717" end="10738" title="endoplasmic reticulum" label="endoplasmic reticulum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10864" end="10893" title="encystation-specific vesicles" label="encystation-specific vesicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="11026" end="11038" title="mitochondrion" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q22329064" start="11116" end="11124" title="mitosome" label="mitosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q83181" start="11167" end="11179" title="Golgi apparatus" label="Golgi bodies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11197" end="11213" title="Secretion#Mechanism" label="secretory system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11321" end="11340" title="peripheral vesicles" label="peripheral vesicles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11518" end="11531" title="median bodies" label="median bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q154626" start="11581" end="11593" title="cytoskeleton" label="cytoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11691" end="11703" title="ventral disk" label="ventral disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="11994" end="12001" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q162643" start="12006" end="12016" title="glycolysis" label="glycolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24722788" start="12033" end="12051" title="arginine deiminase" label="arginine deiminase"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="12088" end="12098" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q312085" start="12163" end="12182" title="iron–sulfur cluster" label="iron–sulfur cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q136575" start="12813" end="12823" title="diplomonad" label="diplomonad"/>
<link wikidata="Q40260" start="12863" end="12874" title="Cell nucleus" label="cell nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="12920" end="12933" title="Transcription (biology)" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12985" end="12994" title="Ploidy#Polyploidy" label="polyploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q933491" start="13297" end="13307" title="GC-content" label="GC-content"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="13336" end="13342" title="ploidy" label="ploidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q428253" start="13833" end="13839" title="Innate immune system" label="innate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645075" start="13844" end="13852" title="Adaptive immune system" label="adaptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="14055" end="14067" title="nitric oxide" label="nitric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491837" start="14072" end="14093" title="inflammatory cytokine" label="inflammatory cytokine"/>
<link wikidata="Q412889" start="14100" end="14113" title="interleukin 6" label="interleukin 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q410015" start="14115" end="14119" title="Toll-like receptor 2" label="TLR2"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914098" start="14124" end="14128" title="Toll-like receptor 4" label="TLR4"/>
<link wikidata="Q768227" start="14218" end="14232" title="T helper 17 cell" label="T helper cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q376266" start="14237" end="14253" title="cytotoxic T cell" label="cytotoxic T cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q79453" start="14278" end="14281" title="Immunoglobulin A" label="IgA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188930" start="14285" end="14291" title="B cell" label="B cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q132595" start="15776" end="15797" title="Trichomonas vaginalis" label="Trichomonas vaginalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q622664" start="16710" end="16745" title="University of California, San Diego" label="University of California, San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="16806" end="16814" title="parasite" label="parasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="17185" end="17198" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774739" start="17241" end="17260" title="antigenic variation" label="antigenic variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q201993" start="17643" end="17659" title="RNA interference" label="RNA interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="18134" end="18139" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q24776639" start="18289" end="18296" title="enolase" label="enolase"/>
<link wikidata="Q21173374" start="18438" end="18449" title="plasminogen" label="plasminogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346925" start="18461" end="18479" title="Necroptosis" label="necroptotic damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346925" start="18809" end="18820" title="necroptosis" label="necroptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21173843" start="18845" end="18876" title="Tumor necrosis factor" label="tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780529" start="18881" end="18906" title="apoptosis-inducing factor" label="apoptosis-inducing factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914370" start="18929" end="18938" title="Caspase 3" label="caspase-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623405" start="19007" end="19023" title="virulence factor" label="virulence factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43522" start="19136" end="19159" title="Antonie van Leeuwenhoek" label="Antonie van Leeuwenhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q46830" start="19180" end="19192" title="Robert Hooke" label="Robert Hooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q706405" start="19381" end="19392" title="Vilém Dušan Lambl" label="Vilém Lambl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419406" start="19559" end="19576" title="Raphaël Blanchard" label="Raphaël Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960426" start="19663" end="19677" title="Charles Wardell Stiles" label="Charles Stiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q322638" start="19764" end="19784" title="Alfred Mathieu Giard" label="Alfred Mathieu Giard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19804" end="19820" title="Charles E. Simon" label="Charles E. Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635818" start="19905" end="19932" title="List of parasites of humans" label="List of parasites of humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594019" start="19935" end="19959" title="1998 Sydney water crisis" label="1998 Sydney water crisis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211652" wikidata="Q1128326" url="?curid=211652" title="Constraint satisfaction problem">
<text>Constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) are mathematical questions defined as a set of objects whose state must satisfy a number of constraints or limitations. CSPs represent the entities in a problem as a homogeneous collection of finite constraints over variables, which is solved by constraint satisfaction methods. CSPs are the subject of research in both artificial intelligence and operations research, since the regularity in their formulation provides a common basis to analyze and solve problems of many seemingly unrelated families. CSPs often exhibit high complexity, requiring a combination of heuristics and combinatorial search methods to be solved in a reasonable time. Constraint programming (CP) is the field of research that specifically focuses on tackling these kinds of problems. Additionally, the Boolean satisfiability problem (SAT), satisfiability modulo theories (SMT), mixed integer programming (MIP) and answer set programming (ASP) are all fields of research focusing on the resolution of particular forms of the constraint satisfaction problem.

Examples of problems that can be modeled as a constraint satisfaction problem include:

* Type inference
* Eight queens puzzle
* Map coloring problem
* Maximum cut problem
* Sudoku, crosswords, futoshiki, Kakuro (Cross Sums), Numbrix/Hidato, Zebra Puzzle, and many other logic puzzles

These are often provided with tutorials of CP, ASP, Boolean SAT and SMT solvers. In the general case, constraint problems can be much harder, and may not be expressible in some of these simpler systems. &quot;Real life&quot; examples include automated planning, lexical disambiguation, musicology, product configuration and resource allocation.

The existence of a solution to a CSP can be viewed as a decision problem. This can be decided by finding a solution, or failing to find a solution after exhaustive search (stochastic algorithms typically never reach an exhaustive conclusion, while directed searches often do, on sufficiently small problems). In some cases the CSP might be known to have solutions beforehand, through some other mathematical inference process.

==Formal definition==
Formally, a constraint satisfaction problem is defined as a triple formula_1, where
* formula_2 is a set of variables, 
* formula_3 is a set of their respective domains of values, and
* formula_4 is a set of constraints. 
Each variable formula_5 can take on the values in the nonempty domain formula_6.
Every constraint formula_7 is in turn a pair formula_8, where formula_9 is a set of formula_10 indices and formula_11 is a formula_10-ary relation on the corresponding product of domains formula_13 where the product is taken with indices in ascending order. An &quot;evaluation&quot; of the variables is a function from a subset of variables to a particular set of values in the corresponding subset of domains. An evaluation formula_14 satisfies a constraint formula_15 if the values assigned to the variables formula_16 satisfy the relation formula_11.

An evaluation is &quot;consistent&quot; if it does not violate any of the constraints. An evaluation is &quot;complete&quot; if it includes all variables. An evaluation is a &quot;solution&quot; if it is consistent and complete; such an evaluation is said to &quot;solve&quot; the constraint satisfaction problem.

==Solution==
Constraint satisfaction problems on finite domains are typically solved using a form of search. The most used techniques are variants of backtracking, constraint propagation, and local search. These techniques are also often combined, as in the VLNS method, and current research involves other technologies such as linear programming.

Backtracking is a recursive algorithm. It maintains a partial assignment of the variables. Initially, all variables are unassigned. At each step, a variable is chosen, and all possible values are assigned to it in turn. For each value, the consistency of the partial assignment with the constraints is checked; in case of consistency, a recursive call is performed. When all values have been tried, the algorithm backtracks. In this basic backtracking algorithm, consistency is defined as the satisfaction of all constraints whose variables are all assigned. Several variants of backtracking exist. Backmarking improves the efficiency of checking consistency. Backjumping allows saving part of the search by backtracking &quot;more than one variable&quot; in some cases. Constraint learning infers and saves new constraints that can be later used to avoid part of the search. Look-ahead is also often used in backtracking to attempt to foresee the effects of choosing a variable or a value, thus sometimes determining in advance when a subproblem is satisfiable or unsatisfiable.

Constraint propagation techniques are methods used to modify a constraint satisfaction problem. More precisely, they are methods that enforce a form of local consistency, which are conditions related to the consistency of a group of variables and/or constraints. Constraint propagation has various uses. First, it turns a problem into one that is equivalent but is usually simpler to solve. Second, it may prove satisfiability or unsatisfiability of problems. This is not guaranteed to happen in general; however, it always happens for some forms of constraint propagation and/or for certain kinds of problems. The most known and used forms of local consistency are arc consistency, hyper-arc consistency, and path consistency. The most popular constraint propagation method is the AC-3 algorithm, which enforces arc consistency.

Local search methods are incomplete satisfiability algorithms. They may find a solution of a problem, but they may fail even if the problem is satisfiable. They work by iteratively improving a complete assignment over the variables. At each step, a small number of variables are changed in value, with the overall aim of increasing the number of constraints satisfied by this assignment. The min-conflicts algorithm is a local search algorithm specific for CSPs and is based on that principle. In practice, local search appears to work well when these changes are also affected by random choices. An integration of search with local search has been developed, leading to hybrid algorithms.

==Theoretical aspects==

===Computational Complexity===
CSPs are also studied in computational complexity theory, finite model theory and universal algebra. It turned out that questions about the complexity of CSPs translate into important universal-algebraic questions about underlying algebras. This approach is known as the &quot;algebraic approach&quot; to CSPs. 

Since every computational decision problem is polynomial-time equivalent to a CSP with an infinite template, general CSPs can have arbitrary complexity. In particular, there are also CSPs within the class of NP-intermediate problems, whose existence was demonstrated by Ladner, under the assumption that P ≠ NP.

However, a large class of CSPs arising from natural applications satisfy a complexity dichotomy, meaning that every CSP within that class is either in P or NP-complete. These CSPs thus provide one of the largest known subsets of NP which avoids NP-intermediate problems. A complexity dichotomy was first proven by Schaefer for Boolean CSPs, i.e. CSPs over a 2-element domain and where all the available relations are Boolean operators. This result has been generalized for various classes of CSPs, most notably for all CSPs over finite domains. This &quot;finite-domain dichotomy conjecture&quot; was first formulated by Tomás Feder and Moshe Vardi, and finally proven independently by Andrei Bulatov and Dmitriy Zhuk in 2017.

Other classes for which a complexity dichotomy has been confirmed are

* all first-order reducts of formula_18,
* all first-order reducts of the countable random graph,
* all first-order reducts of the model companion of the class of all C-relations,
* all first-order reducts of the universal homogenous poset,
* all first-order reducts of homogenous undirected graphs,
* all first-order reducts of all unary structures,
* all CSPs in the complexity class MMSNP.

Most classes of CSPs that are known to be tractable are those where the hypergraph of constraints has bounded treewidth, or where the constraints have arbitrary form but there exist equationally non-trivial polymorphisms of the set of constraint relations.

An &quot;infinite-domain dichotomy conjecture&quot; has been formulated for all CSPs of reducts of finitely bounded homogenous structures, stating that the CSP of such a structure is in P if and only if its polymorphism clone is equationally non-trivial, and NP-hard otherwise. 

The complexity of such infinite-domain CSPs as well as of other generalisations (Valued CSPs, Quantified CSPs, Promise CSPs) is still an area of active research.

Every CSP can also be considered as a conjunctive query containment problem.

===Function problems===
A similar situation exists between the functional classes FP and #P. By a generalization of Ladner&#x27;s theorem, there are also problems in neither FP nor #P-complete as long as FP ≠ #P. As in the decision case, a problem in the #CSP is defined by a set of relations. Each problem takes a Boolean formula as input and the task is to compute the number of satisfying assignments. This can be further generalized by using larger domain sizes and attaching a weight to each satisfying assignment and computing the sum of these weights. It is known that any complex weighted #CSP problem is either in FP or #P-hard.

==Variants==
The classic model of Constraint Satisfaction Problem defines a model of static, inflexible constraints. This rigid model is a shortcoming that makes it difficult to represent problems easily. Several modifications of the basic CSP definition have been proposed to adapt the model to a wide variety of problems.

===Dynamic CSPs===
Dynamic CSPs (&quot;DCSP&quot;s) are useful when the original formulation of a problem is altered in some way, typically because the set of constraints to consider evolves because of the environment. DCSPs are viewed as a sequence of static CSPs, each one a transformation of the previous one in which variables and constraints can be added (restriction) or removed (relaxation). Information found in the initial formulations of the problem can be used to refine the next ones. The solving method can be classified according to the way in which information is transferred:
* Oracles: the solution found to previous CSPs in the sequence are used as heuristics to guide the resolution of the current CSP from scratch.
* Local repair: each CSP is calculated starting from the partial solution of the previous one and repairing the inconsistent constraints with local search.
* Constraint recording: new constraints are defined in each stage of the search to represent the learning of inconsistent group of decisions. Those constraints are carried over to the new CSP problems.

===Flexible CSPs===
Classic CSPs treat constraints as hard, meaning that they are &quot;imperative&quot; (each solution must satisfy all of them) and &quot;inflexible&quot; (in the sense that they must be completely satisfied or else they are completely violated). Flexible CSPs relax those assumptions, partially &quot;relaxing&quot; the constraints and allowing the solution to not comply with all of them. This is similar to preferences in preference-based planning. Some types of flexible CSPs include:
* MAX-CSP, where a number of constraints are allowed to be violated, and the quality of a solution is measured by the number of satisfied constraints.
* Weighted CSP, a MAX-CSP in which each violation of a constraint is weighted according to a predefined preference. Thus satisfying constraint with more weight is preferred.
* Fuzzy CSP model constraints as fuzzy relations in which the satisfaction of a constraint is a continuous function of its variables&#x27; values, going from fully satisfied to fully violated.

===Decentralized CSPs===
In DCSPs each constraint variable is thought of as having a separate geographic location. Strong constraints are placed on information exchange between variables, requiring the use of fully distributed algorithms to solve the constraint satisfaction problem.

==See also==
* Constraint composite graph
* Constraint programming
* Declarative programming
*Constrained optimization (COP)
* Distributed constraint optimization
* Graph homomorphism
* Unique games conjecture
* Weighted constraint satisfaction problem (WCSP)

==References==
==Further reading==
*A quick introduction to constraint satisfaction on YouTube
*Manuel Bodirsky (2021). &quot;Complexity of Infinite-Domain Constraint Satisfaction&quot;. Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107337534
* 
* 
* 
*Tomás Feder, &quot;Constraint satisfaction: a personal perspective&quot;, manuscript.
*Constraints archive
*Forced Satisfiable CSP Benchmarks of Model RB 
*Benchmarks – XML representation of CSP instances
*XCSP3 – An XML-based format designed to represent CSP instances
*Constraint Propagation – Dissertation by Guido Tack giving a good survey of theory and implementation issues</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1128326" start="0" end="32" title="Constraint satisfaction problem" label="Constraint satisfaction problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128326" start="34" end="38" title="Constraint satisfaction problem" label="CSPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q599031" start="101" end="106" title="State (computer science)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303305" start="132" end="143" title="Constraint (mathematics)" label="constraints"/>
<link wikidata="Q177239" start="147" end="158" title="Limit (mathematics)" label="limitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q50701" start="256" end="264" title="Variable (mathematics)" label="variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q30158686" start="286" end="309" title="constraint satisfaction" label="constraint satisfaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="360" end="383" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q194292" start="388" end="407" title="operations research" label="operations research"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156628" start="543" end="577" title="Complexity of constraint satisfaction" label="CSPs often exhibit high complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q201413" start="606" end="616" title="heuristics" label="heuristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150830" start="621" end="641" title="combinatorial search" label="combinatorial search"/>
<link wikidata="Q528588" start="685" end="707" title="Constraint programming" label="Constraint programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q875276" start="819" end="849" title="Boolean satisfiability problem" label="Boolean satisfiability problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067766" start="857" end="887" title="satisfiability modulo theories" label="satisfiability modulo theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q202843" start="895" end="920" title="mixed integer programming" label="mixed integer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852531" start="931" end="953" title="answer set programming" label="answer set programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q586459" start="1165" end="1179" title="Type inference" label="Type inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q623317" start="1182" end="1201" title="Eight queens puzzle" label="Eight queens puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q504843" start="1204" end="1224" title="Graph coloring" label="Map coloring problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q942557" start="1227" end="1246" title="Maximum cut" label="Maximum cut problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q44914" start="1249" end="1255" title="Sudoku" label="Sudoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q83207" start="1257" end="1266" title="crossword" label="crossword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402407" start="1269" end="1278" title="futoshiki" label="futoshiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q212785" start="1280" end="1286" title="Kakuro" label="Kakuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659478" start="1301" end="1308" title="Numbrix" label="Numbrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659478" start="1309" end="1315" title="Hidato" label="Hidato"/>
<link wikidata="Q169497" start="1317" end="1329" title="Zebra Puzzle" label="Zebra Puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774662" start="1346" end="1358" title="logic puzzle" label="logic puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q528588" start="1404" end="1406" title="Constraint programming" label="CP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631895" start="1603" end="1621" title="automated planning" label="automated planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q48522" start="1623" end="1645" title="lexical disambiguation" label="lexical disambiguation"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="1647" end="1657" title="musicology" label="musicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q22674437" start="1659" end="1680" title="Configure, price and quote" label="product configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q287260" start="1685" end="1704" title="resource allocation" label="resource allocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262192" start="1763" end="1779" title="decision problem" label="decision problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071239" start="1879" end="1899" title="stochastic algorithm" label="stochastic algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q107223533" start="2598" end="2606" title="relation (mathematics)" label="relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q755673" start="3432" end="3438" title="Search algorithm" label="search"/>
<link wikidata="Q798554" start="3481" end="3493" title="backtracking" label="backtracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407510" start="3495" end="3517" title="constraint propagation" label="constraint propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868524" start="3523" end="3535" title="Local search (optimization)" label="local search"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421943" start="3589" end="3593" title="Very large-scale neighborhood search" label="VLNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q202843" start="3659" end="3677" title="linear programming" label="linear programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q798554" start="3680" end="3692" title="Backtracking" label="Backtracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q179976" start="4017" end="4026" title="Recursion" label="recursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839693" start="4279" end="4290" title="Backmarking" label="Backmarking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839679" start="4340" end="4351" title="Backjumping" label="Backjumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164376" start="4451" end="4470" title="Constraint learning" label="Constraint learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674930" start="4556" end="4566" title="Look-ahead (backtracking)" label="Look-ahead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407510" start="4761" end="4783" title="Constraint propagation" label="Constraint propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407510" start="4913" end="4930" title="local consistency" label="local consistency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407510" start="5427" end="5442" title="arc consistency" label="arc consistency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407510" start="5444" end="5465" title="hyper-arc consistency" label="hyper-arc consistency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407510" start="5471" end="5487" title="path consistency" label="path consistency"/>
<link wikidata="Q287886" start="5543" end="5557" title="AC-3 algorithm" label="AC-3 algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868524" start="5592" end="5604" title="Local search (optimization)" label="Local search"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862473" start="5984" end="6007" title="min-conflicts algorithm" label="min-conflicts algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092103" start="6263" end="6280" title="Hybrid algorithm (constraint satisfaction)" label="hybrid algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="6364" end="6395" title="computational complexity theory" label="computational complexity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450405" start="6397" end="6416" title="finite model theory" label="finite model theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636734" start="6421" end="6438" title="universal algebra" label="universal algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103034" start="6698" end="6724" title="Polynomial-time reduction" label="polynomial-time equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130846" start="6860" end="6875" title="NP-intermediate" label="NP-intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130846" start="6922" end="6928" title="NP-intermediate" label="Ladner"/>
<link wikidata="Q746242" start="6956" end="6962" title="P versus NP problem" label="P ≠ NP"/>
<link wikidata="Q846354" start="7116" end="7117" title="P (complexity)" label="P"/>
<link wikidata="Q215206" start="7121" end="7132" title="NP-complete" label="NP-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q628036" start="7194" end="7196" title="NP (complexity)" label="NP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130846" start="7210" end="7225" title="NP-intermediate" label="NP-intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430892" start="7279" end="7287" title="Schaefer&amp;#x27;s dichotomy theorem" label="Schaefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="7382" end="7398" title="Boolean operator (Boolean algebra)" label="Boolean operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="7770" end="7781" title="First-order logic" label="first-order"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880812" start="7782" end="7789" title="Reduct" label="reducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281501" start="7838" end="7860" title="Rado graph" label="countable random graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888319" start="7895" end="7910" title="model companion" label="model companion"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="7998" end="8003" title="Partially ordered set" label="poset"/>
<link wikidata="Q840247" start="8230" end="8240" title="hypergraph" label="hypergraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5067368" start="8268" end="8277" title="treewidth" label="treewidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q838048" start="8623" end="8641" title="Clone (algebra)" label="polymorphism clone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781706" start="8897" end="8914" title="conjunctive query" label="conjunctive query"/>
<link wikidata="Q970152" start="9019" end="9021" title="FP (complexity)" label="FP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322138" start="9026" end="9028" title="Sharp-P" label="#P"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130846" start="9053" end="9074" title="Ladner&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Ladner&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q841545" start="9118" end="9129" title="Sharp-P-complete" label="#P-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="9252" end="9259" title="Boolean logic" label="Boolean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143357" start="10495" end="10502" title="Oracle machine" label="Oracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868524" start="10778" end="10790" title="Local search (optimization)" label="local search"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239814" start="11438" end="11463" title="preference-based planning" label="preference-based planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979896" start="11655" end="11667" title="Weighted constraint satisfaction problem" label="Weighted CSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q224821" start="11860" end="11865" title="fuzzy logic" label="fuzzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164364" start="12321" end="12347" title="Constraint composite graph" label="Constraint composite graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q528588" start="12350" end="12372" title="Constraint programming" label="Constraint programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q531152" start="12375" end="12398" title="Declarative programming" label="Declarative programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4477763" start="12400" end="12424" title="Constrained optimization" label="Constrained optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q21281178" start="12433" end="12468" title="Distributed constraint optimization" label="Distributed constraint optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385162" start="12471" end="12489" title="Graph homomorphism" label="Graph homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886950" start="12492" end="12515" title="Unique games conjecture" label="Unique games conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979896" start="12518" end="12558" title="Weighted constraint satisfaction problem" label="Weighted constraint satisfaction problem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211655" wikidata="Q6973666" url="?curid=211655" title="National Institute of General Medical Sciences">
<text>The National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) is one of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the principal medical research agency of the United States Federal Government. NIH is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

== Overview ==

The NIGMS supports basic research that increases understanding of biological processes and lays the foundation for advances in disease diagnosis, treatment, and prevention. NIGMS-funded scientists investigate how living systems work at a range of levels, from molecules and cells to tissues and organs, in research organisms, humans, and populations. Additionally, to ensure the vitality and continued productivity of the research enterprise, NIGMS provides leadership in training the next generation of scientists, in enhancing the diversity of the scientific workforce, and in developing research capacity throughout the country.

All NIH Institutes and Centers support basic research that is relevant to the diseases, organ systems, stages of life, or populations within their mission areas. In contrast, NIGMS supports fundamental research that does not focus on those specific areas. NIGMS&#x27; research mission is aimed at understanding the principles, mechanisms, and processes that underlie living organisms, often using research models. NIGMS also supports the development of fundamental methods and new technologies to achieve its mission. NIGMS-supported research may utilize specific cells or organ systems if they serve as models for understanding general principles.

NIGMS also supports research in specific clinical areas that affect multiple organ systems: anesthesiology and peri-operative pain; sepsis; clinical pharmacology that is common to multiple drugs and treatments; and trauma, burn injury, and wound healing.

NIGMS is organized into the following divisions that support research, research training, and capacity building in a range of scientific fields:

* Division of Biophysics, Biomedical Technology, and Computational Biosciences
* Division of Genetics and Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology
* Division of Pharmacology, Physiology, and Biological Chemistry
* Division for Research Capacity Building
* Division of Training, Workforce Development, and Diversity

NIGMS was established in 1962. In Fiscal Year 2017, the institute&#x27;s budget was $2.6 billion. The vast majority of this money funds grants to scientists at universities, medical schools, hospitals, and other research institutions throughout the country. At any given time, NIGMS supports more than 3,000 investigators and 4,000 research grants—around 11 percent of the total number of research grants funded by NIH as a whole. Additionally, NIGMS supports approximately 26 percent of the NRSA trainees who receive assistance from NIH.

NIGMS produces a number of free science education materials on topics such as cell biology, genetics, chemistry, pharmacology, structural biology, and computational biology. The institute also produces the magazine &quot;Findings&quot;.

== Past directors ==
The following people have served as Director of the NIGMS:

== Research advances ==
Among the advances that scientists have made with NIGMS support are:
* Discovering a gene-silencing process called RNA interference, or RNAi, that is both a powerful research tool and a promising new approach for treating diseases. 
* Revealing how a protein&#x27;s shape affects its function, which plays a key role in health and disease and also informs the design of new drugs.
* Increasing survival from burn injury, in part by improving methods of wound care, nutrition and infection control. 
* Shedding light on the critical functions of carbohydrates, sugar molecules found on all living cells that are vital to fertilization, inflammation, blood clotting and viral infection. 
* Modeling infectious disease outbreaks and the impact of interventions through computer simulations to provide valuable information to public health policymakers. 
* Developing new methods to look inside cells and other living systems. These approaches have advanced what we know about basic life processes in a range of organisms.

== Notes and references ==
== External links ==
* 
* NIGMS account on USAspending.gov</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6973666" start="4" end="50" title="National Institute of General Medical Sciences" label="National Institute of General Medical Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973666" start="52" end="57" title="National Institute of General Medical Sciences" label="NIGMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="73" end="108" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health (NIH)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="169" end="187" title="Federal government of the United States" label="Federal Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="215" end="259" title="United States Department of Health and Human Services" label="U.S. Department of Health and Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="303" end="311" title="research" label="research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996394" start="344" end="364" title="Biological process" label="biological processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q230788" start="2421" end="2427" title="Grant (money)" label="grants"/>
<link wikidata="Q230788" start="2617" end="2632" title="Research Grants" label="research grants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141" start="2903" end="2915" title="cell biology" label="cell biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="2917" end="2925" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="2927" end="2936" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q128406" start="2938" end="2950" title="pharmacology" label="pharmacology"/>
<link wikidata="Q908902" start="2952" end="2970" title="structural biology" label="structural biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q177005" start="2976" end="2997" title="computational biology" label="computational biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q201993" start="3304" end="3308" title="RNA interference" label="RNAi"/>
<link wikidata="Q110644040" start="4258" end="4273" title="USAspending.gov" label="USAspending.gov"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211656" wikidata="Q6646945" url="?curid=211656" title="Lists of corporate assets">
<text>This page is an index for lists of some assets owned by large corporations.

==Holding companies==
*List of assets owned by Berkshire Hathaway
*List of assets owned by Bertelsmann
*List of assets owned by Nestlé
*List of assets owned by Procter &amp; Gamble
*List of assets owned by Shaw Communications
*List of assets owned by Sony
*List of assets owned by Unilever
*List of assets owned by Vivendi
*List of assets owned by Walmart

==Supermarket companies==
*List of assets owned by Ahold Delhaize
*List of assets owned by Albertsons
*List of assets owned by Canadian Tire
*List of assets owned by Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company
*List of assets owned by Kroger
*List of assets owned by Loblaw Companies
*List of assets owned by Schwarz Gruppe
*List of assets owned by Wakefern Food Corporation
*List of assets owned by Walmart

==Media companies==
Media companies are included here based on their inclusion in an online list provided by the &quot;Columbia Journalism Review&quot;, published by the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism. The country in which the company has its corporate headquarters is noted after each company name. ( this list is incomplete.)
*List of assets owned by ABS-CBN
*List of assets owned by Advance Publications
*List of assets owned by Amazon MGM Studios
*List of assets owned by American Media
*List of assets owned by Bell Media
*List of assets owned by Belo Corporation
*List of assets owned by Bertelsmann
*List of assets owned by CanWest Global Communications
*List of assets owned by Clear Channel Communications
*List of assets owned by Comcast
*List of assets owned by Corus Entertainment
*List of assets owned by Dow Jones
*List of assets owned by Fox Corporation
*List of assets owned by Gannett
*List of assets owned by Hearst Corporation
*List of assets owned by Hubbard Broadcasting Corporation
*List of assets owned by Lionsgate
*List of assets owned by News Corp
*List of assets owned by The New York Times Company
*List of assets owned by Rogers Communications
*List of assets owned by Sinclair Broadcast Group
*List of assets owned by The Walt Disney Company
*List of assets owned by Nexstar Media Group
*List of assets owned by Paramount Global
*List of assets owned by Village Voice Media
*List of assets owned by Vivendi
*List of assets owned by Warner Bros. Discovery
*List of assets owned by Washington Post Company
*List of assets owned by Saban Capital Group
*List of assets owned by Sony

==Video game companies==
*List of assets owned by Activision
*List of assets owned by Electronic Arts
*List of assets owned by Embracer Group
*List of assets owned by PlayStation Studios
*List of assets owned by Take-Two Interactive
*List of assets owned by Tencent
*List of assets owned by Xbox Game Studios

==Food and drink companies==
*List of assets owned by AB InBev
*List of assets owned by Bacardi
*List of assets owned by Cadbury
*List of assets owned by Cara Operations
*List of assets owned by CKE Restaurants
*List of assets owned by The Coca-Cola Company
*List of assets owned by ConAgra Foods, Inc.
*List of assets owned by Diageo
*List of assets owned by Focus Brands
*List of assets owned by The Hershey Company
*List of assets owned by Hormel Foods
*List of assets owned by Inspire Brands
*List of assets owned by The J.M. Smucker Company
*List of assets owned by Keurig Dr Pepper
*List of assets owned by Kraft Heinz
*List of assets owned by Mars, Incorporated
*List of assets owned by Molson Coors
*List of assets owned by Nabisco
*List of assets owned by Nestlé
*List of assets owned by PepsiCo
*List of assets owned by Pernod Ricard
*List of assets owned by Restaurant Brands International
*List of assets owned by Yum! Brands, Inc.

==Toy companies==
*List of assets owned by Hasbro (Games only)
*List of assets owned by Hasbro (Toys only)
*List of assets owned by Mattel (Games only)
*List of assets owned by Mattel (Toys only)
*List of assets owned by Pressman

==See also==
* Concentration of media ownership
*Stock-taking
*Hostile takeover

==References==

*Adbusters: Who Owns What</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q873506" start="16" end="21" title="index (publishing)" label="index"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498684" start="47" end="52" title="ownership" label="owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q867651" start="100" end="142" title="List of assets owned by Berkshire Hathaway" label="List of assets owned by Berkshire Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606260" start="144" end="179" title="List of assets owned by Bertelsmann" label="List of assets owned by Bertelsmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q957725" start="181" end="211" title="List of Nestlé brands" label="List of assets owned by Nestlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424488" start="213" end="257" title="List of Procter &amp;amp; Gamble brands" label="List of assets owned by Procter &amp;amp; Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606275" start="259" end="302" title="List of assets owned by Shaw Communications" label="List of assets owned by Shaw Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065505" start="304" end="332" title="List of assets owned by Sony" label="List of assets owned by Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601433" start="334" end="366" title="List of Unilever brands" label="List of assets owned by Unilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245646" start="368" end="399" title="List of assets owned by Vivendi" label="List of assets owned by Vivendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606282" start="401" end="432" title="List of assets owned by Walmart" label="List of assets owned by Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q20539261" start="461" end="499" title="Ahold Delhaize" label="List of assets owned by Ahold Delhaize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831861" start="501" end="535" title="Albertsons" label="List of assets owned by Albertsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032400" start="537" end="574" title="Canadian Tire" label="List of assets owned by Canadian Tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="576" end="625" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="List of assets owned by Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q153417" start="627" end="657" title="Kroger" label="List of assets owned by Kroger"/>
<link wikidata="Q909856" start="659" end="699" title="Loblaw Companies" label="List of assets owned by Loblaw Companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q712034" start="701" end="739" title="Schwarz Gruppe" label="List of assets owned by Schwarz Gruppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961016" start="741" end="790" title="Wakefern Food Corporation" label="List of assets owned by Wakefern Food Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606282" start="792" end="823" title="List of assets owned by Walmart" label="List of assets owned by Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149747" start="944" end="970" title="Columbia Journalism Review" label="Columbia Journalism Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q844673" start="995" end="1044" title="Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism" label="Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606258" start="1173" end="1204" title="List of assets owned by ABS-CBN" label="List of assets owned by ABS-CBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977307" start="1206" end="1250" title="List of Advance subsidiaries" label="List of assets owned by Advance Publications"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1252" end="1294" title="Amazon MGM Studios#Assets" label="List of assets owned by Amazon MGM Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q465666" start="1296" end="1334" title="American Media (publisher)" label="List of assets owned by American Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606259" start="1336" end="1370" title="List of assets owned by Bell Media" label="List of assets owned by Bell Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q729754" start="1372" end="1412" title="Belo Corporation" label="List of assets owned by Belo Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q156913" start="1414" end="1449" title="Bertelsmann" label="List of assets owned by Bertelsmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606275" start="1451" end="1504" title="List of assets owned by CanWest Global Communications" label="List of assets owned by CanWest Global Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="1506" end="1558" title="List of assets owned by Clear Channel Communications" label="List of assets owned by Clear Channel Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606269" start="1560" end="1591" title="List of assets owned by Comcast" label="List of assets owned by Comcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606270" start="1593" end="1636" title="List of assets owned by Corus Entertainment" label="List of assets owned by Corus Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329921" start="1638" end="1671" title="List of assets owned by Dow Jones" label="List of assets owned by Dow Jones"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1673" end="1712" title="Fox Corporation#Assets" label="List of assets owned by Fox Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571626" start="1714" end="1745" title="List of assets owned by Gannett" label="List of assets owned by Gannett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606271" start="1747" end="1789" title="List of assets owned by Hearst Corporation" label="List of assets owned by Hearst Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5926819" start="1791" end="1847" title="List of assets owned by Hubbard Broadcasting Corporation" label="List of assets owned by Hubbard Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q129642421" start="1849" end="1882" title="List of assets owned by Lionsgate" label="List of assets owned by Lionsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329921" start="1884" end="1917" title="List of assets owned by News Corp" label="List of assets owned by News Corp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606281" start="1919" end="1969" title="List of assets owned by The New York Times Company" label="List of assets owned by The New York Times Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606274" start="1971" end="2016" title="List of assets owned by Rogers Communications" label="List of assets owned by Rogers Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880843" start="2018" end="2066" title="List of assets owned by Sinclair Broadcast Group" label="List of assets owned by Sinclair Broadcast Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q283194" start="2068" end="2115" title="List of assets owned by The Walt Disney Company" label="List of assets owned by The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q55620202" start="2117" end="2160" title="List of assets owned by Nexstar Media Group" label="List of assets owned by Nexstar Media Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969410" start="2162" end="2202" title="List of assets owned by Paramount Global" label="List of assets owned by Paramount Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q14479155" start="2204" end="2247" title="List of assets owned by Village Voice Media" label="List of assets owned by Village Voice Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245646" start="2249" end="2280" title="List of assets owned by Vivendi" label="List of assets owned by Vivendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749476" start="2282" end="2328" title="List of assets owned by Warner Bros. Discovery" label="List of assets owned by Warner Bros. Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121014" start="2330" end="2377" title="List of assets owned by Washington Post Company" label="List of assets owned by Washington Post Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2379" end="2422" title="Saban Capital Group#Units" label="List of assets owned by Saban Capital Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065505" start="2424" end="2452" title="List of assets owned by Sony" label="List of assets owned by Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q200491" start="2480" end="2514" title="Activision" label="List of assets owned by Activision"/>
<link wikidata="Q173941" start="2516" end="2555" title="Electronic Arts" label="List of assets owned by Electronic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q65083539" start="2557" end="2595" title="Embracer Group" label="List of assets owned by Embracer Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q542018" start="2597" end="2640" title="PlayStation Studios" label="List of assets owned by PlayStation Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q94933" start="2642" end="2686" title="Take-Two Interactive" label="List of assets owned by Take-Two Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q860580" start="2688" end="2719" title="Tencent" label="List of assets owned by Tencent"/>
<link wikidata="Q73801" start="2721" end="2762" title="Xbox Game Studios" label="List of assets owned by Xbox Game Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q6008710" start="2794" end="2826" title="AB InBev brands" label="List of assets owned by AB InBev"/>
<link wikidata="Q685395" start="2828" end="2859" title="Bacardi" label="List of assets owned by Bacardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149875" start="2861" end="2892" title="List of Cadbury products" label="List of assets owned by Cadbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606268" start="2894" end="2933" title="List of assets owned by Cara Operations" label="List of assets owned by Cara Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012359" start="2935" end="2974" title="CKE Restaurants" label="List of assets owned by CKE Restaurants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606277" start="2976" end="3021" title="List of assets owned by The Coca-Cola Company" label="List of assets owned by The Coca-Cola Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3023" end="3066" title="ConAgra Foods, Inc.#Subsidiaries" label="List of assets owned by ConAgra Foods, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q161140" start="3068" end="3098" title="Diageo" label="List of assets owned by Diageo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463916" start="3100" end="3136" title="Focus Brands" label="List of assets owned by Focus Brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056637" start="3138" end="3181" title="The Hershey Company" label="List of assets owned by The Hershey Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454852" start="3183" end="3219" title="Hormel Foods" label="List of assets owned by Hormel Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074808" start="3221" end="3259" title="Inspire Brands" label="List of assets owned by Inspire Brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742790" start="3261" end="3309" title="The J.M. Smucker Company" label="List of assets owned by The J.M. Smucker Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569272" start="3311" end="3351" title="List of Keurig Dr Pepper brands" label="List of assets owned by Keurig Dr Pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q19681433" start="3353" end="3388" title="Kraft Heinz" label="List of assets owned by Kraft Heinz"/>
<link wikidata="Q109875672" start="3390" end="3432" title="List of assets owned by Mars, Incorporated" label="List of assets owned by Mars, Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821377" start="3434" end="3470" title="List of Molson Coors brands" label="List of assets owned by Molson Coors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545718" start="3472" end="3503" title="Nabisco" label="List of assets owned by Nabisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q957725" start="3505" end="3535" title="List of Nestlé brands" label="List of assets owned by Nestlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606273" start="3537" end="3568" title="List of assets owned by PepsiCo" label="List of assets owned by PepsiCo"/>
<link wikidata="Q837049" start="3570" end="3607" title="Pernod Ricard" label="List of assets owned by Pernod Ricard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619470" start="3609" end="3664" title="Restaurant Brands International" label="List of assets owned by Restaurant Brands International"/>
<link wikidata="Q668737" start="3666" end="3707" title="List of assets owned by Yum! Brands, Inc." label="List of assets owned by Yum! Brands, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q6572921" start="3728" end="3771" title="List of Hasbro games" label="List of assets owned by Hasbro (Games only)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572922" start="3773" end="3815" title="List of Hasbro toys" label="List of assets owned by Hasbro (Toys only)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984754" start="3817" end="3860" title="List of Mattel games" label="List of assets owned by Mattel (Games only)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589469" start="3862" end="3904" title="List of Mattel toys" label="List of assets owned by Mattel (Toys only)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241672" start="3906" end="3938" title="Pressman Toy Corporation" label="List of assets owned by Pressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309976" start="3955" end="3987" title="Concentration of media ownership" label="Concentration of media ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643006" start="3989" end="4001" title="Stock-taking" label="Stock-taking"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4003" end="4019" title="Takeover#Hostile" label="Hostile takeover"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211665" wikidata="Q344118" url="?curid=211665" title="Stephen I">
<text>Stephen I may refer to:

*Pope Stephen I, Bishop of Rome from 254 to 257
*Stephen I of Antioch, Patriarch of Antioch from 342 to 344
*Stephen I of Iberia (died 627), of the Guaramid Dynasty, presiding prince of Iberia from c. 590 to 627
*Ecumenical Patriarch Stephen I of Constantinople (867–893), Patriarch of Constantinople
*Stephen I, Count of Troyes (died 1020), seventh Count of Meaux
*Stephen I of Hungary (967/969/975 – 1038), Grand Prince of the Hungarians and first King of Hungary 
*Stephen I of Croatia (ruled 1030–1058)
*Stephan I, Count of Sponheim (d. ca. 1080)
*Stephen I, Count of Burgundy (1065–1102), Count Palatine of Burgundy, Count of Burgundy and Count of Mâcon and Vienne
*Stephen of England (c. 1096 – 1154) may be referred to as Stephen I
*Stephen I of Sancerre (1133–1190), Count of Sancerre and son of Count Theobald II of Champagne
*Stefan Nemanja (1109–1199), Medieval Serb nobleman, Grand Prince of the medieval Serb state of Rascia
*Stephen I, Duke of Bavaria (1271–1310), duke of Lower Bavaria as co-regent of his older brothers Otto III and Louis III 
*Stephen I, Ban of Bosnia (1242–1314), Bosnian Ban
*Stephen I of Moldavia (r. 1394–1399)
*Stephen Báthory of Poland (1533–1586), Hungarian noble Prince of Transylvania, King consort of Poland and Grand Duke consort of Lithuania.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q134666" start="26" end="40" title="Pope Stephen I" label="Pope Stephen I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145325" start="74" end="94" title="Stephen I of Antioch" label="Stephen I of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092494" start="134" end="153" title="Stephen I of Iberia" label="Stephen I of Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269166" start="238" end="286" title="Ecumenical Patriarch Stephen I of Constantinople" label="Ecumenical Patriarch Stephen I of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q925207" start="327" end="353" title="Stephen I, Count of Troyes" label="Stephen I, Count of Troyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q177903" start="391" end="411" title="Stephen I of Hungary" label="Stephen I of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q278038" start="493" end="513" title="Stephen I of Croatia" label="Stephen I of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608137" start="533" end="561" title="Stephan I, Count of Sponheim" label="Stephan I, Count of Sponheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339109" start="577" end="605" title="Stephen I, Count of Burgundy" label="Stephen I, Count of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60849" start="696" end="714" title="Stephen of England" label="Stephen of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q301217" start="765" end="786" title="Stephen I of Sancerre" label="Stephen I of Sancerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q298612" start="861" end="875" title="Stefan Nemanja" label="Stefan Nemanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q61967" start="964" end="990" title="Stephen I, Duke of Bavaria" label="Stephen I, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289015" start="1086" end="1110" title="Stephen I, Ban of Bosnia" label="Stephen I, Ban of Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q845475" start="1137" end="1158" title="Stephen I of Moldavia" label="Stephen I of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54030" start="1175" end="1200" title="Stephen Báthory of Poland" label="Stephen Báthory of Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211667" wikidata="Q2903144" url="?curid=211667" title="Bill Buckner">
<text>William Joseph Buckner (December 14, 1949 – May 27, 2019) was an American first baseman and left fielder in Major League Baseball (MLB) who played for five teams from through , most notably the Chicago Cubs, Los Angeles Dodgers, and Boston Red Sox. Beginning his career as an outfielder with the Dodgers, Buckner helped the team to the pennant with a .314 batting average, but a serious ankle injury the next year led to his trade to the Cubs before the season. The Cubs moved him to first base, and he won the National League (NL) batting title with a .324 mark in 1980. He was named to the All-Star team the following year as he led the major leagues in doubles. After setting a major league record for first basemen with 159 assists in , Buckner surpassed that total with 161 in while again leading the NL in doubles. Feuds with team management over a loss of playing time resulted in him being traded to the Red Sox in the middle of the season.

During the season, Buckner started all 162 games and shattered his own record with 184 assists. Toward the end of the season, he was hobbled by leg injuries and struggled throughout the playoffs. His tenth-inning error in Game 6 of the 1986 World Series against the New York Mets remains one of the most memorable plays in baseball history; it was long considered part of a curse on the Red Sox that kept them from winning the World Series after the baseball slipped behind the legs, and led to years of fan anger and public mockery that Buckner handled graciously before being embraced by Red Sox fans again after their 2004 World Series victory.

After spending his last few seasons with the California Angels, Kansas City Royals, and Red Sox, Buckner became the 21st player in major league history to play in four decades. He ended his career with 2,715 hits and 498 doubles, having batted over .300 seven times with three seasons of 100 runs batted in (RBI). Buckner led his league in assists four times, with his 1985 mark remaining the American League (AL) record. He retired with the fourth-most assists by a first baseman (1,351) in major league history despite not playing the position regularly until he was 27 years old. After retiring as a player, Buckner became a real estate developer in Idaho. He coached a number of Minor League Baseball (MiLB) teams before leaving baseball in 2014.

==Early years==
Buckner was born in Vallejo, California, and grew up in nearby American Canyon. He and his brothers Bob and Jim, and Jim&#x27;s twin sister Jan, were raised by their parents, Leonard and Marie Katherine Buckner; his father died in 1966, when Bill was a teenager. His mother was a stenographer for the California Highway Patrol.

He graduated from Napa High School in 1968 after playing on the school&#x27;s baseball and football teams. While playing football, he was a two-time All-State receiver and also achieved All-America honors twice.

As a baseball player at Napa High School, Buckner hit .667 in 1967 and .529 in 1968 under coach Dale Fisher. As a football player, Buckner is still in the Napa record lists for reception yards in a season (579), career reception yards (963), and career receptions (61). At first, Buckner contemplated attending Stanford or USC, but he eventually chose professional baseball instead.

Buckner was selected by the Los Angeles Dodgers in the second round of the 1968 Major League Baseball draft; his friend Bobby Valentine was the Dodgers&#x27; first-round pick. Upon signing with the Dodgers, Buckner was assigned to the Ogden Dodgers of the Pioneer League. He also briefly attended Los Angeles Valley College, USC and Arizona State University. He became a member of the Sigma Chi fraternity while a farmhand with the Dodgers, and roomed with Valentine while attending USC after his first professional season.

==Career==
===Minor leagues (1968–1970)===
At age 18, Buckner made his professional debut playing with the Ogden Dodgers of the Rookie Pioneer league in 1968, hitting .344 with 4 home runs and 44 RBI in 64 games. He was teammates with Valentine and Steve Garvey, who also were playing in their first professional seasons. The manager at Ogden was Tommy Lasorda.

In 1969, Buckner played with four Dodger teams, as he advanced quickly in the Dodgers&#x27; farm system. He hit .350 with 6 home runs and 36 RBI in 46 games with the Dodgers team in the Arizona Instructional League. He then batted .307 with 7 home runs and 50 RBI with the Class AA Albuquerque Dodgers, and .315 with 2 home runs and 27 RBI in 36 games with the Class AAA Spokane Indians of the Pacific Coast League. While at Spokane, Buckner&#x27;s manager was once again Lasorda. Buckner was called up to the Dodgers late in the season at age 19, popping up to second base as a pinch hitter for Jim Brewer in the 9th inning of a 4–3 road loss to the San Francisco Giants on September 21 in his only appearance.

Buckner spent April with the Dodgers, picking up his first hit in a 5–2 loss to the Cincinnati Reds on April 8, but after batting .121 with no home runs or RBI, he was returned to Triple-A Spokane, where he played 111 games under Lasorda after he was given leave to complete finals at USC. He hit .335 with 3 home runs and 74 RBI, playing alongside Garvey, Valentine, Davey Lopes, Tom Paciorek, Bill Russell, Charlie Hough, and Doyle Alexander, among others. Buckner played most of the 1970 season with a broken jaw and with his jaw wired shut. Spokane finished 94–52, and Buckner was again called up to the Dodgers in September. He batted .257 in the final month, with 4 RBI and 5 runs scored.

===Los Angeles Dodgers (1971–1976)===
Buckner earned a starting job with the Dodgers in as their opening-day right fielder, and hit his first career home run off Don Wilson of the Houston Astros on April 6, providing the only scoring in a 2–0 road win. Buckner also played some first base with the Dodgers, making 87 starts at first in . However, when Steve Garvey emerged as a Gold Glove first baseman and the National League&#x27;s Most Valuable Player the following season, Buckner was shifted to left field permanently. Buckner played a supporting role in a baseball milestone on April 8, . Playing left field, he climbed the fence in an attempt to catch Hank Aaron&#x27;s record 715th home run. He also played in his first World Series that year, which the Dodgers lost to the Oakland Athletics in five games; Buckner hit .250 in the Series, including a home run off Catfish Hunter in Game 3, a 3–2 road loss.

In his Dodgers career, Buckner batted .289 with 38 home runs and 277 runs batted in in 773 games.

===Chicago Cubs (1977–1984)===
Following the 1976 season, Buckner was traded with Iván DeJesús and Jeff Albert to the Chicago Cubs for Rick Monday and Mike Garman. He had suffered a staph infection in his ankle in 1976, so the Cubs shifted him to first base, the playing position where he remained for the final 14 years of his career.
Whereas early indications seemed to lean toward the Dodgers getting the better end of this deal – with Monday becoming one of the key centerpieces of the Dodgers clubs that went to the and 1978 World Series – Buckner soon emerged as something of a star for the beleaguered Cubs. On May 17, 1979, in a famous slugfest at Wrigley Field in which the Cubs lost 23–22 to the Philadelphia Phillies, with three homers by Dave Kingman and two by Mike Schmidt, Buckner went 4–for–7 with a grand slam off Tug McGraw and a career-high seven RBI. But when manager Herman Franks resigned late in the season, he made negative comments about several players, including calling Buckner &quot;nuts&quot;.

In 1980 Buckner won the NL batting title with a .324 average. He also struck out only 18 times – once every 32 at bats – batting in front of Kingman. Keith Hernandez (.321) and Garry Templeton (.319) finished just behind Buckner in the race for the NL batting title. In the strike-interrupted 1981 season, he batted .311 while tying Cecil Cooper for the major league lead with 35 doubles; he was the Cubs&#x27; sole representative at the All-Star Game, where he grounded out to first base pinch hitting for Manny Trillo in the 9th inning of a 5–4 NL victory, their 10th consecutive All-Star win. In 1982 Buckner batted over .300 for the fourth time in Chicago, picked up a career-high 201 hits, drove in 105 runs – the first time he had topped 75 – and recorded 159 assists at first base, breaking Mickey Vernon&#x27;s 1949 major league record of 155. In 1983 he again led the NL with 38 doubles, but saw his batting average drop to .280, his lowest mark in eight years.

During the season, Buckner saw a loss of playing time at first base to Leon Durham. Because of his lack of playing time, Buckner was at odds with the Cubs management; in protest, he vowed not to shave until he played two games in a row at first base. Buckner finally shaved between games of a doubleheader on May 24, because he found out he was going to be traded the next day to the Boston Red Sox; the Cubs went on to win their division, reaching the postseason for the first time in 39 years. In eight seasons with the Cubs, Buckner hit .300 with 81 home runs, 235 doubles, and 516 RBI in 974 games.

===Boston Red Sox (1984–1987)===
Early in the season, the Red Sox were in the market for an upgrade at first base. On May 25, they acquired Buckner from the Cubs for Dennis Eckersley and Mike Brumley. The Red Sox were 19–25 and in sixth place in the American League East at the time of the trade, but improved to 67–51 the rest of the way to finish the season in fourth place. On September 21, Buckner enjoyed the first five-hit game of his career in an 8–0 road win over the Baltimore Orioles.

Buckner appeared in all 162 games for the Red Sox in , and batted .299 with 16 home runs while posting career highs with 110 RBI, 201 hits, and 46 doubles. He was a prototypical contact hitter, and struck out just 36 times in 719 plate appearances to lead the American League in that category in 1985. (He also led the NL in most at bats per strikeout in , and , and placed second in , , , and .) In 1985, he also extended his own major league record for assists in a season with 184. The record stood for almost 25 years until the St. Louis Cardinals&#x27; Albert Pujols broke Buckner&#x27;s record with 185 assists in .

On June 5, 1986, Buckner picked up his 1,000th career RBI on a ground out in a 7–5 road loss to the Milwaukee Brewers. On August 21, he again had five hits in a blowout 24–5 road win over the Cleveland Indians. In September, he hit .340 with eight home runs and 22 RBI, while missing just three games in spite of chronic ankle soreness. Dave Stapleton, the Red Sox first baseman before the acquisition of Buckner, began seeing more playing time as a late-inning defensive replacement in September and October. Meanwhile, Buckner became the first major league player to wear Nike high-top baseball cleats professionally to relieve pressure on his ankles. That season, Buckner hit a career-high 18 home runs, drove in more than 100 runs for the second season in a row, and was a key member of the team that won the American League East by 5 games. He entered Game 5 of the 1986 American League Championship Series batting just .111 in the Series, and was zero for three in the game when he singled to start a ninth-inning rally which was capped off by Dave Henderson&#x27;s famous home run. He went three for six in the final two games as the Red Sox came back from the brink of elimination to defeat the California Angels and win the American League pennant.

====1986 World Series====
The 1986 Red Sox were leading the heavily favored New York Mets three games to two in the 1986 World Series when Game 6 went into extra innings. For his part, Buckner was batting just .143 against Mets pitching, and he was 0–for–5 in Game 6. When the Red Sox scored two runs in the top of the tenth, Boston manager John McNamara chose to have Buckner take the field in the bottom of the inning instead of bringing Stapleton in as a defensive replacement for the ailing Buckner, as he had in Games 1, 2, and 5.

With two outs and no one on base, New York struck back with three straight singles off Calvin Schiraldi, and tied the game on a wild pitch by Bob Stanley. Mookie Wilson fouled off several pitches before hitting a slow roller to Buckner at first base. Aware of Wilson&#x27;s speed, Buckner tried to rush the play. As a result, the ball rolled to the left side of his glove, through his legs, and into shallow right field, allowing Ray Knight to score the winning run from second base. Had Buckner fielded the ball with Wilson safe at first, the score would have remained tied for the next Mets batter. Had Buckner put out Wilson at first base, Game 6 would have gone to an 11th inning.

Boston led Game 7 by a 3–0 score heading into the bottom of the sixth inning when New York rallied again, scoring 3 runs off Bruce Hurst to tie the game, and 3 more off Schiraldi in the seventh to take a 6–3 lead. Buckner was two for four in the game, and scored one of Boston&#x27;s two runs in the eighth. However, the Mets also scored twice in the eighth, and won 8–5 for their second and most recent World Series championship.

====Fallout====
Regardless of any of the other perceived shortcomings that led to Boston&#x27;s loss in the 1986 World Series, Buckner&#x27;s error epitomized the &quot;Curse of the Bambino&quot; in the minds of Red Sox fans, and he soon became the scapegoat for a frustrated fan base. Buckner began receiving death threats and was heckled and booed by some of his own home fans, often with the false belief or implication that his play alone could have instantly won the series for the Red Sox. Meanwhile, he was the focal point of derision from the fans of opposing teams on the road—especially when he faced the Mets in spring training of 1987—and during his first regular-season at bat at Yankee Stadium. He made his 2,500th career hit on May 19, an RBI single in a 4–1 road loss to the Kansas City Royals, but the Red Sox released Buckner on July 23 after he recorded a .273 batting average, two home runs, and 42 RBI in 75 games.

===California Angels (1987–1988)===
Upon his release from the Red Sox, Buckner signed with the California Angels. For the remainder of the 1987 season, Buckner batted .306 and drove in 32 runs in 57 games. In 76 total games with the Angels, Buckner hit .288 with three home runs and 41 RBI.

===Kansas City Royals (1988–1989)===
At 38 years old, Buckner was released by the Angels on May 9, , just before a road trip that would have brought him to the east coast to face the Yankees and Red Sox. He signed with the Royals shortly after his release and walked into Fenway Park as a player for the opposing team for the first time on July 15. He went one for two off Roger Clemens with a walk.

In 168 games with the Royals, Buckner hit .239 with four home runs and 50 RBI.

===Second Red Sox stint (1990)===
Buckner returned to the Red Sox in as a free agent and received a standing ovation from the crowd during player introductions at the home opener on April 9.

Buckner&#x27;s last home run was against Kirk McCaskill on April 25, 1990, at Fenway Park, the only inside-the-park home run of his career. Despite being one of the slowest runners in baseball, the 40-year-old Buckner circled the bases in the fourth inning when Angels outfielder Claudell Washington crashed into Fenway&#x27;s three-foot high right-field wall and somersaulted into the front row of seats.

His return was short-lived; he retired on June 5 with a .186 batting average, one home run, and three RBI that season. In 526 career games with Boston, Buckner hit .279 with 48 home runs, 112 doubles, and 324 RBI.

==Career stats==
Buckner was a speedy baserunner until his ankle surgeries in 1975 and 1976 for a severe ankle sprain and bone chips, respectively. He twice finished in the top 10 in the league in stolen bases ( and 1976) and twice led the league in doubles (1981 and 1983). After moving to first base, he played 1,555 regular-season games and made only 128 errors in 13,901 chances.

In 2,517 games over 22 seasons, Buckner batted .289 (2,715–for–9,397) with 1,077 runs scored, 498 doubles, 49 triples, 174 home runs, 1,208 RBI, 183 stolen bases, 450 walks, an on-base percentage of .321, and a slugging percentage of .408. Defensively, he recorded a .991 fielding percentage at first base and at left and right field.

==Post-playing career==
After Buckner retired from baseball, he moved his family to Idaho where he invested in real estate in the Boise area. One of the housing subdivisions that he developed is named &quot;Fenway Park&quot;. He lent his name to and was a minority owner of a local car dealership, Bill Buckner Motors in Emmett, which was in business from 2006 to 2008.

On April 8, , Buckner threw out the first pitch to former teammate Dwight Evans at the Red Sox home opener as they unfurled their 2007 World Series championship banner. He received a two-minute standing ovation from the sell-out crowd. After the game, when asked if he had any second thoughts about appearing at the game, he said, &quot;I really had to forgive, not the fans of Boston, per se, but I would have to say in my heart I had to forgive the media for what they put me and my family through. So, you know, I&#x27;ve done that and I&#x27;m over that.&quot;

On January 4, 2011, Buckner was named the manager of the Brockton Rox of the Can-Am League. The Rox posted a 51–42 record in 2011, but after the season, the Rox dropped the professional format to join the Futures Collegiate Baseball League.

In December 2011, Buckner became the hitting instructor for the Boise Hawks for the 2012 season. The Hawks were the Chicago Cubs affiliate in the Class A-Short Season Northwest League. Buckner announced his retirement from baseball on March 3, 2014. Buckner was inducted into the Napa High School Hall Of Fame in 1997 and the CIF Sac-Joaquin Section Hall of Fame in 2010.

Buckner was inducted into the Baseball Reliquary&#x27;s Shrine of the Eternals in 2008.

==Personal life==
Buckner and his wife Jody had two daughters, Brittany and Christen, and a son, Bobby. Bobby was a member of the Texas A&amp;M–Corpus Christi Islanders baseball team.

===Death===
Buckner died on May 27, 2019, of Lewy body dementia at the age of 69. He was surrounded by his wife Jody and three children at the time of his death.

In a statement, Buckner&#x27;s family said, &quot;Bill fought with courage and grit as he did all things in life. Our hearts are broken but we are at peace knowing he is in the arms of his Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.&quot; Buckner&#x27;s funeral service was held at Calvary Chapel in Boise, Idaho.

==References in popular culture==
In the 1974 episode of the TV series &quot;Emergency!&quot; entitled “Nagging Suspicion,” Buckner is mentioned as “batting .300” by one of the fire fighters reading the newspaper. The series is set in Los Angeles and at the time Buckner was playing for the Dodgers. Charlie Sheen purchased the &quot;Buckner Ball&quot; at auction in for $93,000, and for a long time, it resided in the collection of songwriter and Mets fan Seth Swirsky, who refers to it as the &quot;Mookie Ball&quot;. The ball was on loan for a time from Swirsky to the Mets to display in their Hall of Fame and Museum, and it was among the most popular artifacts for fans to see. On May 3, 2012, Swirsky sold the ball through Heritage Auctions for $418,250.

Buckner made a cameo appearance at the beginning of the sports parody film &quot;The Comebacks&quot; and was featured in an episode of the HBO series &quot;Curb Your Enthusiasm&quot;. He also made a cameo appearance in the pilot episode of the short-lived sitcom &quot;Inside Schwartz&quot;, advising the title character to &quot;just let it go&quot;. In 1995, Buckner appeared along with Michael Jordan, Stan Musial, Willie Mays and Ken Griffey Jr. in a commercial for the shoemaker Nike in which Spike Lee, in character as Mars Blackmon, compares Jordan&#x27;s baseball skills to Musial, Mays, Griffey and Buckner. The punch line is a visual reference to Buckner&#x27;s 1986 World Series error. His famous 1986 World Series miscue is also referenced in the films &quot;Celtic Pride&quot;, &quot;Rounders,&quot; and &quot;Fever Pitch&quot;. The play is also referenced in an episode of &quot;The Simpsons&quot; titled &quot;Brother&#x27;s Little Helper&quot; and in the musical &quot;Johnny Baseball&quot;. On October 23, 2008, during former Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan&#x27;s testimony in House hearings on the economic crisis of 2008, Representative John Yarmuth referred to Greenspan as one of &quot;three Bill Buckners&quot;. Buckner and Mookie Wilson appeared in an MLB Network commercial for the 2016 postseason, &quot;Catching Up&quot;, marking the 30th anniversary of the 1986 World Series and their roles in it.

Buckner is mentioned in &quot;The Areas of My Expertise&quot; in a series of New England sports references. In the book, John Hodgman describes a (fictional) radio personality and recounts the premonition she had regarding Buckner&#x27;s infamous error in Game 6 of the 1986 World Series.

The Leonard P. Zakim Bunker Hill Memorial Bridge, in Boston, is colloquially referred to by locals as the Bill Buckner Bridge because traffic goes between the &quot;legs&quot; of the bridge, like Buckner&#x27;s 1986 World Series fielding error. The nickname is now spoken fondly, since Buckner and Sox fans thought fondly of each other after the 2004 World Series win.

In the season 2, episode 16 episode of &quot;Boston Legal&quot;, Tom Selleck&#x27;s fiancé needs to be reminded of a tragedy to break out of uncontrolled laughter. The first time this has to be done he reminds her that Bambi&#x27;s mother was shot. The second time Selleck simply says, &quot;Bill Buckner.&quot;

==See also==
*List of Major League Baseball career hits leaders
*List of Major League Baseball career doubles leaders
*List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders
*List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders
*List of Major League Baseball batting champions
*List of Major League Baseball annual doubles leaders
*List of Major League Baseball players who played in four decades
==References==
==Further reading==
* Bill Buckner&#x27;s 1986 World Series error
* 
** &quot;David Ortiz: Cooking with the Pros&quot; Bill Buckner, December 2017, Pages 102–103, 196-197 Author Mulcahy, Susan. ISBN 9780692816400

==External links==
*
*Bill Buckner 
*Bill Buckner at The Baseball Page (via archive.today)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2903144" start="0" end="22" title="Bill Buckner" label="William Joseph Buckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326154" start="74" end="87" title="first baseman" label="first baseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149868" start="92" end="104" title="left fielder" label="left fielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="108" end="129" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="194" end="206" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="208" end="227" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="233" end="247" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="356" end="371" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="511" end="526" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104863" start="532" end="545" title="List of Major League Baseball batting champions" label="batting title"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="592" end="600" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194630" start="656" end="663" title="double (baseball)" label="doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045147" start="728" end="735" title="assist (baseball)" label="assists"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181616" start="1150" end="1168" title="Bill Buckner&amp;#x27;s 1986 World Series error" label="tenth-inning error"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568875" start="1186" end="1203" title="1986 World Series" label="1986 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="1216" end="1229" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358166" start="1324" end="1344" title="Curse of the Bambino" label="curse on the Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341797" start="1571" end="1588" title="2004 World Series" label="2004 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="1644" end="1661" title="California Angels" label="California Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="1663" end="1681" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589010" start="1754" end="1774" title="List of Major League Baseball players who played in four decades" label="play in four decades"/>
<link wikidata="Q713493" start="1807" end="1811" title="hit (baseball)" label="hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="1891" end="1905" title="run batted in" label="runs batted in"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="1992" end="2007" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q695829" start="2227" end="2248" title="real estate developer" label="real estate developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="2252" end="2257" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="2282" end="2303" title="Minor League Baseball" label="Minor League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q208445" start="2387" end="2406" title="Vallejo, California" label="Vallejo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q463679" start="2430" end="2445" title="American Canyon, California" label="American Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249117" start="2668" end="2693" title="California Highway Patrol" label="California Highway Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964786" start="2714" end="2730" title="Napa High School" label="Napa High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302355" start="3086" end="3095" title="Reception (gridiron football)" label="reception"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="3220" end="3228" title="Stanford" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="3232" end="3235" title="University of Southern California" label="USC"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="3321" end="3340" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q970870" start="3368" end="3400" title="1968 Major League Baseball draft" label="1968 Major League Baseball draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101104" start="3413" end="3428" title="Bobby Valentine" label="Bobby Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040850" start="3528" end="3541" title="Ogden Dodgers" label="Ogden Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q870585" start="3549" end="3563" title="Pioneer League (baseball)" label="Pioneer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682369" start="3590" end="3616" title="Los Angeles Valley College" label="Los Angeles Valley College"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="3626" end="3650" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q768929" start="3678" end="3687" title="Sigma Chi" label="Sigma Chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040850" start="3925" end="3938" title="Ogden Dodgers" label="Ogden Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q870585" start="3953" end="3967" title="Pioneer League (baseball)" label="Pioneer league"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="3997" end="4005" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q615887" start="4067" end="4079" title="Steve Garvey" label="Steve Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071896" start="4165" end="4178" title="Tommy Lasorda" label="Tommy Lasorda"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966309" start="4367" end="4395" title="Arizona Instructional League" label="Arizona Instructional League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041096" start="4463" end="4482" title="Albuquerque Dodgers" label="Albuquerque Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578867" start="4552" end="4567" title="Spokane Indians" label="Spokane Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353669" start="4575" end="4595" title="Pacific Coast League" label="Pacific Coast League"/>
<link wikidata="Q209897" start="4760" end="4772" title="pinch hitter" label="pinch hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6193826" start="4777" end="4787" title="Jim Brewer (baseball)" label="Jim Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="4832" end="4852" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="4978" end="4993" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230338" start="5262" end="5273" title="Davey Lopes" label="Davey Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817143" start="5275" end="5287" title="Tom Paciorek" label="Tom Paciorek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910727" start="5289" end="5301" title="Bill Russell (shortstop)" label="Bill Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960863" start="5303" end="5316" title="Charlie Hough" label="Charlie Hough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303738" start="5322" end="5337" title="Doyle Alexander" label="Doyle Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210151" start="5576" end="5587" title="run (baseball)" label="runs scored"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149560" start="5699" end="5712" title="right fielder" label="right fielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293739" start="5752" end="5762" title="Don Wilson (baseball)" label="Don Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="5770" end="5784" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q615887" start="5942" end="5954" title="Steve Garvey" label="Steve Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q120649" start="5968" end="5978" title="Gold Glove" label="Gold Glove"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="6001" end="6016" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="6024" end="6044" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award" label="Most Valuable Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q215777" start="6249" end="6259" title="Hank Aaron" label="Hank Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="6372" end="6389" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q325250" start="6462" end="6476" title="Catfish Hunter" label="Catfish Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577404" start="6650" end="6654" title="1976 in baseball" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q6100039" start="6687" end="6699" title="Iván DeJesús" label="Iván DeJesús"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431584" start="6740" end="6751" title="Rick Monday" label="Rick Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q16142693" start="6756" end="6767" title="Mike Garman" label="Mike Garman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34879" start="6787" end="6802" title="staph infection" label="staph infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q845655" start="7130" end="7147" title="1978 World Series" label="1978 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052807" start="7261" end="7274" title="Wrigley Field" label="Wrigley Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="7311" end="7332" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229109" start="7355" end="7367" title="Dave Kingman" label="Dave Kingman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147513" start="7379" end="7391" title="Mike Schmidt" label="Mike Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074753" start="7421" end="7431" title="Grand slam (baseball)" label="grand slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459273" start="7436" end="7446" title="Tug McGraw" label="Tug McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862400" start="7493" end="7506" title="Herman Franks" label="Herman Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104863" start="7657" end="7670" title="List of Major League Baseball batting champions" label="batting title"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208705" start="7741" end="7747" title="at bat" label="at bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194742" start="7780" end="7795" title="Keith Hernandez" label="Keith Hernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524232" start="7807" end="7822" title="Garry Templeton" label="Garry Templeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118368" start="7904" end="7910" title="1981 Major League Baseball strike" label="strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943685" start="7963" end="7975" title="Cecil Cooper" label="Cecil Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579879" start="8068" end="8081" title="1981 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q922002" start="8137" end="8149" title="Manny Trillo" label="Manny Trillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356090" start="8428" end="8441" title="Mickey Vernon" label="Mickey Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229634" start="8673" end="8684" title="Leon Durham" label="Leon Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077036" start="8895" end="8907" title="Doubleheader (baseball)" label="doubleheader"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="8986" end="9000" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145696" start="9372" end="9388" title="Dennis Eckersley" label="Dennis Eckersley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846165" start="9393" end="9405" title="Mike Brumley (infielder)" label="Mike Brumley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363291" start="9456" end="9476" title="American League East" label="American League East"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="9682" end="9699" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164832" start="9880" end="9894" title="contact hitter" label="contact hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="9962" end="9977" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="10234" end="10253" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q148726" start="10260" end="10273" title="Albert Pujols" label="Albert Pujols"/>
<link wikidata="Q848103" start="10425" end="10442" title="Milwaukee Brewers" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="10517" end="10534" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229907" start="10662" end="10676" title="Dave Stapleton (infielder)" label="Dave Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="10899" end="10903" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754762" start="10904" end="10912" title="high-top" label="high-top"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511187" start="11196" end="11236" title="1986 American League Championship Series" label="1986 American League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196988" start="11313" end="11320" title="single (baseball)" label="singled"/>
<link wikidata="Q5922449" start="11375" end="11389" title="Dave Henderson" label="Dave Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11397" end="11412" title="Dave Henderson#1986 ALCS home run" label="famous home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582894" start="11528" end="11545" title="1986 California Angels season" label="California Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582879" start="11614" end="11626" title="1986 Boston Red Sox season" label="1986 Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583138" start="11660" end="11673" title="1986 New York Mets season" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568875" start="11700" end="11717" title="1986 World Series" label="1986 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089411" start="11740" end="11753" title="extra innings" label="extra innings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182071" start="11925" end="11938" title="John McNamara (baseball)" label="John McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024497" start="12208" end="12224" title="Calvin Schiraldi" label="Calvin Schiraldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934066" start="12263" end="12274" title="Bob Stanley (baseball)" label="Bob Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323539" start="12276" end="12289" title="Mookie Wilson" label="Mookie Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420530" start="12551" end="12561" title="Ray Knight" label="Ray Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926430" start="12932" end="12943" title="Bruce Hurst" label="Bruce Hurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358166" start="13408" end="13428" title="Curse of the Bambino" label="Curse of the Bambino"/>
<link wikidata="Q669904" start="13862" end="13877" title="spring training" label="spring training"/>
<link wikidata="Q675214" start="13932" end="13946" title="Yankee Stadium (1923)" label="Yankee Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="14030" end="14048" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584588" start="14651" end="14658" title="1988 New York Yankees season" label="Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584500" start="14691" end="14697" title="1988 Kansas City Royals season" label="Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="14740" end="14751" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q473208" start="14841" end="14854" title="Roger Clemens" label="Roger Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="15023" end="15033" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610932" start="15049" end="15065" title="standing ovation" label="standing ovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415489" start="15182" end="15196" title="Kirk McCaskill" label="Kirk McCaskill"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="15219" end="15230" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q845485" start="15241" end="15265" title="inside-the-park home run" label="inside-the-park home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567823" start="15421" end="15440" title="Claudell Washington" label="Claudell Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q174493" start="15801" end="15811" title="Baserunning" label="baserunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195130" start="15960" end="15971" title="stolen base" label="stolen base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194630" start="16013" end="16020" title="Double (baseball)" label="doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154654" start="16325" end="16343" title="on-base percentage" label="on-base percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815849" start="16359" end="16378" title="slugging percentage" label="slugging percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q859741" start="16420" end="16439" title="fielding percentage" label="fielding percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="16568" end="16573" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q35775" start="16614" end="16619" title="Boise, Idaho" label="Boise"/>
<link wikidata="Q988735" start="16805" end="16811" title="Emmett, Idaho" label="Emmett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318152" start="16922" end="16934" title="Dwight Evans (Baseball)" label="Dwight Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071224" start="16985" end="17002" title="2007 World Series" label="2007 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965599" start="17478" end="17490" title="Brockton Rox (2002–2024)" label="Brockton Rox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240266" start="17498" end="17511" title="Canadian American Association of Professional Baseball" label="Can-Am League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510883" start="17626" end="17660" title="Futures Collegiate Baseball League" label="Futures Collegiate Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938454" start="17727" end="17738" title="Boise Hawks" label="Boise Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="17779" end="17791" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q106778717" start="17809" end="17829" title="Class A-Short Season" label="Class A-Short Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186822" start="17830" end="17846" title="Northwest League" label="Northwest League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866551" start="18066" end="18084" title="Baseball Reliquary" label="Baseball Reliquary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18092" end="18114" title="Baseball Reliquary#Shrine of the Eternals" label="Shrine of the Eternals"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155601" start="18255" end="18293" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M–Corpus Christi Islanders" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M–Corpus Christi Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331905" start="18355" end="18373" title="Lewy body dementia" label="Lewy body dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247463" start="18851" end="18861" title="Emergency!" label="Emergency!"/>
<link wikidata="Q103939" start="19074" end="19087" title="Charlie Sheen" label="Charlie Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456610" start="19231" end="19243" title="Seth Swirsky" label="Seth Swirsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995257" start="19503" end="19520" title="Heritage Auctions" label="Heritage Auctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558887" start="19617" end="19630" title="The Comebacks" label="The Comebacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="19675" end="19678" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q23722" start="19692" end="19712" title="Curb Your Enthusiasm" label="Curb Your Enthusiasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037812" start="19805" end="19820" title="Inside Schwartz" label="Inside Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="19925" end="19939" title="Michael Jordan" label="Michael Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328142" start="19941" end="19952" title="Stan Musial" label="Stan Musial"/>
<link wikidata="Q561852" start="19954" end="19965" title="Willie Mays" label="Willie Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q536900" start="19970" end="19985" title="Ken Griffey Jr." label="Ken Griffey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="20020" end="20024" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="20034" end="20043" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294956" start="20061" end="20074" title="Mars Blackmon" label="Mars Blackmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171263" start="20307" end="20319" title="Celtic Pride" label="Celtic Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q832728" start="20333" end="20341" title="Rounders (film)" label="Rounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304902" start="20359" end="20370" title="Fever Pitch (2005 film)" label="Fever Pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="20429" end="20441" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356848" start="20461" end="20489" title="Brother&amp;#x27;s Little Helper" label="Brother&amp;#x27;s Little Helper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266296" start="20521" end="20536" title="Johnny Baseball" label="Johnny Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q193635" start="20604" end="20618" title="Alan Greenspan" label="Alan Greenspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="20661" end="20684" title="economic crisis of 2008" label="economic crisis of 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="20686" end="20700" title="United States House of Representatives" label="Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q699970" start="20701" end="20713" title="John Yarmuth" label="John Yarmuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661550" start="20820" end="20831" title="MLB Network" label="MLB Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714218" start="21001" end="21026" title="The Areas of My Expertise" label="The Areas of My Expertise"/>
<link wikidata="Q329372" start="21092" end="21104" title="John Hodgman" label="John Hodgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q151914" start="21265" end="21309" title="Leonard P. Zakim Bunker Hill Memorial Bridge" label="Leonard P. Zakim Bunker Hill Memorial Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q308984" start="21676" end="21688" title="Boston Legal" label="Boston Legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9016370" start="21958" end="22007" title="List of Major League Baseball career hits leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career hits leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244083" start="22009" end="22061" title="List of Major League Baseball career doubles leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career doubles leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244079" start="22063" end="22122" title="List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589011" start="22124" end="22180" title="List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104863" start="22182" end="22229" title="List of Major League Baseball batting champions" label="List of Major League Baseball batting champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577595" start="22231" end="22283" title="List of Major League Baseball annual doubles leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual doubles leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589010" start="22285" end="22349" title="List of Major League Baseball players who played in four decades" label="List of Major League Baseball players who played in four decades"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181616" start="22387" end="22430" title="Bill Buckner&amp;#x27;s 1986 World Series error" label="Bill Buckner&amp;#x27;s 1986 World Series error"/>
<link wikidata="Q13515725" start="22655" end="22668" title="archive.today" label="archive.today"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211671" wikidata="Q990658" url="?curid=211671" title="Aldwych tube station">
<text>Aldwych is a closed station on the London Underground, located in the City of Westminster in Central London. It was opened in 1907 with the name Strand, after the street on which it is located. It was the terminus of the short Piccadilly line branch from Holborn that was a relic of the merger of two railway schemes. The station building is close to the Strand&#x27;s junction with Surrey Street, near Aldwych. During its lifetime, the branch was the subject of a number of unrealised extension proposals that would have seen the tunnels through the station extended southwards, usually to Waterloo.

Served mostly by a shuttle train and having low passenger numbers, the station and branch were considered for closure several times. Service was offered only during weekday peak hours from 1962 and discontinued in 1994, when the cost of replacing the lifts was considered too high for the income generated.

Disused parts of the station and the running tunnels were used during both world wars to shelter artworks from London&#x27;s public galleries and museums from bombing. The station is the work of Leslie Green and has long been popular as a filming location, appearing as itself and as other London Underground stations in a number of films. In recognition of its historical significance, the station is a Grade II listed building and is an example of the Modern Style (British Art Nouveau style).

London Transport Museum runs guided tours of the station via its &quot;Hidden London&quot; programme throughout the year. The tour takes visitors through the ticket hall, the original lifts, disused platforms and tunnels; and shares findings from the museum&#x27;s archives on the history of the site.

==History==

===Planning===

The Great Northern and Strand Railway (GN&amp;SR) first proposed a station in the parish of St Clement Danes in a private bill presented to Parliament in November 1898. The station was to be the southern terminus of an underground railway line planned to run from Wood Green station (now Alexandra Palace) via Finsbury Park and King&#x27;s Cross and was originally to be located at the corner of Stanhope Street and Holles Street, north of the Strand. When the two streets were scheduled for demolition as part of the London County Council&#x27;s plans for the construction of Kingsway and Aldwych, the GN&amp;SR moved the location to the junction of the two new roads. Royal assent to the bill was given and the Great Northern and Strand Railway Act 1899 was enacted on 1 August.

In September 1901, the GN&amp;SR was taken over by the Brompton and Piccadilly Circus Railway (B&amp;PCR), which planned to build an underground line from South Kensington to Piccadilly Circus via Knightsbridge. Both were under the control of Charles Yerkes through his Metropolitan District Electric Traction Company and, in June 1902, were transferred to Yerkes&#x27; new holding company, the Underground Electric Railways Company of London (UERL). Neither of the railways had carried out any construction, but the UERL obtained permission for new tunnels between Piccadilly Circus and Holborn to connect the two routes. The companies were formally merged as the Great Northern, Piccadilly and Brompton Railway (GNP&amp;BR) following parliamentary approval in November 1902. Prior to confirmation of the merger, the GN&amp;SR had sought permission to extend its line southwards from the future junction of Kingsway and Aldwych, under Norfolk Street to a new interchange under the Metropolitan District Railway&#x27;s station at Temple. The extension was rejected following objections from the Duke of Norfolk under whose land the last part of the proposed tunnels would have run.

In 1903, the GNP&amp;BR sought permission for a branch from Piccadilly Circus to run under Leicester Square, Strand, and Fleet Street and into the City of London. The branch would have passed and interchanged with the already approved Strand station, allowing travel on the GNP&amp;BR from Strand in three directions. The deliberations of the Royal Commission on London Traffic prevented parliamentary consideration of the proposal, which was withdrawn.

In 1905, with the Royal Commission&#x27;s report about to be published, the GNP&amp;BR returned to Parliament with two bills for consideration. The first bill revived the 1903 proposal for a branch from Piccadilly Circus to the City of London, passing and interchanging with Strand station. The second proposed an extension and relocation of Strand station to the junction of Strand and Surrey Street. From there the line was to continue as a single tunnel under the River Thames to Waterloo. The first bill was again delayed and withdrawn. Of the second, only the relocation of Strand station was permitted.
===Construction===
The linking of the GN&amp;SR and B&amp;PCR routes meant that the section of the GN&amp;SR south of Holborn became a branch from the main route. The UERL began constructing the main route in July 1902. Progress was rapid, so that it was largely complete by the Autumn of 1906. Construction of the Holborn to Strand section was delayed while the London County Council constructed Kingsway and the tramway subway running beneath it and while the UERL decided how the junction between the main route and the branch would be arranged at Holborn.

Strand station was built on the site of the Royal Strand Theatre, which had closed on 13 May 1905 and been demolished. Construction of the station began on 21 October 1905, to a design by the UERL&#x27;s architect Leslie Green in the UERL house style of a two-storey steel-framed building faced with red glazed terracotta blocks, with wide semi-circular windows on the upper floor. The station building is L-shaped, with two façades separated by the building on the corner of Strand and Surrey Street. The Strand façade is narrow with a single semi-circular window above the entrance. The façade in Surrey Street is wider with a separate entrance and exit and a shop unit. In anticipation of a revival of the extension to Waterloo and the City route, the station was built with three circular lift shafts able to accommodate six trapezium-shaped lifts. Only one of the shafts was fitted out, with two lifts. The other two shafts rose from the lower concourse to the basement of the station, but could have been extended upwards into the space of the shop unit when required. A fourth smaller-diameter shaft accommodated an emergency spiral stair.

The platforms are below street level and are long; shorter than the GNP&amp;BR&#x27;s standard length of . As with other UERL stations, the platform walls were tiled with distinctive patterns, in this case cream and dark green. Only parts of the platform walls were decorated because it was planned to operate the branch with short trains. Owing to the reduced lift provision, a second route between the platforms and lifts was never brought into use and was left in an unfinished condition without tiling.

===Operation===

The GNP&amp;BR&#x27;s main route opened on 15 December 1906, but the Strand branch was not opened until 30 November 1907. Initially, shuttle trains operated to Holborn from the eastern platform into the through platform at Holborn. At peak times, an additional train operated alternately in the branch&#x27;s western tunnel into the bay platform at Holborn. During the first year of operation, a train for theatregoers operated late on Monday to Saturday evenings from Strand through Holborn and northbound to Finsbury Park; this was discontinued in October 1908.

In March 1908, the off-peak shuttle service began to use the western platform at Strand and the through platform at Holborn, crossing between the two branch tunnels south of Holborn. Low usage led to the withdrawal of the second peak-hour shuttle and the eastern tunnel was taken out of use in 1914. On 9 May 1915, three of the Underground stations in the area were renamed and Strand station became Aldwych. Sunday services ended in April 1917 and, in August of the same year, the eastern tunnel and platform at Aldwych and the bay platform at Holborn were formally closed. A German bombing campaign in September 1917 led to the disused platform being used as storage for around 300 paintings from the National Gallery from then until December 1918.
In October 1922, the ticket office was replaced by a facility in the lifts. Passenger numbers remained low: when the station was one of a number on the network considered for closure in 1929, its annual usage was 1,069,650 and takings were £4,500. The branch was again considered for closure in 1933, but remained open.

Wartime efficiency measures led to the branch being closed temporarily on 22 September 1940, shortly after the start of The Blitz, and it was partly fitted out by the City of Westminster as an air-raid shelter. The tunnels between Aldwych and Holborn were used to store items from the British Museum, including the Elgin Marbles. The branch reopened on 1 July 1946, but patronage did not increase. In 1958, the station was one of three that London Transport announced would be closed. Again it survived, but the service was reduced in June 1958 to run during Monday to Friday peak hours and Saturday morning and early afternoons. The Saturday service was withdrawn in June 1962.
After operating only during peak hours for more than 30 years, the closure announcement came on 4 January 1993. The original 1907 lifts required replacement at a cost of £3 million. This was not considered justifiable in relation to the passenger numbers using the station and it was losing London Regional Transport £150,000 per year. The Secretary of State for Transport granted permission on 1 September 1994 to close the station, and the branch closed on 30 September. Recognising the station&#x27;s historical significance as a mostly unaltered station from the early 20th century, the station was given Grade II listed building status in 2011. Office floors above the station are used by the Classics department of King&#x27;s College London, and part of the station is used by the university&#x27;s Rifle and Pistol Club.
===Proposals for extension and new connections===

Although the Piccadilly Circus to City of London branch proposal of 1905 was never revisited after its withdrawal, the early plan to extend the branch south to Waterloo was revived a number of times during the station&#x27;s life. The extension was considered in 1919 and 1948, but no progress towards constructing the link was made.

In the years after the Second World War, a series of preliminary plans for relieving congestion on the London Underground had considered various east–west routes through the Aldwych area, although other priorities meant that these were never proceeded with. In March 1965, a British Rail and London Transport joint planning committee published &quot;A Railway Plan for London&quot;, which proposed a new tube railway, the Fleet line (later renamed the Jubilee line), to join the Bakerloo line at then run via , , , Aldwych and into the City of London via , and before heading into south-east London. An interchange was proposed at Aldwych and a second recommendation of the report was the revival of the link from Aldwych to Waterloo. London Transport had already sought parliamentary approval to construct tunnels from Aldwych to Waterloo in November 1964, and in August 1965, parliamentary powers were granted. Detailed planning took place, although public spending cuts led to postponement of the scheme in 1967 before tenders were invited.

Planning of the Fleet line continued and parliamentary approval was given in July 1969 for the first phase of the line, from Baker Street to Charing Cross. Tunnelling began on the £35 million route in February 1972 and the Jubilee line opened north from Charing Cross in May 1979. The tunnels of the approved section continued east of Charing Cross under Strand almost as far as Aldwych station, but no work at Aldwych was undertaken and they were used only as sidings. Funding for the second phase of the work was delayed throughout the 1970s whilst the route beyond Charing Cross was reviewed to consider options for serving anticipated development in the London Docklands area. By 1979, the cost was estimated as £325 million, a six-fold increase from the £51 million estimated in 1970. A further review of alternatives for the Jubilee line was carried out in 1980, which led to a change of priorities and the postponement of any further effort on the line. When the extension was eventually constructed in the late 1990s it took a different route, south of the River Thames via , and to provide a rapid link to , leaving the tunnels between and Aldwych redundant.

Following the station&#x27;s closure, in 1996 the Civic Trust and other organisations including Transport 2000 proposed to create a heritage railway. The station would be restored to an inter-war appearance, and old Underground rolling stock would be used for journeys on the disused tracks. London Underground rejected the proposal on safety and cost grounds.

In July 2005, Ove Arup &amp; Partners produced a report, &quot;DLR Horizon 2020 Study&quot;, for the Docklands Light Railway (DLR) examining &quot;pragmatic development schemes&quot; to expand and improve the DLR network between 2012 and 2020. One of the proposals was an extension of the DLR from to via and Aldwych. The disused Jubilee line tunnels would be enlarged to accommodate the larger DLR trains and Aldwych station would form the basis for a new station on the line, although requiring considerable reconstruction to accommodate escalators. The estimated cost in 2005 was £232 million for the infrastructure works and the scheme was described as &quot;strongly beneficial&quot; as it was expected to attract passengers from the London Underground&#x27;s existing east–west routes and from local buses and reduce overcrowding at Bank station. The business case assessment was that the proposal offered high value, although similar values were calculated for other extension proposals from Bank. Further detailed studies were proposed.

In 2015, a scheme was proposed by the design firm Gensler to convert disused London Underground tunnels into subterranean rail trails, enabling the disused branches of the Piccadilly line and Jubilee line to be used as cycle paths. The scheme, which would involve re-opening Aldwych station as an access point for cyclists, has not been officially approved.

==Use in media==

Because it was a self-contained section of the London Underground that was closed outside weekday peak hours, Aldwych station and the branch line from Holborn were popular locations for filming scenes set on the Tube even before their closure. Since the branch&#x27;s closure in 1994, its use in film productions has continued, with the station appearing as itself and, with appropriate signage, as other stations on the network. The track and infrastructure are maintained in operational condition, and until 2021 a train of ex-Northern line 1972 tube stock was stabled on the branch. This train could be driven up and down the branch for filming. The physical connection with the Piccadilly line northbound tracks remains, but requires manual operation.

Films and television productions that have been shot at Aldwych include:


The pre-war operation of the station features in a pivotal scene in Geoffrey Household&#x27;s novel &quot;Rogue Male&quot;, when the pursuit of the protagonist by an enemy agent sees them repeatedly using the shuttle service on the branch line. A chase through Aldwych station ends with the agent&#x27;s death by electrocution on the track. A much modified and expanded version of the station appears as a level in the video game &quot;Tomb Raider III&quot;. The music video for The Prodigy&#x27;s song &quot;Firestarter&quot; was filmed in the disused eastern tunnel and one of the unused lift shafts. The station was the subject of an episode of &quot;Most Haunted&quot; in 2002. The station was also the subject of an episode of The Magnus Archives in 2018.

==See also==
* List of former and unopened London Underground stations

==Notes and references==

===Notes===
===References===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* 
* London Transport Museum Photographic Archive
** 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q990658" start="0" end="7" title="Aldwych tube station" label="Aldwych"/>
<link wikidata="Q450458" start="13" end="27" title="List of former and unopened London Underground stations" label="closed station"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="35" end="53" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="70" end="89" title="City of Westminster" label="City of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="93" end="107" title="Central London" label="Central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q990658" start="145" end="151" title="Aldwych tube station" label="Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q756819" start="159" end="169" title="Strand, London" label="the street"/>
<link wikidata="Q207689" start="227" end="242" title="Piccadilly line" label="Piccadilly line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433544" start="255" end="262" title="Holborn tube station" label="Holborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q620182" start="403" end="410" title="Aldwych" label="Aldwych"/>
<link wikidata="Q10319641" start="591" end="599" title="Waterloo tube station" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300750" start="621" end="634" title="shuttle train" label="shuttle train"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="853" end="858" title="elevator" label="lifts"/>
<link wikidata="Q376964" start="1105" end="1117" title="Leslie Green" label="Leslie Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1323" end="1338" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q99600895" start="1364" end="1404" title="Modern Style (British Art Nouveau style)" label="Modern Style (British Art Nouveau style)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541098" start="1407" end="1430" title="London Transport Museum" label="London Transport Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1478" end="1491" title="London Transport Museum#Hidden London" label="Hidden London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826027" start="1743" end="1776" title="Great Northern and Strand Railway" label="Great Northern and Strand Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592834" start="1831" end="1847" title="St Clement Danes (parish)" label="St Clement Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q876477" start="1853" end="1865" title="private bill" label="private bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300483" start="2003" end="2013" title="Alexandra Palace railway station" label="Wood Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q536796" start="2049" end="2062" title="Finsbury Park station" label="Finsbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q826120" start="2067" end="2084" title="King&amp;#x27;s Cross St Pancras tube station" label="King&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q739384" start="2257" end="2278" title="London County Council" label="London County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q893261" start="2316" end="2324" title="Kingsway, London" label="Kingsway"/>
<link wikidata="Q620182" start="2329" end="2336" title="Aldwych" label="Aldwych"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="2409" end="2421" title="Royal assent" label="Royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826027" start="2452" end="2494" title="Great Northern and Strand Railway Act 1899" label="Great Northern and Strand Railway Act 1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826027" start="2576" end="2614" title="Brompton and Piccadilly Circus Railway" label="Brompton and Piccadilly Circus Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q976035" start="2676" end="2692" title="South Kensington tube station" label="South Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q26448" start="2696" end="2713" title="Piccadilly Circus tube station" label="Piccadilly Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757120" start="2718" end="2731" title="Knightsbridge tube station" label="Knightsbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066292" start="2764" end="2778" title="Charles Yerkes" label="Charles Yerkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="2895" end="2910" title="holding company" label="holding company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502902" start="2916" end="2963" title="Underground Electric Railways Company of London" label="Underground Electric Railways Company of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826027" start="3186" end="3233" title="Great Northern, Piccadilly and Brompton Railway" label="Great Northern, Piccadilly and Brompton Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283358" start="3503" end="3539" title="District Railway" label="Metropolitan District Railway&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431071" start="3551" end="3557" title="Temple tube station" label="Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q547536" start="3616" end="3631" title="Henry Fitzalan-Howard, 15th Duke of Norfolk" label="Duke of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q848912" start="3795" end="3811" title="Leicester Square" label="Leicester Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q846686" start="3825" end="3837" title="Fleet Street" label="Fleet Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="3851" end="3865" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q85798058" start="4047" end="4081" title="Royal Commission on London Traffic" label="Royal Commission on London Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10319641" start="4642" end="4650" title="Waterloo tube station" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061013" start="5182" end="5196" title="Kingsway tramway subway" label="tramway subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477926" start="5373" end="5393" title="Royal Strand Theatre" label="Royal Strand Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q376964" start="5543" end="5555" title="Leslie Green" label="Leslie Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567349" start="5640" end="5650" title="glazed architectural terra-cotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q46303" start="6158" end="6167" title="trapezoid" label="trapezium"/>
<link wikidata="Q123624" start="8112" end="8119" title="Holborn" label="Holborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q180788" start="8270" end="8286" title="National Gallery" label="National Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="8759" end="8768" title="The Blitz" label="The Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="8806" end="8825" title="City of Westminster" label="City of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q389959" start="8832" end="8848" title="air-raid shelter" label="air-raid shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="8924" end="8938" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q606662" start="8954" end="8967" title="Elgin Marbles" label="Elgin Marbles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246267" start="9080" end="9096" title="London Transport Executive" label="London Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826459" start="9609" end="9634" title="London Regional Transport" label="London Regional Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246797" start="9658" end="9690" title="Secretary of State for Transport" label="Secretary of State for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="9936" end="9951" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090578" start="10016" end="10035" title="Department of Classics, King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="Classics department"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="10039" end="10065" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q920016" start="10808" end="10820" title="British Railways Board" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244480" start="10825" end="10841" title="London Transport Board" label="London Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q961290" start="10955" end="10965" title="Fleet line" label="Fleet line"/>
<link wikidata="Q961290" start="10985" end="10997" title="Jubilee line" label="Jubilee line"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892" start="11012" end="11025" title="Bakerloo line" label="Bakerloo line"/>
<link wikidata="Q124041" start="12236" end="12252" title="London Docklands" label="London Docklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124341" start="12797" end="12808" title="Civic Trust (England)" label="Civic Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027785" start="12843" end="12857" title="Campaign for Better Transport (United Kingdom)" label="Transport 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q420962" start="12879" end="12895" title="heritage railway" label="heritage railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q716737" start="13123" end="13146" title="Arup Group Limited" label="Ove Arup &amp;amp; Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q216360" start="13210" end="13233" title="Docklands Light Railway" label="Docklands Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896170" start="13966" end="13979" title="business case" label="business case"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100834" start="14205" end="14212" title="Gensler" label="Gensler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116321" start="14277" end="14287" title="rail trail" label="rail trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q207689" start="14327" end="14342" title="Piccadilly line" label="Piccadilly line"/>
<link wikidata="Q961290" start="14347" end="14359" title="Jubilee line" label="Jubilee line"/>
<link wikidata="Q214793" start="15061" end="15074" title="Northern line" label="Northern line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817694" start="15075" end="15090" title="London Underground 1972 Stock" label="1972 tube stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q207689" start="15214" end="15229" title="Piccadilly line" label="Piccadilly line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503014" start="15432" end="15450" title="Geoffrey Household" label="Geoffrey Household"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359523" start="15470" end="15480" title="Rogue Male (novel)" label="Rogue Male"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="15770" end="15775" title="level (video gaming)" label="level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123794" start="15800" end="15815" title="Tomb Raider III" label="Tomb Raider III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256860" start="15843" end="15854" title="The Prodigy" label="The Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419005" start="15873" end="15884" title="Firestarter (The Prodigy song)" label="Firestarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234114" start="16018" end="16030" title="Most Haunted" label="Most Haunted"/>
<link wikidata="Q450458" start="16141" end="16196" title="List of former and unopened London Underground stations" label="List of former and unopened London Underground stations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211675" wikidata="Q6620952" url="?curid=211675" title="List of footwear designers">
<text>This is a list of notable dedicated [[footwear]] designers.
==See also==
* List of fashion designers


abibas</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6620952" start="10" end="58" title="List of footwear designers" label="list of notable dedicated [[footwear]] designers"/>
<link wikidata="Q56926" start="75" end="100" title="List of fashion designers" label="List of fashion designers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211676" wikidata="Q2155334" url="?curid=211676" title="Ceremonial magic">
<text>Ceremonial magic (also known as magick, ritual magic, high magic or learned magic) encompasses a wide variety of rituals of magic. The works included are characterized by ceremony and numerous requisite accessories to aid the practitioner. It can be seen as an extension of ritual magic, and in most cases synonymous with it. Popularized by the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, it draws on such schools of philosophical and occult thought as Hermetic Qabalah, Enochian magic, Thelema, and the magic of various grimoires. Ceremonial magic is part of Hermeticism and Western esotericism.

The synonym &quot;magick&quot; is an archaic spelling of &#x27;magic&#x27; used during the Renaissance, which was revived by Aleister Crowley to differentiate occult magic from stage magic. He defined it as &quot;the Science and Art of causing Change to occur in conformity with Will&quot;, including ordinary acts of will as well as ritual magic. Crowley wrote that &quot;it is theoretically possible to cause in any object any change of which that object is capable by nature&quot;. John Symonds and Kenneth Grant attach a deeper occult significance to this preference.

Crowley saw magic as the essential method for a person to reach true understanding of the self and to act according to one&#x27;s true will, which he saw as the reconciliation &quot;between freewill and destiny.&quot; Crowley describes this process in his &quot;Magick, Book 4&quot;.

==Definitions and general purpose==
The term &quot;magick&quot; is an Early Modern English spelling for magic, used in works such as the 1651 translation of Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa&#x27;s &quot;De Occulta Philosophia&quot;, &quot;Three Books of Occult Philosophy, or Of Magick&quot;. Aleister Crowley chose the spelling to differentiate his practices and rituals from stage magic (which may be more appropriately termed &quot;illusion&quot;) and the term has since been re-popularised by those who have adopted elements of his teachings. Crowley defined Magick as &quot;the science and art of causing change to occur in conformity with will.&quot;

===Qabalah and the Tree of Life===
The Tree of Life is a tool used to categorize and organize various mystical concepts. At its most simple level, it is composed of ten spheres, or emanations, called sephiroth (sing. &quot;sephira&quot;) which are connected by twenty two paths. The sephiroth are represented by the planets and the paths by the characters of the Hebrew alphabet, which are subdivided by the four classical elements, the seven classical planets, and the twelve signs of the Zodiac. Within the western magical tradition, the Tree is used as a kind of conceptual filing cabinet. Each sephira and path is assigned various ideas, such as gods, cards of the Tarot, astrological planets and signs, elements, etc.

Crowley considered a deep understanding of the Tree of Life to be essential to the magician:

Similar to yoga, learning the Tree of Life is not so much magic as it is a way to map out one&#x27;s spiritual universe. As such, the adept may use the Tree to determine a destination for astral travel, to choose which gods to invoke for what purposes, et cetera. It also plays an important role in modeling the spiritual journey, where the adept begins in Malkuth, which is the every-day material world of phenomena, with the ultimate goal being at Kether, the sphere of Unity with the All.

==Components==
===Body of light===

The body of light, sometimes called the &#x27;astral body&#x27; or the &#x27;subtle body,&#x27; is a &quot;quasi material&quot; aspect of the human body, being neither solely physical nor solely spiritual, posited by a number of philosophers, and elaborated on according to various esoteric, occult, and mystical teachings. Other terms used for this body include body of glory, spirit-body, radiant body, luciform body, &quot;augoeides&quot; (&#x27;radiant&#x27;), &quot;astroeides&quot; (&#x27;starry&#x27; or &#x27;sidereal body&#x27;), and celestial body.

Crowley referred to the &quot;augoeides&quot;, a Greek term for the body of light, and connected it with &#x27;the Knowledge &amp; Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel&#x27; associated with each human being. He stressed that the body of light must be built up though the use of imagination, and that it must then be animated, exercised, and disciplined. According to Asprem (2017):

===Grimoires===
A grimoire is a textbook of magic, typically including instructions on how to create magical objects like talismans and amulets, how to perform magical spells, charms and divination, and how to summon or invoke supernatural entities such as angels, spirits, deities, and demons. In many cases, the books themselves are believed to be imbued with magical powers, although in many cultures, other sacred texts that are not grimoires (such as the Bible) have been believed to have supernatural properties intrinsically. The only contents found in a grimoire would be information on spells, rituals, the preparation of magical tools, and lists of ingredients and their magical correspondences. In this manner, while all &quot;books on magic&quot; could be thought of as grimoires, not all &quot;magical books&quot; should be thought of as grimoires.

While the term &quot;grimoire&quot; is originally European—and many Europeans throughout history, particularly ceremonial magicians and cunning folk, have used grimoires—the historian Owen Davies noted that similar books can be found all around the world, ranging from Jamaica to Sumatra. He also noted that in this sense, the world&#x27;s first grimoires were created in Europe and the Ancient Near East.

===Magical formulae===
A magical formula or &#x27;word of power&#x27; is a word that is believed to have specific supernatural effects. They are words whose meaning illustrates principles and degrees of understanding that are often difficult to relay using other forms of speech or writing. It is a concise means to communicate very abstract information through the medium of a word or phrase.

These words often have no intrinsic meaning in and of themselves. However, when deconstructed, each individual letter may refer to some universal concept found in the system in which the formula appears. Additionally, in grouping certain letters together one is able to display meaningful sequences that are considered to be of value to the spiritual system that utilizes them (e.g., spiritual hierarchies, historiographic data, psychological stages, etc.)

A formula&#x27;s potency is understood and made usable by the magician only through prolonged meditation on its levels of meaning. Once these have been interiorized by the magician, they may then utilize the formula to maximum effect.

===Magical record===
A magical record is a journal or other source of documentation containing magical events, experiences, ideas, and any other information that the magician may see fit to add. There can be many purposes for such a record, such as recording evidence to verify the effectiveness of specific procedures (per the scientific method that Aleister Crowley claimed should be applied to the practice of magic) or to ensure that data may propagate beyond the lifetime of the magician. Benefits of this process vary, but usually include future analysis and further education by the individual and/or associates with whom the magician feels comfortable in revealing such intrinsically private information.

Crowley was highly insistent upon the importance of this practice. As he writes in Liber E, &quot;It is absolutely necessary that all experiments should be recorded in detail during, or immediately after, their performance ... The more scientific the record is, the better. Yet the emotions should be noted, as being some of the conditions. Let then the record be written with sincerity and care; thus with practice it will be found more and more to approximate to the ideal.&quot; Other items he suggests for inclusion include the physical and mental condition of the experimenter, the time and place, and environmental conditions, including the weather.

===Magical weapons===

The practice of ceremonial magic often requires tools made or consecrated specifically for this use, called magical weapons, which are required for a particular ritual or series of rituals. They may be a symbolic representation of psychological elements of the magician or of metaphysical concepts.

In &quot;Magick (Book 4)&quot;, Part II &quot;(Magick)&quot;, Aleister Crowley lists the tools required as a magic circle drawn on the ground and inscribed with the names of god, an altar, a wand, cup, sword, and pentacle, to represent his true will, his understanding, his reason, and the lower parts of his being respectively. On the altar, too, is a phial of oil to represent his aspiration, and for consecrating items to his intent. The magician is surrounded by a scourge, dagger, and chain intended to keep his intent pure. An oil lamp, book of conjurations and bell are required, as is the wearing of a crown, robe, and lamen. The crown affirms his divinity, the robe symbolizes silence, and the lamen declare his work. The book of conjurations is his magical record, his karma. In the East is the magic fire in which all burns up at last.

==Techniques==

According to Crowley, there is a single definition of the purpose for ritual magic: to achieve Union with God through &quot;the uniting of the Microcosm with the Macrocosm.&quot; Since this process is so arduous, it is also acceptable to use magic to develop the self (i.e. one&#x27;s body of light) or to create ideal circumstances for the Work (e.g. having access to a place in which to do ritual undisturbed). There are many kinds of magic, but the categories of ritual that are recommended by Crowley include:
* Banishing—the elimination of unwanted forces. &quot;The Magician must therefore take the utmost care in the matter of purification, firstly, of himself, secondly, of his instruments, thirdly, of the place of working.&quot;
* Invocation, where the magician identifies with the Deity invoked. There are three methods:
*# &quot;Devotion&quot; —where &quot;identity with the God is attained by love and by surrender, by giving up or suppressing all irrelevant (and illusionary) parts of yourself.&quot;
*# &quot;Calling forth&quot;—where &quot;identity is attained by paying special attention to the desired part of yourself: positive, as the first method is negative.&quot; (e.g. assumption of godforms)
*# &quot;Drama&quot;—where &quot;identity is attained by sympathy. It is very difficult for the ordinary man to lose himself completely in the subject of a play or of a novel; but for those who can do so, this method is unquestionably the best.&quot; (e.g. many initiations and the Gnostic Mass)
* Evocation—which is bringing a spiritual being &quot;before&quot;, not &quot;into&quot;, the magician (e.g. goetia)
* Eucharistic ritual—which &quot;consists in taking common things, transmuting them into things divine, and consuming them.&quot;
* Consecration—&quot;the active dedication of a thing to a single purpose.&quot;
* Divination—such as the use of the Thoth Tarot or other tools used to gather information.

===Vibration of god-names===
In magical rituals, a vocal technique called &quot;vibration&quot; is commonly used. This was a basic aspect of magical training for Crowley, who described it in &quot;Liber O.&quot; According to that text, vibration involves a physical set of steps, starting in a standing position, breathing in through the nose while imagining the name of the god entering with the breath, imagining that breath travelling through the entire body, stepping forward with the left foot while throwing the body forward with arms outstretched, visualizing the name rushing out when spoken, ending in an upright stance, with the right forefinger placed upon the lips. According to Crowley in &quot;Liber O&quot;, success in this technique is signaled by physical exhaustion and &quot;though only by the student himself is it perceived, when he hears the name of the God vehemently roared forth, as if by the concourse of ten thousand thunders; and it should appear to him as if that Great Voice proceeded from the Universe, and not from himself.&quot;

===Banishing===
The purpose of banishing rituals is to eliminate forces that might interfere with a magical operation, and they are often performed at the beginning of an important event or ceremony (although they can be performed for their own sake as well). The area of effect can be a magic circle or a room. The general theory of magic proposes that there are various forces which are represented by the classical elements (air, earth, fire, and water), the planets, the signs of the Zodiac, and adjacent spaces in the astral world. There are many banishing rituals, but most are some variation on two of the most common—&quot;The Star Ruby&quot; and the Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram.

Crowley describes banishing in his &quot;Magick, Book 4&quot; (ch.13):

He further states:

===Purification===

Purification is similar in theme to banishing, but is a more rigorous process of preparing the self and her temple for serious spiritual work. Crowley mentions that ancient magicians would purify themselves through arduous programs, such as through special diets, fasting, sexual abstinence, keeping the body meticulously tidy, and undergoing a complicated series of prayers. He goes on to say that purification no longer requires such activity, since the magician can purify the self via willed intention. Specifically, the magician labors to purify the mind and body of all influences which may interfere with the Great Work:

Crowley recommended symbolically ritual practices, such as bathing and robing before a main ceremony: &quot;The bath signifies the removal of all things extraneous or antagonistic to the one thought. The putting on of the robe is the positive side of the same operation. It is the assumption of the frame of mind suitable to that one thought.&quot;

===Consecration===
Consecration is an equally important magical operation. It is essentially the dedication, usually of a ritual instrument or space, to a specific purpose. In &quot;Magick, Book 4&quot; (ch.13), Crowley writes:

===Invocation===
Invocation is the bringing in or identifying with a particular deity or spirit. Crowley wrote of two keys to success in this arena: to &quot;inflame thyself in praying&quot; and to &quot;invoke often&quot;. For Crowley, the single most important invocation, or any act of magic for that matter, was the invocation of one&#x27;s Holy Guardian Angel, or &quot;secret self&quot;, which allows the adept to know his or her true will.

Crowley describes the experience of invocation:

Crowley (&quot;Magick, Book 4&quot;) discusses three main categories of invocation, although &quot;in the great essentials these three methods are one. In each case the magician identifies himself with the Deity invoked.&quot;
*&quot;Devotion&quot;—where &quot;identity with the God is attained by love and by surrender, by giving up or suppressing all irrelevant (and illusionary) parts of yourself.&quot;
*&quot;Calling forth&quot;—where &quot;identity is attained by paying special attention to the desired part of yourself.&quot;
*&quot;Drama&quot;—where &quot;identity is attained by sympathy. It is very difficult for the ordinary man to lose himself completely in the subject of a play or of a novel; but for those who can do so, this method is unquestionably the best.&quot;

Another invocatory technique that the magician can employ is called the assumption of godforms — where with &quot;concentrated imagination of oneself in the symbolic shape of any God, one should be able to identify oneself with the idea which [the god] represents.&quot; A general method involves positioning the body in a position that is typical for a given god, imagining that the image of the god is coinciding with or enveloping the body, accompanied by the practice of &quot;vibration&quot; of the appropriate god-name(s).

===Evocation===
There is a distinct difference between invocation and evocation, as Crowley explains:

Generally, evocation is used for two main purposes: to gather information and to obtain the services or obedience of a spirit or demon. Crowley believed that the most effective form of evocation was found in the grimoire on Goetia (see below), which instructs the magician in how to safely summon forth and command 72 infernal spirits. However, it is equally possible to evoke angelic beings, gods, and other intelligences related to planets, elements, and the Zodiac.

Unlike with invocation, which involves a calling in, evocation involves a calling forth, most commonly into what is called the &quot;triangle of art.&quot;

===Eucharist===
The word &quot;eucharist&quot; originally comes from the Greek word for thanksgiving. However, within magic, it takes on a special meaning—the transmutation of ordinary things (usually food and drink) into divine sacraments, which are then consumed. The object is to infuse the food and drink with certain properties, usually embodied by various deities, so that the adept takes in those properties upon consumption. Crowley describes the process of the regular practice of eucharistic ritual:

There are several eucharistic rituals within the magical canon. Two of the most well known are The Mass of the Phoenix and The Gnostic Mass. The first is a ritual designed for the individual, which involves sacrificing a &quot;Cake of Light&quot; (a type of bread that serves as the host) to Ra (i.e. the Sun) and infusing a second Cake with the adept&#x27;s own blood (either real or symbolic, in a gesture reflecting the myth of the Pelican cutting its own breast to feed its young) and then consuming it with the words, &quot;There is no grace: there is no guilt: This is the Law: Do what thou wilt!&quot; The other ritual, The Gnostic Mass, is a very popular public ritual (although it can be practiced privately) that involves a team of participants, including a Priest and Priestess. This ritual is an enactment of the mystical journey that culminates with the Mystic Marriage and the consumption of a Cake of Light and a goblet of wine (a process termed &quot;communication&quot;). Afterwards, each Communicant declares, &quot;There is no part of me that is not of the gods!&quot;

===Divination===
The art of divination is generally employed for the purpose of obtaining information that can guide the adept in his Great Work. The underlying theory states that there exists intelligences (either outside of or inside the mind of the diviner) that can offer accurate information within certain limits using a language of symbols. Normally, divination within magic is not the same as fortune telling, which is more interested in predicting future events. Rather, divination tends to be more about discovering information about the nature and condition of things that can help the magician gain insight and to make better decisions.

There are literally hundreds of different divinatory techniques in the world. However, Western occult practice mostly includes the use of astrology (calculating the influence of heavenly bodies), bibliomancy (reading random passages from a book, such as Liber Legis or the I Ching), Thoth Tarot (a deck of 78 cards, each with symbolic meaning, usually laid out in a meaningful pattern), and geomancy (a method of making random marks on paper or in earth that results in a combination of sixteen patterns).

It is an accepted truism within magic that divination is imperfect. As Crowley writes, &quot;In estimating the ultimate value of a divinatory judgment, one must allow for more than the numerous sources of error inherent in the process itself. The judgment can do no more than the facts presented to it warrant. It is naturally impossible in most cases to make sure that some important factor has not been omitted [...] One must not assume that the oracle is omniscient.&quot;
==History==
=== Renaissance magic ===

The term originates in 16th-century Renaissance magic, referring to practices described in various Medieval and Renaissance grimoires and in collections such as that of Johannes Hartlieb. Georg Pictor uses the term synonymously with &quot;goetia&quot;.

James Sanford in his 1569 translation of Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa&#x27;s 1526 &quot;De incertitudine et vanitate scientiarum&quot; has &quot;The partes of ceremoniall Magicke be Geocie, and Theurgie&quot;. For Agrippa, ceremonial magic was in opposition to natural magic. While he had his misgivings about natural magic, which included astrology, alchemy, and also what we would today consider fields of natural science, such as botany, he was nevertheless prepared to accept it as &quot;the highest peak of natural philosophy&quot;. Ceremonial magic, on the other hand, which included all sorts of communication with spirits, including necromancy and witchcraft, he denounced in its entirety as impious disobedience towards God.

=== Francis Barrett ===

Among the various sources for ceremonial magic, Francis Barrett, a late 18th-century Englishman, called himself a student of chemistry, metaphysics, and natural occult philosophy. Barrett was enthusiastic about reviving interest in the occult arts, and published a magical textbook called &quot;The Magus&quot;. &quot;The Magus&quot; dealt with the natural magic of herbs and stones, magnetism, talismanic magic, alchemy, numerology, the elements, and biographies of famous adepts from history. It was a compilation, almost entirely consisting of selections from Cornelius Agrippa&#x27;s &quot;Three Books of Occult Philosophy&quot;, the &quot;Fourth Book of Occult Philosophy&quot; attributed to Agrippa, and Robert Turner&#x27;s 1655 translation of the &quot;Heptameron of Peter of Abano&quot;. Barrett made modifications and modernized spelling and syntax. Possibly influencing the novelist Edward Bulwer-Lytton, the book gained little other notice until it influenced Eliphas Levi.

===Éliphas Lévi===
Éliphas Lévi (1810–1875) conceived the notion of writing a treatise on magic with his friend Bulwer-Lytton. This appeared in 1855 under the title &quot;Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie&quot;, and was translated into English by Arthur Edward Waite as &quot;Transcendental Magic, its Doctrine and Ritual&quot;.

In 1861, he published a sequel, &quot;La Clef des Grands Mystères&quot; (&quot;The Key to the Great Mysteries&quot;). Further magical works by Lévi include &quot;Fables et Symboles&quot; (&quot;Stories and Images&quot;), 1862, and &quot;La Science des Esprits&quot; (&quot;The Science of Spirits&quot;), 1865. In 1868, he wrote &quot;Le Grand Arcane, ou l&#x27;Occultisme Dévoilé&quot; (&quot;The Great Secret, or Occultism Unveiled&quot;); this, however, was only published posthumously in 1898.

Lévi&#x27;s version of magic became a great success, especially after his death. That Spiritualism was popular on both sides of the Atlantic from the 1850s contributed to his success. His magical teachings were free from obvious fanaticisms, even if they remained rather murky; he had nothing to sell, and did not pretend to be the initiate of some ancient or fictitious secret society. He incorporated the Tarot cards into his magical system, and as a result the Tarot has been an important part of the paraphernalia of Western magicians. He had a deep impact on the magic of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn and later Aleister Crowley, and it was largely through this impact that Lévi is remembered as one of the key founders of the twentieth century revival of magic.

===Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn===
The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn (founded 1888) was a secret society devoted to the study and practice of the occult, metaphysics, and paranormal activities during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Known as a magical order, the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn was active in Great Britain and focused its practices on theurgy and spiritual development. Many present-day concepts of ritual and magic that are at the centre of contemporary traditions, such as Wicca and Thelema, were inspired by the Golden Dawn, which became one of the largest single influences on 20th century Western occultism.

The three founders, William Robert Woodman, William Wynn Westcott, and Samuel Liddell Mathers, were Freemasons. Westcott appears to have been the initial driving force behind the establishment of the Golden Dawn.

The &quot;Golden Dawn&quot; was the first of three Orders, although all three are often collectively referred to as the &quot;Golden Dawn&quot;. The First Order taught esoteric philosophy based on the Hermetic Qabalah and personal development through study and awareness of the four classical elements, as well as the basics of astrology, tarot divination, and geomancy. The Second or Inner Order, the , taught magic, including scrying, astral travel, and alchemy.

===Aleister Crowley===

English author and occultist Aleister Crowley (1875–1947) wrote about magical practices and theory, including those of &quot;theurgy&quot; (&quot;high magic&quot;) and &quot;goetia&quot; (&quot;low magic&quot;). In &quot;The Book of the Law&quot; and &quot;The Vision and the Voice&quot;, the Aramaic magical formula &quot;Abracadabra&quot; was changed to &quot;Abrahadabra&quot;, which he called the new formula of the Aeon of Horus. He also famously spelled magic in the archaic manner, as &#x27;magick&#x27;, to differentiate &quot;the true science of the Magi from all its counterfeits.&quot; He also stated that &quot;The spirits of the Goetia are portions of the human brain.&quot;

His book &quot;Magick, Liber ABA, Book 4&quot;, is a lengthy treatise on magic in which he which also presents his own system of Western occult practice, synthesised from many sources, including Yoga, Hermeticism, medieval grimoires, contemporary magical theories from writers like Eliphas Levi and Helena Blavatsky, and his own original contributions. It consists of four parts: Mysticism, Magick (Elementary Theory), Magick in Theory and Practice, and ΘΕΛΗΜΑ—the Law (The Equinox of The Gods). It also includes numerous appendices presenting many rituals and explicatory papers.

===Dion Fortune===
Dion Fortune (1890–1946) was a Welsh occultist, ceremonial magician, novelist and author. She was a co-founder of the Fraternity of the Inner Light, an occult organisation that promoted philosophies which she claimed had been taught to her by spiritual entities known as the Ascended Masters. A prolific writer, she produced a large number of articles and books on her occult ideas and also authored seven novels, several of which expound occult themes.

Fortune was a ceremonial magician. The magical principles on which her Fraternity was based were adopted from the late nineteenth century Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, with other influences coming from Theosophy and Christian Science. The magical ceremonies performed by Fortune&#x27;s Fraternity were placed into two categories: initiations, in which the candidate was introduced to magical forces, and evocation, in which these forces were manipulated for a given purpose.

The Fraternity&#x27;s rituals at their Bayswater temple were carried out under a dim light, as Fortune believed that bright light disperses etheric forces. An altar was placed in the centre of a room, with the colours of the altar-cloth and the symbols on the altar varying according to the ceremony being performed. A light was placed on the altar while incense, usually frankincense, was burned. The senior officers sat in a row along the eastern end of the room, while officers—who were believed to be channels for cosmic forces—were positioned at various positions on the floor. The lodge was opened by walking around the room in a circle chanting, with the intent of building a psychic force up as a wall. Next, the cosmic entities would be invoked, with the members believing that these entities would manifest in astral form and interact with the chosen officers.

Fortune was particularly concerned with the issue of sex. She believed that this erotic attraction between men and women could be harnessed for use in magic. She urged her followers to be naked under their robes when carrying out magical rituals, for this would increase the creative sexual tension between the men and women present. Although sex features in her novels, it is never described in graphic detail. The scholar Andrew Radford noted that Fortune&#x27;s &quot;reactionary and highly heteronormative&quot; view of &quot;sacralised sexuality&quot; should be seen as part of a wider tradition among esoteric currents, going back to the ideas of Emanuel Swedenborg and Andrew Jackson Davis and also being found in the work of occultists like Paschal Beverly Randolph and Ida Craddock.

The religious studies scholar Hugh Urban noted that Fortune was &quot;one of the key links&quot; between early twentieth-century ceremonial magic and the developing Pagan religion of Wicca. Similarly, the Wiccan high priestess Vivianne Crowley characterised Fortune as a &quot;proto-Pagan&quot;. The scholar and esotericist Nevill Drury stated that Fortune &quot;in many ways anticipated feminist ideas in contemporary Wicca&quot;, particularly through her belief that all goddesses were a manifestation of a single Great Goddess. Graf agreed, adding that Fortune&#x27;s works found &quot;resonance&quot; in the work of the later feminist Wiccan Starhawk, and in particular in the latter&#x27;s 1979 book, &quot;The Spiral Dance&quot;.

In researching ceremonial magic orders and other esoteric groups active in the London area during the 1980s, Luhrmann found that within them, Fortune&#x27;s novels were treated as &quot;fictionalized ideals&quot; and that they were recommended to newcomers as the best way to understand magic. The Pagan studies scholar Joanne Pearson added that Fortune&#x27;s books, and in particular the novels &quot;The Sea Priestess&quot; and &quot;Moon Magic&quot;, were owned by many Wiccans and other Pagans. The religious studies scholar Graham Harvey compared &quot;The Sea Priestess&quot; to the Wiccan Gerald Gardner&#x27;s 1949 novel &quot;High Magic&#x27;s Aid&quot;, stating that while neither were &quot;great literature&quot;, they &quot;evoke Paganism better than later more didactic works&quot;.

===Jack Parsons===

John Whiteside Parsons (1914–1952) was an American rocket engineer, chemist, and Thelemite occultist. Parsons converted to Thelema, the new religious movement founded by the English occultist Aleister Crowley. Together with his first wife, Helen Northrup, Parsons joined the Agape Lodge, the Californian branch of Ordo Templi Orientis (O.T.O.) in 1941. At Crowley&#x27;s bidding, Parsons replaced Wilfred Talbot Smith as its leader in 1942 and ran the Lodge from his mansion on Orange Grove Boulevard.

Parsons identified four obstacles that prevented humans from achieving and performing their true will, all of which he connected with fear: the fear of incompetence, the fear of the opinion of others, the fear of hurting others, and the fear of insecurity. He insisted that these must be overcome, writing that &quot;The Will must be freed of its fetters. The ruthless examination and destruction of taboos, complexes, frustrations, dislikes, fears and disgusts hostile to the Will is essential to progress.&quot;

In 1945, Parsons separated from Helen, after having an affair with her sister Sara; when Sara left him for L. Ron Hubbard, Parsons conducted the Babalon Working, a series of rituals intended to invoke the Thelemic goddess Babalon on Earth. The Babalon Working was a series of magic ceremonies or rituals performed from January to March 1946 by Parsons and Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard. This ritual was essentially designed to manifest an individual incarnation of the archetypal divine feminine called Babalon. The project was based on the ideas of Crowley, and his description of a similar project in his 1917 novel &quot;Moonchild&quot;.

When Parsons declared that the first of the series of rituals was complete and successful, he almost immediately met Marjorie Cameron in his own home, and regarded her as the elemental that he and Hubbard had called through the ritual. Soon Parsons began the next stage of the series, an attempt to conceive a child through sex magic workings. Although no child was conceived, this did not affect the result of the ritual to that point. Parsons and Cameron, who Parsons now regarded as the Scarlet Woman, &quot;Babalon&quot;, called forth by the ritual, soon married.

The rituals performed drew largely upon rituals and sex magic described by Crowley. Crowley was in correspondence with Parsons during the course of the Babalon Working, and warned Parsons of his potential overreactions to the magic he was performing, while simultaneously deriding Parsons&#x27; work to others.

A brief text entitled &quot;Liber 49&quot;, self-referenced within the text as &quot;The Book of Babalon&quot;, was written by Jack Parsons as a transmission from the goddess or force called &#x27;Babalon&#x27; received by him during the Babalon Working. Parsons wrote that &quot;Liber 49&quot; constituted a fourth chapter of Crowley&#x27;s &quot;Liber AL Vel Legis (The Book of the Law)&quot;, the holy text of Thelema.

===Phyllis Seckler===

Phyllis Seckler (1917–2004), also known as &#x27;Soror Meral&#x27;, was a ninth degree (IX°) member of the Sovereign Sanctuary of the Gnosis of Ordo Templi Orientis (O.T.O.), and a lineage holder in the A∴A∴ tradition. She was a student of Jane Wolfe, herself a student of Aleister Crowley.

Sekler was a member of O.T.O. Agape Lodge, the only working Lodge of the O.T.O. at the time of Aleister Crowley&#x27;s death. Seckler was also instrumental in preserving important parts of Crowley&#x27;s literary heritage, typing parts of his &quot;Confessions&quot;, and the complete texts of &quot;The Vision and the Voice&quot; and &quot;Magick Without Tears&quot; during the 1950s. Seckler was also instrumental in re-activing the O.T.O. with Grady Louis McMurtry, during the early-mid 1970s, following the death of Crowley&#x27;s appointed successor, Karl Germer.

Seckler continued her lifelong work with the A∴A∴, founding the &quot;College of Thelema&quot; and co-founding (with James A. Eshelman) the &quot;Temple of Thelema&quot;, and later warranting the formation of the &quot;Temple of the Silver Star&quot;. Seeking to guide her students to an understanding of the Law of Thelema, especially deeper understanding of oneself and of one&#x27;s magical will, Sekler published the bi-annual Thelemic journal &quot;In the Continuum&quot; which featured her essays on Thelema and initiation as well as instructional articles for the students of the A.:.A.:., illustrations and essays which help to clarify some of Crowley&#x27;s thoughts and aid in the understanding of Thelemic principles expressed in Liber AL. Printed for 20 years from 1976 through 1996, &quot;In the Continuum&quot; also published rare works by Aleister Crowley which at the time were out of print or hard to find.

Seckler served as a master of 418 Lodge of O.T.O. in California from its inception in 1979 until her death.

===Kenneth Grant===
Kenneth Grant (1924–2011) was an English ceremonial magician and advocate of the Thelemic religion. A poet, novelist, and writer, he founded his own Thelemic organisation, the Typhonian Ordo Templi Orientis—later renamed the Typhonian Order—with his wife Steffi Grant.

Grant was fascinated by the work of the occultist Aleister Crowley, having read a number of his books. Eager to meet Crowley, Grant wrote letters to Crowley&#x27;s publishers, asking that they pass his letters on to Crowley himself. These eventually resulted in the first meeting between the two, in autumn 1944, at the Bell Inn in Buckinghamshire. After several further meetings and an exchange of letters, Grant agreed to work for Crowley as his secretary and personal assistant. Now living in relative poverty, Crowley was unable to pay Grant for his services in money, instead paying him in magical instruction.

In March 1945, Grant moved into a lodge cottage in the grounds of Netherwood, a Sussex boarding house where Crowley was living. He continued living there with Crowley for several months, dealing with the old man&#x27;s correspondences and needs. In turn, he was allowed to read from Crowley&#x27;s extensive library on occult subjects, and performed ceremonial magic workings with him, becoming a high initiate of Crowley&#x27;s magical group, Ordo Templi Orientis (O.T.O.). Crowley saw Grant as a potential leader of O.T.O. in the UK, writing in his diary, &quot;value of Grant. If I die or go to the USA, there must be a trained man to take care of the English O.T.O.&quot;

Grant drew eclectically on a range of sources in devising his teachings. Although based in Thelema, Grant&#x27;s Typhonian tradition has been described as &quot;a &quot;bricolage&quot; of occultism, Neo-Vedanta, Hindu tantra, Western sexual magic, Surrealism, ufology and Lovecraftian gnosis&quot;. According to Djurdjevic, Grant&#x27;s writing style is notorious for being opaque with &quot;verbal and conceptual labyrinths&quot;. The historian of religion, Manon Hedenborg White, noted that &quot;Grant&#x27;s writings do not lend themselves easily to systematization&quot;. She added that he &quot;deliberately employs cryptic or circuitous modes of argumentation&quot;, and lacks clear boundaries between fact and fiction.

Grant promoted what he termed the Typhonian or Draconian tradition of magic, and wrote that Thelema was only a recent manifestation of this wider tradition. In his books, he portrayed the Typhonian tradition as the world&#x27;s oldest spiritual tradition, writing that it had ancient roots in Africa. The religious studies scholar Gordan Djurdjevic noted that Grant&#x27;s historical claims regarding Typhonian history were &quot;at best highly speculative&quot; and lacked any supporting evidence, however he suggested that Grant may never have intended these claims to be taken literally.

Grant adopted a perennialist interpretation of the history of religion. Grant&#x27;s wrote that Indian spiritual traditions like Tantra and Yoga correlate to Western esoteric traditions, and that both stem from a core, ancient source, has parallels in the perennial philosophy promoted by the Traditionalist School of esotericists. He believed that by mastering magic, one masters this illusory universe, gaining personal liberation and recognising that only the Self really exists. Doing so, according to Grant, leads to the discovery of one&#x27;s true will, the central focus of Thelema.

Grant further wrote that the realm of the Self was known as &quot;the Mauve Zone&quot;, and that it could be reached while in a state of deep sleep, where it has the symbolic appearance of a swamp. He also believed that the reality of consciousness, which he deemed the only true reality, was formless and thus presented as a void, although he also taught that it was symbolised by the Hindu goddess Kali and the Thelemic goddess Nuit.

Grant&#x27;s views on sex magic drew heavily on the importance of sexual dimorphism among humans and the subsequent differentiation of gender roles. Grant taught that the true secret of sex magic were bodily secretions, the most important of which was a woman&#x27;s menstrual blood. In this he differed from Crowley, who viewed semen as the most important genital secretion. Grant referred to female sexual secretions as &quot;kalas&quot;, a term adopted from Sanskrit. He thought that because women have kalas, they have oracular and visionary powers. The magical uses of female genital secretions are a recurring theme in Grant&#x27;s writings.

===James Lees===
James Lees (August 22, 1939 – 2015) was an English magician known for discovering the system he called English Qaballa.

Lees was born in Bolton, Lancashire. He established a career as an analytic chemist. In his search for truth, he also studied psychology. Not finding the answers he wanted from science, he turned to the study of astrology, even making a living for a time as a horary astrologer.

Still resolved to discover further answers, Lees decided to study Kabbalah and the Tree of Life. From here he proceeded to experiment with invocations from the &quot;Key of Solomon&quot;. Satisfied with the results, he proceeded to perform the 18-month working described in &quot;The Book of Abramelin&quot; by means of the Bornless Ritual. Claiming to have successfully invoked his Holy Guardian Angel, he turned his attention to ascending the &#x27;Middle Pillar&#x27; of the Tree of Life, culminating with an experience known as crossing the abyss.

Then, in November 1976, Lees constructed the &quot;order &amp; value of the English Alphabet.&quot; Following this, Lees founded the O∴A∴A∴ in order to assist others in the pursuit of their own spiritual paths. The first public report of the system known as English Qaballa (EQ) was published in 1979 by Ray Sherwin in an editorial in the final issue of his journal, &quot;The New Equinox&quot;. Lees subsequently assumed the role of publisher of &quot;The New Equinox&quot; and, starting in 1981, published additional material about the EQ system over the course of five issues of the journal, extending into 1982.

In 1904, Aleister Crowley wrote out the text of the foundational document of his world-view, known as &quot;Liber AL vel Legis&quot;, &quot;The Book of the Law&quot;. In this text was the injunction found at verse 2:55; &quot;Thou shalt obtain the order &amp; value of the English Alphabet, thou shalt find new symbols to attribute them unto&quot; which was understood by Crowley as referring to an English Qabalah yet to be developed or revealed.

The &quot;order &amp; value&quot; constructed by James Lees lays the letters out on the grid superimposed on the page of manuscript of &quot;Liber AL&quot; on which this verse (Ch. III, v. 47) appears (sheet 16 of Chapter III). Also appearing on this page are a diagonal line and a circled cross. &quot;The Book of the Law&quot; states that the book should only be printed with Crowley&#x27;s hand-written version included, suggesting that there are mysteries in the &quot;chance shape of the letters and their position to one another&quot; of Crowley&#x27;s handwriting. Whichever top-left to bottom-right diagonal is read the magickal order of the letters is obtained.

Little further material on English Qaballa was published until the appearance of Jake Stratton-Kent&#x27;s book, &quot;The Serpent Tongue: Liber 187&quot;, in 2011. This was followed in 2016 by &quot;The Magickal Language of the Book of the Law: An English Qaballa Primer&quot; by Cath Thompson. The creation, exploration, and continuing research and development of the system up to 2010, by James Lees and members of his group in England, are detailed in her 2018 book, &quot;All This and a Book&quot;.

===Nema Andahadna===

Nema Andahadna (1939–2018) practiced and wrote about magic (magical working, as defined by Aleister Crowley) for over thirty years. In 1974, she claimed to have channelled a short book called &quot;&quot;.

From her experience with Thelemic magic, she developed her own system of magic called &quot;Maat Magick&quot; which has the aim of transforming the human race. In 1979, she co-founded the Horus-Maat Lodge. The Lodge and her ideas have been featured in the writings of Kenneth Grant.

Her writings have appeared in many publications, including the &quot;Cincinnati Journal of Ceremonial Magick&quot;, &quot;Aeon&quot;, and &quot;Starfire&quot;. According to Donald Michael Kraig:

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Works cited===
====Primary sources====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Contains a lengthy account of the writing of Nema&#x27;s &quot;Liber Pennae Praenumbra&quot;.
* Contains a photo facsimile of &quot;Liber Pennae Praenumbra&quot;.
* 
====Secondary sources====
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
*
*
* 
==Further reading==
*
*


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2155334" start="0" end="16" title="Ceremonial magic" label="Ceremonial magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155334" start="32" end="38" title="Ceremonial magic" label="magick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155334" start="40" end="52" title="Ceremonial magic" label="ritual magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155334" start="54" end="64" title="Ceremonial magic" label="high magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155334" start="68" end="81" title="Ceremonial magic" label="learned magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="124" end="129" title="Magic (supernatural)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q368173" start="345" end="378" title="Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn" label="Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="426" end="432" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613576" start="444" end="460" title="Hermetic Qabalah" label="Hermetic Qabalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115585" start="462" end="476" title="Enochian magic" label="Enochian magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q745955" start="478" end="485" title="Thelema" label="Thelema"/>
<link wikidata="Q913554" start="512" end="520" title="grimoire" label="grimoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192933" start="551" end="562" title="Hermeticism" label="Hermeticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="567" end="586" title="Western esotericism" label="Western esotericism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="680" end="691" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="714" end="730" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="748" end="754" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q148442" start="766" end="777" title="magic (illusion)" label="stage magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422294" start="1074" end="1086" title="John Symonds" label="John Symonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392415" start="1091" end="1104" title="Kenneth Grant" label="Kenneth Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589560" start="1292" end="1301" title="true will" label="true will"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731054" start="1424" end="1438" title="Magick (Book 4)" label="Magick, Book 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472196" start="1517" end="1537" title="Early Modern English" label="Early Modern English"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="1551" end="1556" title="Magic (paranormal)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q76568" start="1604" end="1630" title="Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa" label="Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939470" start="1680" end="1726" title="Three Books of Occult Philosophy" label="Three Books of Occult Philosophy, or Of Magick"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="1734" end="1750" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651237" start="2138" end="2150" title="Tree of Life" label="Tree of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="2201" end="2209" title="Mysticism" label="mystical"/>
<link wikidata="Q660267" start="2299" end="2308" title="Sephirot (Kabbalah)" label="sephiroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="2462" end="2477" title="Hebrew alphabet" label="Hebrew alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q188520" start="2512" end="2529" title="classical element" label="classical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q40540" start="2589" end="2595" title="Zodiac" label="Zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231686" start="3274" end="3281" title="Malkuth" label="Malkuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739887" start="3367" end="3373" title="Kether" label="Kether"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="3728" end="3736" title="Western esotericism" label="esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="3738" end="3744" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="3750" end="3758" title="mysticism" label="mystical"/>
<link wikidata="Q110442391" start="4036" end="4045" title="augoeides" label="augoeides"/>
<link wikidata="Q728388" start="4157" end="4176" title="Holy Guardian Angel" label="Holy Guardian Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q913554" start="4410" end="4418" title="grimoire" label="grimoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83790" start="4424" end="4432" title="textbook" label="textbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="4436" end="4441" title="Magic (paranormal)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44506" start="4514" end="4523" title="talismans" label="talismans"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="4528" end="4535" title="amulets" label="amulets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999796" start="4560" end="4565" title="Spell (paranormal)" label="spell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999796" start="4568" end="4574" title="Spell (paranormal)" label="charms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="4579" end="4589" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q829697" start="4602" end="4608" title="evocation" label="summon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671839" start="4612" end="4618" title="invocation" label="invoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="4649" end="4654" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q45529" start="4657" end="4664" title="Ghost" label="spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="4666" end="4673" title="Deity" label="deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="4679" end="4684" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="4852" end="4857" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673224" start="5073" end="5096" title="magical correspondences" label="magical correspondences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194294" start="5391" end="5403" title="cunning folk" label="cunning folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114446" start="5439" end="5450" title="Owen Davies (historian)" label="Owen Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="5524" end="5531" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="5535" end="5542" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="5642" end="5659" title="Ancient Near East" label="Ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781430" start="5687" end="5702" title="magical formula" label="magical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="5776" end="5788" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731054" start="8454" end="8469" title="Magick (Book 4)" label="Magick (Book 4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211147" start="8554" end="8566" title="magic circle" label="magic circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589560" start="8685" end="8694" title="true will" label="true will"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492942" start="8700" end="8713" title="Binah (Kabbalah)" label="understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q385777" start="8807" end="8810" title="Abramelin oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q913554" start="8988" end="9008" title="Grimoire" label="book of conjurations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481731" start="9072" end="9077" title="Lamen (magic)" label="lamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="9224" end="9229" title="karma" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q373066" start="9250" end="9260" title="Thurible" label="magic fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q110442391" start="9594" end="9607" title="body of light" label="body of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855785" start="9825" end="9834" title="Banishing" label="Banishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671839" start="10050" end="10060" title="Invocation" label="Invocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204780" start="10150" end="10158" title="Buddhist devotion" label="Devotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10940474" start="10502" end="10524" title="assumption of godforms" label="assumption of godforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="10535" end="10540" title="Drama" label="Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q594939" start="10788" end="10798" title="initiation" label="initiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574462" start="10808" end="10820" title="Gnostic Mass" label="Gnostic Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q829697" start="10824" end="10833" title="Evocation" label="Evocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540656" start="10931" end="10937" title="goetia" label="goetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="10941" end="10950" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="10953" end="10959" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="11071" end="11083" title="Consecration" label="Consecration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="11152" end="11162" title="Divination" label="Divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q641678" start="11186" end="11197" title="Thoth Tarot" label="Thoth Tarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855785" start="12336" end="12345" title="banishing" label="banishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188520" start="12713" end="12730" title="classical element" label="classical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q40540" start="12793" end="12799" title="Zodiac" label="Zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531546" start="12964" end="13004" title="Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram" label="Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q40953" start="13486" end="13492" title="prayer" label="prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q728388" start="14672" end="14691" title="Holy Guardian Angel" label="Holy Guardian Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589560" start="14763" end="14772" title="true will" label="true will"/>
<link wikidata="Q10940474" start="15680" end="15702" title="assumption of godforms" label="assumption of godforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540656" start="16465" end="16471" title="Goetia" label="Goetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="16899" end="16908" title="eucharist" label="eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719256" start="17478" end="17497" title="Mass of the Phoenix" label="Mass of the Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540539" start="17502" end="17518" title="The Gnostic Mass" label="The Gnostic Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018071" start="17606" end="17619" title="Cake of Light" label="Cake of Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252904" start="17671" end="17673" title="Ra" label="Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q19413" start="17814" end="17821" title="Pelican" label="Pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="18496" end="18506" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600261" start="18602" end="18612" title="Great Work (Hermeticism)" label="Great Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011595" start="18869" end="18884" title="fortune telling" label="fortune telling"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="19213" end="19219" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="19256" end="19265" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q282244" start="19314" end="19325" title="bibliomancy" label="bibliomancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169632" start="19372" end="19383" title="Liber Legis" label="Liber Legis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="19391" end="19398" title="I Ching" label="I Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q641678" start="19401" end="19412" title="Thoth Tarot" label="Thoth Tarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q815750" start="19509" end="19517" title="geomancy" label="geomancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312469" start="20176" end="20193" title="Renaissance magic" label="Renaissance magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q913554" start="20264" end="20272" title="grimoire" label="grimoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q88079" start="20309" end="20326" title="Johannes Hartlieb" label="Johannes Hartlieb"/>
<link wikidata="Q97464" start="20328" end="20340" title="Georg Pictor" label="Georg Pictor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540656" start="20379" end="20385" title="goetia" label="goetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142765" start="20394" end="20407" title="James Sanford (translator)" label="James Sanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q76568" start="20435" end="20461" title="Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa" label="Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980728" start="20653" end="20666" title="natural magic" label="natural magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="20732" end="20741" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="20743" end="20750" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="20800" end="20815" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="20825" end="20831" title="botany" label="botany"/>
<link wikidata="Q337935" start="21033" end="21043" title="necromancy" label="necromancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="21048" end="21058" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q463195" start="21200" end="21215" title="Francis Barrett (occultist)" label="Francis Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="21277" end="21286" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="21288" end="21299" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="21320" end="21330" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749605" start="21447" end="21456" title="The Magus (Barrett book)" label="The Magus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="21518" end="21523" title="herbs" label="herbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="21528" end="21534" title="Rock (geology)" label="stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="21536" end="21545" title="magnetism" label="magnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="21547" end="21563" title="amulet" label="talismanic magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="21565" end="21572" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q140732" start="21574" end="21584" title="numerology" label="numerology"/>
<link wikidata="Q188520" start="21590" end="21598" title="Classical element" label="elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q356336" start="21626" end="21631" title="adept" label="adept"/>
<link wikidata="Q76568" start="21715" end="21732" title="Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa" label="Cornelius Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21862" end="21875" title="Robert Turner (writer)" label="Robert Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q318462" start="22046" end="22066" title="Edward Bulwer-Lytton" label="Edward Bulwer-Lytton"/>
<link wikidata="Q274681" start="22124" end="22136" title="Eliphas Levi" label="Eliphas Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q274681" start="22158" end="22170" title="Éliphas Lévi" label="Éliphas Lévi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21450930" start="22251" end="22264" title="Bulwer-Lytton" label="Bulwer-Lytton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501457" start="22310" end="22343" title="Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie" label="Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie"/>
<link wikidata="Q553124" start="22386" end="22405" title="Arthur Edward Waite" label="Arthur Edward Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q829348" start="23053" end="23065" title="Spiritualism (religious movement)" label="Spiritualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="23338" end="23352" title="secret society" label="secret society"/>
<link wikidata="Q583269" start="23374" end="23379" title="Tarot" label="Tarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q148442" start="23496" end="23501" title="magic (illusion)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q368173" start="23788" end="23821" title="Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn" label="Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23843" end="23857" title="secret society#Europe" label="secret society"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="23899" end="23905" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="23907" end="23918" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q332102" start="23924" end="23934" title="paranormal" label="paranormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946195" start="24004" end="24017" title="Magical organization" label="magical order"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="24071" end="24084" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140325" start="24114" end="24121" title="theurgy" label="theurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="24189" end="24194" title="Magic (paranormal)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q59774" start="24254" end="24259" title="Wicca" label="Wicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q745955" start="24264" end="24271" title="Thelema" label="Thelema"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="24381" end="24390" title="occultism" label="occultism"/>
<link wikidata="Q945121" start="24413" end="24435" title="William Robert Woodman" label="William Robert Woodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q540538" start="24437" end="24458" title="William Wynn Westcott" label="William Wynn Westcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q705702" start="24464" end="24486" title="Samuel Liddell Mathers" label="Samuel Liddell Mathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="24493" end="24503" title="Freemasons" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613576" start="24808" end="24824" title="Hermetic Qabalah" label="Hermetic Qabalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q188520" start="24890" end="24907" title="classical element" label="classical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="24935" end="24944" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q126645" start="24946" end="24962" title="tarot divination" label="tarot divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q815750" start="24968" end="24976" title="geomancy" label="geomancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411865" start="25035" end="25042" title="scrying" label="scrying"/>
<link wikidata="Q818844" start="25044" end="25057" title="Astral projection" label="astral travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="25063" end="25070" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140325" start="25222" end="25229" title="theurgy" label="theurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540656" start="25271" end="25277" title="goetia" label="goetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169632" start="25318" end="25337" title="The Book of the Law" label="The Book of the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772872" start="25354" end="25378" title="The Vision and the Voice" label="The Vision and the Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q205177" start="25420" end="25431" title="Abracadabra" label="Abracadabra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668717" start="25459" end="25470" title="Abrahadabra" label="Abrahadabra"/>
<link wikidata="Q255391" start="25517" end="25530" title="Aeon (Thelema)" label="Aeon of Horus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731054" start="25801" end="25826" title="Magick (Book 4)" label="Magick, Liber ABA, Book 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="25923" end="25929" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="25981" end="25985" title="Yoga" label="Yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q192933" start="25987" end="25998" title="Hermeticism" label="Hermeticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q913554" start="26009" end="26018" title="grimoires" label="grimoires"/>
<link wikidata="Q274681" start="26068" end="26080" title="Eliphas Levi" label="Eliphas Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q189454" start="26085" end="26101" title="Helena Blavatsky" label="Helena Blavatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q260670" start="26387" end="26399" title="Dion Fortune" label="Dion Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="26424" end="26433" title="occultist" label="occultist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16237504" start="26505" end="26534" title="Fraternity of the Inner Light" label="Fraternity of the Inner Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918500" start="26662" end="26678" title="Ascended master" label="Ascended Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q173486" start="27695" end="27707" title="frankincense" label="frankincense"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001361" start="28143" end="28149" title="Astral body" label="astral"/>
<link wikidata="Q185832" start="28848" end="28866" title="Emanuel Swedenborg" label="Emanuel Swedenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q505391" start="28871" end="28891" title="Andrew Jackson Davis" label="Andrew Jackson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065146" start="28944" end="28968" title="Paschal Beverly Randolph" label="Paschal Beverly Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656504" start="28973" end="28985" title="Ida Craddock" label="Ida Craddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q24572185" start="29018" end="29028" title="Hugh Urban" label="Hugh Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q59774" start="29171" end="29176" title="Wicca" label="Wicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q435687" start="29215" end="29231" title="Vivianne Crowley" label="Vivianne Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004584" start="29312" end="29324" title="Nevill Drury" label="Nevill Drury"/>
<link wikidata="Q272205" start="29634" end="29642" title="Starhawk" label="Starhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765884" start="29700" end="29716" title="The Spiral Dance" label="The Spiral Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124181" start="30023" end="30036" title="Pagan studies" label="Pagan studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q350708" start="30322" end="30336" title="Gerald Gardner" label="Gerald Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q331497" start="30544" end="30566" title="Jack Parsons (rocket engineer)" label="John Whiteside Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="30595" end="30610" title="aerospace engineering" label="rocket engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="30612" end="30619" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q745955" start="30625" end="30634" title="Thelema" label="Thelemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="30635" end="30641" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q745955" start="30667" end="30674" title="Thelema" label="Thelema"/>
<link wikidata="Q477544" start="30680" end="30702" title="new religious movement" label="new religious movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q40890380" start="30819" end="30830" title="Agape Lodge" label="Agape Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q33237" start="30858" end="30878" title="Ordo Templi Orientis" label="Ordo Templi Orientis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999036" start="30941" end="30961" title="Wilfred Talbot Smith" label="Wilfred Talbot Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589560" start="31139" end="31148" title="true will" label="true will"/>
<link wikidata="Q7421728" start="31640" end="31644" title="Sara Northrup Hollister" label="Sara"/>
<link wikidata="Q216896" start="31669" end="31683" title="L. Ron Hubbard" label="L. Ron Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877775" start="31707" end="31722" title="Babalon Working" label="Babalon Working"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877775" start="31784" end="31791" title="Babalon" label="Babalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="31838" end="31843" title="magic (paranormal)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627975" start="31844" end="31854" title="ceremony" label="ceremonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="31858" end="31864" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q131036" start="31918" end="31929" title="Scientology" label="Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q216896" start="31938" end="31952" title="L. Ron Hubbard" label="L. Ron Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q41374" start="32017" end="32028" title="incarnation" label="incarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877775" start="32070" end="32077" title="Babalon" label="Babalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907673" start="32185" end="32206" title="Moonchild (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Moonchild&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766231" start="32326" end="32342" title="Marjorie Cameron" label="Marjorie Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786347" start="32384" end="32393" title="elemental" label="elemental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752601" start="32533" end="32542" title="sex magic" label="sex magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877775" start="32720" end="32727" title="Babalon" label="Babalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q331497" start="33217" end="33229" title="John Whiteside Parsons" label="Jack Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169632" start="33458" end="33477" title="The Book of the Law" label="The Book of the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q745955" start="33503" end="33510" title="Thelema" label="Thelema"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413247" start="33536" end="33551" title="Phyllis Seckler" label="Phyllis Seckler"/>
<link wikidata="Q33237" start="33680" end="33700" title="Ordo Templi Orientis" label="Ordo Templi Orientis"/>
<link wikidata="Q526492" start="33739" end="33743" title="A∴A∴" label="A∴A∴"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152961" start="33776" end="33786" title="Jane Wolfe" label="Jane Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772872" start="34128" end="34152" title="The Vision and the Voice" label="The Vision and the Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731062" start="34169" end="34189" title="Magick Without Tears" label="Magick Without Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592132" start="34275" end="34295" title="Grady Louis McMurtry" label="Grady Louis McMurtry"/>
<link wikidata="Q78405" start="34384" end="34395" title="Karl Germer" label="Karl Germer"/>
<link wikidata="Q526492" start="34443" end="34447" title="A∴A∴" label="A∴A∴"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169632" start="35139" end="35147" title="Liber AL" label="Liber AL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392415" start="35452" end="35465" title="Kenneth Grant" label="Kenneth Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q745955" start="35533" end="35541" title="Thelema" label="Thelemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861088" start="35628" end="35658" title="Typhonian Order" label="Typhonian Ordo Templi Orientis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="36054" end="36069" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="36419" end="36425" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q33237" start="36783" end="36803" title="Ordo Templi Orientis" label="Ordo Templi Orientis"/>
<link wikidata="Q657488" start="38352" end="38364" title="perennial philosophy" label="perennialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q50685643" start="38629" end="38650" title="Traditionalist School" label="Traditionalist School"/>
<link wikidata="Q132127" start="39328" end="39332" title="Kali" label="Kali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068814" start="39358" end="39362" title="Nuit" label="Nuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752601" start="39387" end="39396" title="sex magic" label="sex magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="39431" end="39448" title="sexual dimorphism" label="sexual dimorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9715" start="39694" end="39699" title="semen" label="semen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="39826" end="39834" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q108551466" start="40134" end="40149" title="English Qaballa" label="English Qaballa"/>
<link wikidata="Q184579" start="40169" end="40187" title="Bolton, Lancashire" label="Bolton, Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346" start="40219" end="40235" title="analytic chemistry" label="analytic chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577364" start="40412" end="40429" title="horary astrology" label="horary astrologer"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="40498" end="40506" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746743" start="40515" end="40527" title="Tree of life (Kabbalah)" label="Tree of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081549" start="40598" end="40612" title="Key of Solomon" label="Key of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22257011" start="40712" end="40733" title="The Book of Abramelin" label="The Book of Abramelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946143" start="40756" end="40771" title="Bornless Ritual" label="Bornless Ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q728388" start="40815" end="40834" title="Holy Guardian Angel" label="Holy Guardian Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5285175" start="40883" end="40896" title="Middle Pillar" label="Middle Pillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670735" start="40964" end="40982" title="crossing the abyss" label="crossing the abyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q108551466" start="41243" end="41258" title="English Qaballa" label="English Qaballa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169632" start="41742" end="41761" title="The Book of the Law" label="The Book of the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990862" start="43250" end="43264" title="Nema Andahadna" label="Nema Andahadna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43411" end="43421" title="Mediumship#Channeling" label="channelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q745955" start="43482" end="43490" title="Thelema" label="Thelemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392415" start="43725" end="43738" title="Kenneth Grant" label="Kenneth Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294880" start="43914" end="43934" title="Donald Michael Kraig" label="Donald Michael Kraig"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211681" wikidata="Q152923" url="?curid=211681" title="Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria">
<text>Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria (Rudolf Franz Karl Josef; 21 August 1858 – 30 January 1889) was the only son and third child of Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria and Duchess Elisabeth of Bavaria (Sisi). He was heir apparent to the imperial throne of the Austro-Hungarian Empire from birth. In 1889, he died in a suicide pact with his mistress Baroness Mary Vetsera at the Mayerling hunting lodge. The ensuing scandal made international headlines.

==Background==


Rudolf was born at Schloss Laxenburg, a castle near Vienna, as the son of Emperor Franz Joseph I and Empress Elisabeth. He was named after the first Habsburg King of Germany, Rudolf I, who reigned from 1273 to 1291. Rudolf was raised together with his older sister Gisela and the two were very close. At the age of six, Rudolf was separated from his sister as he began his education to become a future Emperor of Austria. This did not change their relationship and Gisela remained close to him until she left Vienna upon her marriage to Prince Leopold of Bavaria. Rudolf&#x27;s initial education under Leopold Gondrecourt was physically and emotionally abusive, and likely a contributing factor in his later suicide.

Influenced by his tutor Ferdinand von Hochstetter (who later became the first superintendent of the Imperial Natural History Museum), Rudolf became very interested in natural sciences, starting a mineral collection at an early age. After his death, large portions of his mineral collection came into the possession of the University of Agriculture in Vienna, which is now known as the University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna

In 1877, Count Karl Albert von Bombelles was master of the young prince. Bombelles had been the custodian of Rudolf&#x27;s aunt Empress Charlotte of Mexico.

In contrast with his deeply conservative father, Rudolf held liberal views that were closer to those of his mother. Nevertheless, his relationship with her was at times strained.

==Marriage==
In Vienna, on 10 May 1881, Rudolf married Princess Stéphanie of Belgium, a daughter of King Leopold II of Belgium, at the Augustinian Church in Vienna. Although their marriage was initially a happy one, by the time their only child, the Archduchess Elisabeth, was born on 2 September 1883, the couple had drifted apart.

After the birth of their child, Rudolf became increasingly unstable as he drank heavily and was having many affairs. This behaviour, however, was not entirely new as Rudolf had a long history of reckless promiscuity prior to his marriage.

In 1886, Rudolf became seriously ill and the couple was directed to the island of Lacroma (present day Croatia) for his treatment. In transit, Stéphanie also became seriously ill and described &quot;suffering terrible pain&quot;. The couple&#x27;s diagnosis of peritonitis was kept secret by order of the Emperor. 

After intensive treatment, Stéphanie was able to recover from the illness but she was left unable to have children as the illness had destroyed her fallopian tubes. Stéphanie&#x27;s symptoms and outcome indicate Rudolf had most likely infected her with gonorrhoea. Rudolf himself did not improve with treatment and grew increasingly ill. It is likely he had contracted syphilis in addition to gonorrhoea. In order to cope with the effects of the disease, Rudolf began taking large doses of morphine.

By 1889, it was common knowledge at Court that Stéphanie would not have any more children due to the events of 1886, and that Rudolf&#x27;s health was deteriorating.

==Murder-suicide==

In 1886, Rudolf bought Mayerling, a hunting lodge. In late 1888, the 30-year-old Crown Prince met the 17-year-old Baroness Marie von Vetsera, and began an affair with her. On 30 January 1889, he and the young baroness were discovered dead in the lodge as a result of an apparent joint suicide. As suicide would prevent him from being given a church burial, Rudolf was officially declared to have been in a state of &quot;mental unbalance&quot;, and he was buried in the Imperial Crypt () of the Capuchin Church in Vienna. Vetsera&#x27;s body was smuggled out of Mayerling in the middle of the night and secretly buried in the village cemetery at Heiligenkreuz. The Emperor had Mayerling converted into a penitential convent of Carmelite nuns and endowed a chantry so that daily prayers would eternally be said by the nuns for the repose of Rudolf&#x27;s soul.

Vetsera&#x27;s private letters were discovered in a safe deposit box in an Austrian bank in 2015, and they revealed that she was preparing to commit suicide alongside Rudolf, out of love.

==Aftermath of death==
Rudolf&#x27;s death plunged his mother, Empress Elisabeth, into despair. She wore black or pearl grey, the colours of mourning, for the rest of her life and spent more and more time away from the imperial court in Vienna. Her daughter Gisela was afraid that she might also commit suicide. In 1898, while Elisabeth was abroad in Geneva, Switzerland, she was murdered by an Italian anarchist, Luigi Lucheni.

Rudolf&#x27;s death had left Franz Joseph without a direct male heir. Franz-Joseph&#x27;s younger brother, Archduke Karl Ludwig, was next in line to the Austro-Hungarian throne, though it was falsely reported that he had renounced his succession rights. In any case, his death in 1896 from typhoid made his eldest son, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, the new heir presumptive. However, Archduke Franz Ferdinand was assassinated in 1914 (an event that precipitated World War I), so when Emperor Franz-Joseph died in November 1916, he was succeeded instead by his grandnephew, Charles I of Austria. The demands of the American President, Woodrow Wilson forced Emperor Charles I to renounce involvement in state affairs in Vienna in early November 1918. As a result, the Austro-Hungarian Empire ceased to exist and a republic came into being without revolution. Charles I and his family went into exile in Switzerland after spending a short time at Castle Eckartsau.

== Legend ==
Rudolf (also known as Ludolf or Ludó in folklore) was a figure in folk stories in Hungary. Legend has it, that it was his father who sentenced him to death, as he was a Hungarophile and defied his Hungarophobic father&#x27;s will. However, the latter secretly pardoned him and buried a waxwork in his place, and the real Ludó lived out his life in South America. The legend&#x27;s popularity peaked during the interwar period.

==In popular culture==
* &quot;Mayerling&quot;, a 1936 film directed by Anatole Litvak, with Charles Boyer and Danielle Darrieux, based on a novel by Claude Anet.
* &quot;Sarajevo&quot; (1940), a film directed Max Ophüls starts with Rudolf&#x27;s death.
* The fictionalized musical &quot;Marinka&quot; (1945), with book by George Marion Jr., and Karl Farkas, lyrics by George Marion Jr., music by Emmerich Kálmán.
* &quot;Mayerling&quot;, a 1957 film, starring Mel Ferrer as Crown Prince Rudolf, Audrey Hepburn as Baroness Mary Vetsara with Lorne Greene as Kaiser Franz Josef.
* &quot;Mayerling&quot;, a 1968 film, starring Omar Sharif as Crown Prince Rudolf, Catherine Deneuve as Mary with James Mason as Kaiser Franz Josef and Ava Gardner as Empress Elisabeth.
* Japanese Takarazuka Revue&#x27;s &quot;Utakata no Koi&quot;/&quot;Ephemeral Love&quot;, based on the 1968 film.
*&quot;Requiem for a Crown Prince&quot;, one-hour episode of the British documentary/drama series &quot;Fall of Eagles&quot; (1974), directed by James Furman and written by David Turner, tracks in detail the events of 30 January 1889 and the following few days at Mayerling.
* Miklós Jancsó&#x27;s 1975 film &quot;Vizi privati, pubbliche virtù&quot; (&quot;Private Vices, Public Virtues&quot;), a reinterpretation in which the lovers and their friends are murdered by imperial authorities for treason and immorality.
* Kenneth MacMillan&#x27;s 1978 ballet, &quot;Mayerling&quot;.
* Japanese manga by Higuri You, &quot;Tenshi no Hitsugi&quot; (Angel&#x27;s Coffin) (2000).
* The Crown Prince, a 2006 television film in two parts directed by Robert Dornhelm.
* Composer Frank Wildhorn&#x27;s musical &quot;Rudolf – Affaire Mayerling&quot; (2006), produced in some territories as &quot;The Last Kiss&quot; or &quot;Rudolf – The Last Kiss&quot;.
* The play &quot;Rudolf&quot; (2011) by David Logan dramatises the last few weeks of the life of Crown Prince Rudolf.
* A highly fictionalized version of the incident at Mayerling is depicted in the 2006 film &quot;The Illusionist&quot;. Crown Prince Leopold (played by Rufus Sewell) is a fictional analog of Rudolf.
*&quot;The Empress&quot; is a German historical drama television series based on the life of Empress Elisabeth of Austria, starring Devrim Lingnau in the title role, and Philip Froissant as Emperor Franz Joseph.
* &quot;Corsage&quot;, a 2022 film, starred as Crown Prince Rudolph with Vicky Krieps as Empress Elisabeth.

==Titles, styles and honours==
===Titles and styles===
* 21 August 1858 – 30 January 1889: &quot;His Imperial and Royal Highness&quot; The Crown Prince of Austria, Hungary, Bohemia and Croatia

===Honours===
;Domestic
* Knight of the Golden Fleece, &quot;1858&quot;
* Grand Cross of the Royal Hungarian Order of St. Stephen, &quot;1877&quot;

;Foreign
==Ancestors==
==Gallery==
==See also==
*Lake Rudolf, an earlier name for Lake Turkana, Kenya
*Mount Rudolf and Rudolf Glacier, New Zealand
*Rudolf Island, northernmost island of the Franz Josef Archipelago, Russia
*Alma Vetsera Hayne, a New York socialite who claimed to be the daughter of Rudolf and Mary Vetsera
*List of heirs to the Austrian throne

==Notes==
==Further reading==
* Barkeley, Richard. &quot;The Road to Mayerling: Life and Death of Crown Prince Rudolph of Austria&quot;. London: Macmillan, 1958.
* Franzel, Emil. &quot;Crown Prince Rudolph and the Mayerling Tragedy: Fact and Fiction&quot;. Vienna : V. Herold, 1974.
* Hamann, Brigitte. &quot;Kronprinz Rudolf: Ein Leben&quot;. Vienna: Amalthea, 2005, .
* Lonyay, Károly. &quot;Rudolph: The Tragedy of Mayerling&quot;. New York: Scribner, 1949.
* Morton, Frederic. &quot;A Nervous Splendor: Vienna 1888/1889&quot;. Penguin 1979
* Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria. &quot;Majestät, ich warne Sie... Geheime und private Schriften&quot;. Edited by Brigitte Hamann. Vienna: Amalthea, 1979, (reprinted Munich: Piper, 1998, ).
* Salvendy, John T. &quot;Royal Rebel: A Psychological Portrait of Crown Prince Rudolf of Austria-Hungary&quot;. Lanham, Maryland: University Press of America, 1988.

==External links==

*A profile of Marie Vetsera
*IMDb on various Mayerling Films
*Crown Prince Rudolfs death</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q152923" start="0" end="31" title="Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria" label="Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="136" end="161" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q150782" start="166" end="201" title="Empress Elisabeth of Austria" label="Duchess Elisabeth of Bavaria (Sisi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="210" end="223" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="254" end="277" title="Austro-Hungarian Empire" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305388" start="312" end="324" title="suicide pact" label="suicide pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q625369" start="334" end="342" title="mistress (lover)" label="mistress"/>
<link wikidata="Q233074" start="343" end="364" title="Baroness Mary Vetsera" label="Baroness Mary Vetsera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260137" start="372" end="395" title="Mayerling incident" label="Mayerling hunting lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q380298" start="484" end="501" title="Schloss Laxenburg" label="Schloss Laxenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="517" end="523" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="539" end="561" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Emperor Franz Joseph I"/>
<link wikidata="Q150782" start="566" end="583" title="Elisabeth of Bavaria" label="Empress Elisabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883514" start="623" end="638" title="King of Germany" label="King of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q76956" start="640" end="648" title="Rudolf I of Germany" label="Rudolf I"/>
<link wikidata="Q231871" start="730" end="736" title="Archduchess Gisela of Austria" label="Gisela"/>
<link wikidata="Q166877" start="867" end="885" title="Emperor of Austria" label="Emperor of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q61015" start="1002" end="1027" title="Prince Leopold of Bavaria" label="Prince Leopold of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502382" start="1067" end="1086" title="Leopold Gondrecourt" label="Leopold Gondrecourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q64294" start="1207" end="1232" title="Ferdinand von Hochstetter" label="Ferdinand von Hochstetter"/>
<link wikidata="Q688704" start="1283" end="1314" title="Imperial Natural History Museum" label="Imperial Natural History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q876520" start="1568" end="1625" title="University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna" label="University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q56537780" start="1658" end="1667" title="Bombelles" label="Bombelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q154971" start="1755" end="1782" title="Carlota of Mexico" label="Empress Charlotte of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="1846" end="1853" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170197" start="2020" end="2049" title="Princess Stéphanie of Belgium" label="Princess Stéphanie of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12967" start="2070" end="2091" title="Leopold II of Belgium" label="Leopold II of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q693869" start="2096" end="2118" title="Augustinian Church, Vienna" label="the Augustinian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q93390" start="2215" end="2236" title="Archduchess Elisabeth Marie of Austria" label="Archduchess Elisabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q277389" start="2621" end="2628" title="Lokrum" label="Lacroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q223102" start="2800" end="2811" title="peritonitis" label="peritonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101896" start="3108" end="3118" title="gonorrhoea" label="gonorrhoea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="3224" end="3232" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q701221" start="3566" end="3575" title="Mayerling" label="Mayerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424449" start="3579" end="3592" title="Jagdschloss" label="hunting lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q233074" start="3657" end="3683" title="Baroness Mary Vetsera" label="Baroness Marie von Vetsera"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="3828" end="3835" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q662652" start="4013" end="4027" title="Imperial Crypt" label="Imperial Crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q697944" start="4038" end="4053" title="Capuchin Church, Vienna" label="Capuchin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q665159" start="4189" end="4202" title="Heiligenkreuz, Lower Austria" label="Heiligenkreuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135659" start="4270" end="4279" title="Discalced Carmelites" label="Carmelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q575842" start="4299" end="4306" title="chantry" label="chantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120101" start="4456" end="4472" title="safe deposit box" label="safe deposit box"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="4944" end="4950" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="4952" end="4963" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q317709" start="5007" end="5020" title="Luigi Lucheni" label="Luigi Lucheni"/>
<link wikidata="Q78519" start="5130" end="5150" title="Archduke Karl Ludwig of Austria" label="Archduke Karl Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q43063" start="5342" end="5366" title="Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria" label="Archduke Franz Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="5376" end="5392" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q192050" start="5403" end="5444" title="assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria" label="Archduke Franz Ferdinand was assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5481" end="5492" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q51068" start="5592" end="5612" title="Charles I of Austria" label="Charles I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="5653" end="5667" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="6077" end="6084" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162686" start="6192" end="6205" title="Anti-Hungarian sentiment" label="Hungarophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055622" start="6281" end="6288" title="Wax sculpture" label="waxwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="6343" end="6356" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="6405" end="6420" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607724" start="6454" end="6463" title="Mayerling (1936 film)" label="Mayerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q213581" start="6495" end="6509" title="Anatole Litvak" label="Anatole Litvak"/>
<link wikidata="Q105987" start="6516" end="6529" title="Charles Boyer" label="Charles Boyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q234149" start="6534" end="6551" title="Danielle Darrieux" label="Danielle Darrieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096435" start="6573" end="6584" title="Claude Anet" label="Claude Anet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020208" start="6594" end="6602" title="Sarajevo (1940 French film)" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55410" start="6633" end="6643" title="Max Ophüls" label="Max Ophüls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637869" start="6711" end="6718" title="Marinka (operetta)" label="Marinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507856" start="6746" end="6763" title="George Marion Jr." label="George Marion Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q87018" start="6769" end="6780" title="Karl Farkas" label="Karl Farkas"/>
<link wikidata="Q153818" start="6820" end="6835" title="Emmerich Kálmán" label="Emmerich Kálmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102739" start="6845" end="6854" title="Mayerling (1957 film)" label="Mayerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q333475" start="6884" end="6894" title="Mel Ferrer" label="Mel Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42786" start="6919" end="6933" title="Audrey Hepburn" label="Audrey Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q550784" start="6964" end="6976" title="Lorne Greene" label="Lorne Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914469" start="7008" end="7017" title="Mayerling (1968 film)" label="Mayerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q170515" start="7047" end="7058" title="Omar Sharif" label="Omar Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q106418" start="7083" end="7100" title="Catherine Deneuve" label="Catherine Deneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q209186" start="7114" end="7125" title="James Mason" label="James Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q164487" start="7152" end="7163" title="Ava Gardner" label="Ava Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q586430" start="7197" end="7213" title="Takarazuka Revue" label="Takarazuka Revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008819" start="7404" end="7418" title="Fall of Eagles" label="Fall of Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q259240" start="7577" end="7590" title="Miklós Jancsó" label="Miklós Jancsó"/>
<link wikidata="Q722967" start="7614" end="7643" title="Vizi privati, pubbliche virtù" label="Vizi privati, pubbliche virtù"/>
<link wikidata="Q661555" start="7819" end="7836" title="Kenneth MacMillan" label="Kenneth MacMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797084" start="7857" end="7878" title="Mayerling (ballet)" label="&amp;quot;Mayerling&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q441692" start="7900" end="7910" title="You Higuri" label="Higuri You"/>
<link wikidata="Q328124" start="7974" end="7990" title="The Crown Prince (2006 film)" label="The Crown Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q79060" start="8040" end="8055" title="Robert Dornhelm" label="Robert Dornhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444457" start="8068" end="8082" title="Frank Wildhorn" label="Frank Wildhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q681540" start="8104" end="8130" title="Rudolf (musical)" label="Rudolf – Affaire Mayerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q645735" start="8451" end="8478" title="The Illusionist (2006 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Illusionist&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q299217" start="8512" end="8524" title="Rufus Sewell" label="Rufus Sewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q105686533" start="8566" end="8577" title="The Empress (TV series)" label="The Empress"/>
<link wikidata="Q98099227" start="8691" end="8705" title="Devrim Lingnau" label="Devrim Lingnau"/>
<link wikidata="Q110158599" start="8779" end="8786" title="Corsage (film)" label="Corsage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522116" start="8844" end="8856" title="Vicky Krieps" label="Vicky Krieps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9100" end="9127" title="Order of the Golden Fleece#Austrian Order" label="Knight of the Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q285071" start="9167" end="9203" title="Order of St. Stephen of Hungary" label="Royal Hungarian Order of St. Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182719" start="9272" end="9283" title="Lake Rudolf" label="Lake Rudolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q31661066" start="9326" end="9338" title="Mount Rudolf" label="Mount Rudolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q840509" start="9372" end="9385" title="Rudolf Island" label="Rudolf Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733612" start="9447" end="9465" title="Alma Vetsera Hayne" label="Alma Vetsera Hayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622133" start="9547" end="9583" title="List of heirs to the Austrian throne" label="List of heirs to the Austrian throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q65619" start="9870" end="9886" title="Brigitte Hamann" label="Hamann, Brigitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q65619" start="10244" end="10259" title="Brigitte Hamann" label="Brigitte Hamann"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211683" wikidata="Q744593" url="?curid=211683" title="Military–industrial complex">
<text>The expression military–industrial complex (MIC) describes the relationship between a country&#x27;s military and the defense industry that supplies it, seen together as a vested interest which influences public policy. A driving factor behind the relationship between the military and the defense-minded corporations is that both sides benefit—one side from obtaining weapons, and the other from being paid to supply them. The term is most often used in reference to the system behind the armed forces of the United States, where the relationship is most prevalent due to close links among defense contractors, the Pentagon, and politicians. The expression gained popularity after a warning of the relationship&#x27;s detrimental effects, in the farewell address of U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower on January 17, 1961.

Conceptually, it is closely related to the ideas of the iron triangle in the U.S. (the three-sided relationship between Congress, the executive branch bureaucracy, and interest groups) and the defense industrial base (the network of organizations, facilities, and resources that supplies governments with defense-related goods and services).

==Etymology==

U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower originally coined the term in his Farewell Address to the Nation on January 17, 1961:

The phrase was thought to have been &quot;war-based&quot; industrial complex before becoming &quot;military&quot; in later drafts of Eisenhower&#x27;s speech, a claim passed on only by oral history. Geoffrey Perret, in his biography of Eisenhower, claims that, in one draft of the speech, the phrase was &quot;military–industrial–congressional complex&quot;, indicating the essential role that the United States Congress plays in the propagation of the military industry, but the word &quot;congressional&quot; was dropped from the final version to appease the then-currently elected officials. James Ledbetter calls this a &quot;stubborn misconception&quot; not supported by any evidence; likewise a claim by Douglas Brinkley that it was originally &quot;military–industrial–scientific complex&quot;. Additionally, Henry Giroux claims that it was originally &quot;military–industrial–academic complex&quot;. The actual authors of the speech were Eisenhower&#x27;s speechwriters Ralph E. Williams and Malcolm Moos.

== The MIC and the Cold War ==

Attempts to conceptualize something similar to a modern &quot;military–industrial complex&quot; did exist before 1961, as the underlying phenomenon described by the term is generally agreed to have emerged during or shortly after World War II. For example, a similar phrase was used in a 1947 &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot; article in a sense close to that it would later acquire, and sociologist C. Wright Mills contended in his 1956 book &quot;The Power Elite&quot; that a democratically unaccountable class of military, business, and political leaders with convergent interests exercised the preponderance of power in the contemporary West. 

However, following its coinage in Eisenhower&#x27;s address, the MIC became a staple of American political and sociological discourse. Many Vietnam War–era activists and polemicists, such as Seymour Melman and Noam Chomsky employed the concept in their criticism of U.S. foreign policy, while other academics and policymakers found it to be a useful analytical framework. Although the MIC was bound up in its origins with the bipolar international environment of the Cold War, some contended that the MIC might endure under different geopolitical conditions (for example, George F. Kennan wrote in 1987 that &quot;were the Soviet Union to sink tomorrow under the waters of the ocean, the American military–industrial complex would have to remain, substantially unchanged, until some other adversary could be invented.&quot;). The collapse of the USSR and the resultant decrease in global military spending (the so-called &#x27;peace dividend&#x27;) did in fact lead to decreases in defense industrial output and consolidation among major arms producers, although global expenditures rose again following the September 11 terror attacks and the ensuing global war on terror, as well as the more recent increase in geopolitical tensions associated with strategic competition between the United States, Russia, and China.

==Eras==

Some sources divide the history of the United States military–industrial complex into three distinct eras.

===First era===
From 1797 to 1941, the U.S. government only relied on civilian industries while the country was actually at war. The government owned their own shipyards and weapons manufacturing facilities which they relied on through World War I. With World War II came a massive shift in the way that the U.S. government armed the military.

With the onset of World War II, U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt established the War Production Board to coordinate civilian industries and shift them into wartime production. Throughout World War II arms production in the U.S. went from around one percent of annual GDP to 40 percent of GDP. Various U.S. companies, such as Boeing and General Motors, maintained and expanded their defense divisions. These companies have gone on to develop various technologies that have improved civilian life as well, such as night-vision goggles and GPS.

===Second era===
The second era is identified as beginning with the coining of the term by U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower. This era continued through the Cold War period, up to the end of the Warsaw Pact and the collapse of the Soviet Union. A 1965 article written by Marc Pilisuk and Thomas Hayden says benefits of the military–industrial complex of the U.S. include the advancement of the civilian technology market as civilian companies benefit from innovations from the MIC and vice versa. In 1993, the Pentagon urged defense contractors to consolidate due to the fall of communism and a shrinking defense budget.

===Third (current) era===

In the third era, U.S. defense contractors either consolidated or shifted their focus to civilian innovation. From 1992 to 1997 there was a total of US$55 billion worth of mergers in the defense industry, with major defense companies purchasing smaller competitors.

The U.S. domestic economy is now tied directly to the success of the MIC which has led to concerns of repression as Cold War-era attitudes are still prevalent among the American public.

Shifts in values and the collapse of communism have ushered in a new era for the U.S. military–industrial complex. The Department of Defense works in coordination with traditional military–industrial complex aligned companies such as Lockheed Martin and Northrop Grumman. Many former defense contractors have shifted operations to the civilian market and sold off their defense departments.

==Military subsidy theory==
According to the military subsidy theory, the Cold War–era mass production of aircraft benefited the U.S. civilian aircraft industry. The theory asserts that the technologies developed during the Cold War along with the financial backing of the military led to the dominance of U.S. aviation companies. There is also strong evidence that the United States federal government intentionally paid a higher price for these innovations to serve as a subsidy for civilian aircraft advancement.

==Current applications==
According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), total world spending on military expenses in 2022 was $2,240 billion. 39% of this total, or $837 billion, was spent by the United States. China was the second largest spender, with $292 billion and 13% of the global share. The privatization of the production and invention of military technology also leads to a complicated relationship with significant research and development of many technologies. In 2011, the United States spent more (in absolute numbers) on its military than the next 13 countries combined.

The military budget of the United States for the 2009 fiscal year was $515.4 billion. Adding emergency discretionary spending and supplemental spending brings the sum to $651.2 billion. This does not include many military-related items that are outside of the Defense Department&#x27;s budget. Overall, the U.S. federal government is spending about $1 trillion annually on military-related purposes.

U.S. President Joe Biden signed a record $886 billion defense spending bill into law on December 22, 2023.

In a 2012 story, &quot;Salon&quot; reported, &quot;Despite a decline in global arms sales in 2010 due to recessionary pressures, the United States increased its market share, accounting for a whopping 53 percent of the trade that year. Last year saw the United States on pace to deliver more than $46 billion in foreign arms sales.&quot; The U.S. military and arms industry also tend to contribute heavily to incumbent members of Congress.

==Political geography==
The datagraphic represents the 20 largest US defense contractors based on the amount of their defense revenue. Among these corporations, 53.5% of total revenues are derived from defense, and the median proportion is 63.4%; 6 firms derive over 75% of their revenue from defense.
According to the Wikipedia entries for the companies, the headquarters of 11 of these corporations are located in the Washington metropolitan area, of which 5 are in Reston, Virginia.

==Similar concepts==
A thesis similar to the military–industrial complex was originally expressed by Daniel Guérin, in his 1936 book &quot;Fascism and Big Business&quot;, about the fascist government ties to heavy industry. It can be defined as, &quot;an informal and changing coalition of groups with vested psychological, moral, and material interests in the continuous development and maintenance of high levels of weaponry, in preservation of colonial markets and in military-strategic conceptions of internal affairs.&quot; 

An exhibit of the trend was made in Franz Leopold Neumann&#x27;s book &quot;&quot; in 1942, a study of how Nazism came into a position of power in a democratic state.

Within decades of its inception, the idea of the military–industrial complex gave rise to the ideas of other similar industrial complexes, including:
* Animal–industrial complex;
* Prison–industrial complex;
* Pharmaceutical–industrial complex;
* Entertainment-industrial complex;
* Medical–industrial complex;
* Corporate consumption complex.

Virtually all institutions in sectors ranging from agriculture, medicine, entertainment, and media, to education, criminal justice, security, and transportation, began reconceiving and reconstructing in accordance with capitalist, industrial, and bureaucratic models with the aim of realizing profit, growth, and other imperatives. According to Steven Best, all these systems interrelate and reinforce one another.

The concept of the military–industrial complex has been also expanded to include the entertainment and creative industries as well. For an example in practice, Matthew Brummer describes Japan&#x27;s Manga Military and how the Ministry of Defense uses popular culture and the moe that it engenders to shape domestic and international perceptions.

An alternative term to describe the interdependence between the military-industrial complex and the entertainment industry is coined by James Der Derian as &quot;Military-Industrial-Media-Entertainment-Network&quot;. Ray McGovern extended this appellation to Military-Industrial-Congressional-Intelligence-Media-Academia-Think-Tank complex, MICIMATT.

=== &#x27;Tech-industrial complex&#x27; ===
In his 2025 farewell address, outgoing U.S. President Joe Biden warned of a &#x27;tech-industrial complex&#x27; , stating that &quot;Americans are being buried under an avalanche of misinformation and disinformation, enabling the abuse of power.&quot; Commentators noted that this statement was made following Elon Musk&#x27;s upcoming role in the second Donald Trump administration and public overtures towards Trump by technology industry leaders including Meta&#x27;s Mark Zuckerberg and Amazon&#x27;s Jeff Bezos, including the dismantling of Facebook&#x27;s fact-checking program.

==See also==
; Literature and media
* &quot;The Complex: How the Military Invades Our Everyday Lives&quot; (2008 book by Nick Turse)
* &quot;The Power Elite &quot;(1956 book by C. Wright Mills)
* &quot;War Is a Racket&quot; (1935 book by Smedley Butler)
* &quot;War Made Easy: How Presidents &amp; Pundits Keep Spinning Us to Death&quot; (2007 documentary film)
* &quot;Why We Fight&quot; (2005 documentary film by Eugene Jarecki)
; Other complexes or axes
* List of industrial complexes

==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===

* DeGroot, Gerard J. &quot;Blighty: British Society in the Era of the Great War&quot;, 144, London &amp; New York: Longman, 1996, 
* Eisenhower, Dwight D. &quot;Public Papers of the Presidents&quot;, 1035–1040. 1960.
* Eisenhower, Dwight D. &quot;Farewell Address.&quot; In &quot;The Annals of America&quot;. Vol. 18. &quot;1961–1968: The Burdens of World Power&quot;, 1–5. Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, 1968.
* Eisenhower, Dwight D. , Wikisource.
* Hartung, William D. &quot;Eisenhower&#x27;s Warning: The Military–Industrial Complex Forty Years Later.&quot; &quot;World Policy Journal&quot; 18, no. 1 (Spring 2001).
* Johnson, Chalmers &quot;The Sorrows of Empire: Militarism, Secrecy, and the End of the Republic&quot;, New York: Metropolitan Books, 2004
* Kurth, James. &quot;Military–Industrial Complex.&quot; In &quot;The Oxford Companion to American Military History&quot;, ed. John Whiteclay Chambers II, 440–442. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.
* Mills, C. Wright.&quot;Power Elite&quot;, New York, 1956
* Nelson, Lars-Erik. &quot;Military–Industrial Man.&quot; In &quot;New York Review of Books&quot; 47, no. 20 (December 21, 2000): 6.
* Nieburg, H. L. &quot;In the Name of Science&quot;, Quadrangle Books, 1970
==Further reading==

* Adams, Gordon, &quot;The Iron Triangle: The Politics of Defense Contracting&quot;, 1981.
* Andreas, Joel, &quot;Addicted to War: Why the U.S. Can&#x27;t Kick Militarism&quot;, .
* Cochran, Thomas B., William M. Arkin, Robert S. Norris, Milton M. Hoenig, &quot;U.S. Nuclear Warhead Production&quot; Harper and Row, 1987, 
* Cockburn, Andrew, &quot;The Military-Industrial Virus: How bloated budgets gut our defenses&quot;, &quot;Harper&#x27;s Magazine&quot;, vol. 338, no. 2029 (June 2019), pp. 61–67. &quot;The military-industrial complex could be said to be concerned, exclusively, with self-preservation and expansion... The defense budget is not propelled by foreign wars. The wars are a consequence of the quest for bigger budgets.&quot;
* Cockburn, Andrew, &quot;Why America Goes to War: Money drives the US military machine&quot;, &quot;The Nation&quot;, vol. 313, no. 6 (20–27 September 2021), pp. 24–27.
* Friedman, George and Meredith, &quot;The Future of War: Power, Technology and American World Dominance in the 21st Century&quot;, Crown, 1996, 
* 
* Hossein-Zadeh, Ismael, &quot;The Political Economy of US Militarism.&quot; New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2006.
* Keller, William W., &quot;Arm in Arm: The Political Economy of the Global Arms Trade.&quot; New York: Basic Books, 1995.
* Kelly, Brian, &quot;Adventures in Porkland: How Washington Wastes Your Money and Why They Won&#x27;t Stop&quot;, Villard, 1992, 
* Lassman, Thomas C. &quot;Putting the Military Back into the History of the Military-Industrial Complex: The Management of Technological Innovation in the U.S. Army, 1945–1960&quot;, &quot;Isis&quot; (2015) 106#1 pp. 94–120 in JSTOR
* Mathews, Jessica T., &quot;America&#x27;s Indefensible Defense Budget&quot;, &quot;The New York Review of Books&quot;, vol. LXVI, no. 12 (18 July 2019), pp. 23–24. &quot;For many years, the United States has increasingly relied on military strength to achieve its foreign policy aims... We are [...] allocating too large a portion of the federal budget to defense as compared to domestic needs [...] accumulating too much federal debt, and yet not acquiring a forward-looking, twenty-first-century military built around new cyber and space technologies.&quot; (p. 24.)
* McDougall, Walter A., &quot;...The Heavens and the Earth: A Political History of the Space Age&quot;, Basic Books, 1985, (Pulitzer Prize for History) 
* Melman, Seymour, &quot;Pentagon Capitalism: The Political Economy of War&quot;, McGraw Hill, 1970
* Melman, Seymour, (ed.) &quot;The War Economy of the United States: Readings in Military Industry and Economy&quot;, New York: St. Martin&#x27;s Press, 1971.
* Mills, C Wright, &quot;The Power Elite.&quot; New York, 1956, 
* Mollenhoff, Clark R., &quot;The Pentagon: Politics, Profits and Plunder.&quot; New York: G.P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons, 1967
* Patterson, Walter C., &quot;The Plutonium Business and the Spread of the Bomb&quot;, Sierra Club, 1984, 
* Pasztor, Andy, &quot;When the Pentagon Was for Sale: Inside America&#x27;s Biggest Defense Scandal&quot;, Scribner, 1995, 
* Pierre, Andrew J., &quot;The Global Politics of Arms Sales.&quot; Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1982.
* 
* Sampson, Anthony, &quot;The Arms Bazaar: From Lebanon to Lockheed.&quot; New York: Bantam Books, 1977.
* St. Clair, Jeffery, &quot;Grand Theft Pentagon: Tales of Corruption and Profiteering in the War on Terror.&quot; Common Courage Press, 2005.
* Sweetman, Bill, &quot;In search of the Pentagon&#x27;s billion dollar hidden budgets – how the US keeps its R&amp;D spending under wraps&quot;, from &quot;Jane&#x27;s International Defence Review&quot;, online
* Thorpe, Rebecca U. &quot;The American Warfare State: The Domestic Politics of Military Spending.&quot; Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014.
* Watry, David M., &quot;Diplomacy at the Brink, Eisenhower, Churchill, and Eden in the Cold War&quot;, Baton Rouge, Louisiana State University Press, 2014.
* Weinberger, Sharon, &quot;Imaginary Weapons&quot;, New York: Nation Books, 2006.
==External links==


* Khaki capitalism, &quot;The Economist&quot;, December 3, 2011
* Militaryindustrialcomplex.com, Features running daily, weekly and monthly defense spending totals plus Contract Archives section.
* C. Wright Mills, Structure of Power in American Society, British Journal of Sociology, Vol. 9. No. 1 1958
* Dwight David Eisenhower, Farewell Address On the military–industrial complex and the government–universities collusion – January 17, 1961
* Dwight D. Eisenhower, Farewell Address As delivered transcript and complete audio from AmericanRhetoric.com
* William McGaffin and Erwin Knoll, The military–industrial complex, An analysis of the phenomenon written in 1969
* The Cost of War &amp; Today&#x27;s Military Industrial Complex, National Public Radio, January 8, 2003.
* Human Rights First; Private Security Contractors at War: Ending the Culture of Impunity (2008)
* Fifty Years After Eisenhower&#x27;s Farewell Address, A Look at the Military–Industrial Complex – video report by &quot;Democracy Now!&quot;
* Online documents, Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library
* 50th Anniversary of Eisenhower&#x27;s Farewell Address – Eisenhower Institute
* Part 1 – Anniversary Discussion of Eisenhower&#x27;s Farewell Address – Gettysburg College
* Part 2 – Anniversary Discussion of Eisenhower&#x27;s Farewell Address – Gettysburg College</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q744593" start="15" end="42" title="Military–industrial complex" label="military–industrial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q744593" start="44" end="47" title="Military–industrial complex" label="MIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="101" end="109" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="118" end="134" title="Arms industry" label="defense industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q546113" start="205" end="218" title="public policy" label="public policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="490" end="523" title="United States Armed Forces" label="armed forces of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="612" end="624" title="United States Department of Defense" label="the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349907" start="743" end="763" title="Eisenhower&amp;#x27;s farewell address" label="the farewell address"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="782" end="802" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151934" start="881" end="894" title="Iron triangle (US politics)" label="iron triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="945" end="953" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="959" end="975" title="Federal government of the United States" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="993" end="1008" title="Lobbying" label="interest groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251438" start="1018" end="1041" title="defense industrial base" label="defense industrial base"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349907" start="1253" end="1269" title="Eisenhower&amp;#x27;s farewell address" label="Farewell Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534823" start="1505" end="1520" title="Geoffrey Perret" label="Geoffrey Perret"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137910" start="1901" end="1916" title="James Ledbetter" label="James Ledbetter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301276" start="2016" end="2032" title="Douglas Brinkley" label="Douglas Brinkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q705200" start="2122" end="2134" title="Henry Giroux" label="Henry Giroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287431" start="2285" end="2302" title="Ralph E. Williams" label="Ralph E. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843847" start="2307" end="2319" title="Malcolm Moos" label="Malcolm Moos"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2584" end="2596" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="2653" end="2668" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q312837" start="2748" end="2763" title="C. Wright Mills" label="C. Wright Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456546" start="2797" end="2812" title="The Power Elite" label="The Power Elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="3137" end="3148" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459210" start="3188" end="3202" title="Seymour Melman" label="Seymour Melman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="3207" end="3219" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q156058" start="3569" end="3585" title="George F. Kennan" label="George F. Kennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456716" start="3924" end="3938" title="peace dividend" label="peace dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="4105" end="4132" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 terror attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="4149" end="4169" title="War on terror" label="global war on terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4297" end="4303" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4309" end="4314" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4671" end="4682" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="4827" end="4848" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536750" start="4865" end="4885" title="War Production Board" label="War Production Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="5051" end="5054" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="5109" end="5115" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="5120" end="5134" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q328989" start="5296" end="5316" title="Night-vision device" label="night-vision goggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="5321" end="5324" title="Global Positioning System" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="5524" end="5535" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5560" end="5572" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="6666" end="6681" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q329953" start="6686" end="6702" title="Northrop Grumman" label="Northrop Grumman"/>
<link wikidata="Q206814" start="6958" end="6966" title="Civil aviation" label="civilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q936518" start="6967" end="6984" title="Aerospace manufacturer" label="aircraft industry"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7130" end="7153" title=":Category:Aircraft manufacturers of the United States" label="U.S. aviation companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140407" start="7383" end="7431" title="Stockholm International Peace Research Institute" label="Stockholm International Peace Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708315" start="7960" end="7996" title="military budget of the United States" label="military budget of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="8372" end="8381" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q120681668" start="8411" end="8432" title="National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2024" label="defense spending bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="8488" end="8493" title="Salon.com" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="8570" end="8579" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="9225" end="9234" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="9326" end="9354" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375280" start="9374" end="9390" title="Reston, Virginia" label="Reston, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q465156" start="9494" end="9507" title="Daniel Guérin" label="Daniel Guérin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="9574" end="9581" title="fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q63195" start="9960" end="9981" title="Franz Neumann (political scientist)" label="Franz Leopold Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q95641153" start="10209" end="10227" title="industrial complex" label="industrial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788508" start="10244" end="10269" title="Animal–industrial complex" label="Animal–industrial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245880" start="10273" end="10298" title="Prison–industrial complex" label="Prison–industrial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q507443" start="10302" end="10335" title="Pharmaceutical industry" label="Pharmaceutical–industrial complex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10339" end="10371" title="Entertainment#Industry" label="Entertainment-industrial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906828" start="10375" end="10401" title="Medical–industrial complex" label="Medical–industrial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q17028388" start="10405" end="10434" title="Hyperconsumerism" label="Corporate consumption complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023078" start="10782" end="10793" title="Steven Best" label="Steven Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062689" start="11079" end="11098" title="Ministry of Defense (Japan)" label="Ministry of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q497942" start="11128" end="11131" title="Moe (slang)" label="moe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132569" start="11336" end="11352" title="James Der Derian" label="James Der Derian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120355" start="11417" end="11429" title="Ray McGovern" label="Ray McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="11650" end="11659" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122864" start="11678" end="11682" title="Big tech" label="tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q317521" start="11906" end="11915" title="Elon Musk" label="Elon Musk"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="11951" end="11963" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q380" start="12055" end="12059" title="Meta Platforms" label="Meta"/>
<link wikidata="Q36215" start="12067" end="12082" title="Mark Zuckerberg" label="Mark Zuckerberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="12087" end="12093" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312556" start="12101" end="12111" title="Jeff Bezos" label="Jeff Bezos"/>
<link wikidata="Q59555084" start="12158" end="12171" title="fact-checking" label="fact-checking"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12226" end="12282" title="The Complex: How the Military Invades Our Everyday Lives" label="The Complex: How the Military Invades Our Everyday Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q15433633" start="12303" end="12313" title="Nick Turse" label="Nick Turse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456546" start="12323" end="12338" title="The Power Elite" label="The Power Elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q312837" start="12359" end="12374" title="C. Wright Mills" label="C. Wright Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490311" start="12384" end="12399" title="War Is a Racket" label="War Is a Racket"/>
<link wikidata="Q556880" start="12420" end="12434" title="Smedley Butler" label="Smedley Butler"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12444" end="12513" title="War Made Easy: How Presidents &amp;amp; Pundits Keep Spinning Us to Death" label="War Made Easy: How Presidents &amp;amp; Pundits Keep Spinning Us to Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462630" start="12552" end="12564" title="Why We Fight (2005 film)" label="Why We Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342745" start="12597" end="12611" title="Eugene Jarecki" label="Eugene Jarecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q95641153" start="12641" end="12669" title="List of industrial complexes" label="List of industrial complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="13100" end="13123" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="13651" end="13674" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5661418" start="13876" end="13890" title="Harold L. Nieburg" label="Nieburg, H. L."/>
<link wikidata="Q16919053" start="13897" end="13919" title="In the Name of Science" label="In the Name of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127696" start="14271" end="14285" title="Harper and Row" label="Harper and Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756634" start="14296" end="14312" title="Andrew Cockburn" label="Cockburn, Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="14401" end="14423" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q937312" start="14600" end="14614" title="defense budget" label="defense budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756634" start="14717" end="14733" title="Andrew Cockburn" label="Cockburn, Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="14816" end="14826" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177681" start="15637" end="15656" title="Jessica T. Mathews" label="Mathews, Jessica T."/>
<link wikidata="Q1426223" start="15720" end="15748" title="The New York Review of Books" label="The New York Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883083" start="15975" end="15989" title="United States federal budget" label="federal budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="16059" end="16071" title="federal debt" label="federal debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q849340" start="16161" end="16166" title="Cyberwarfare" label="cyber"/>
<link wikidata="Q211485" start="16171" end="16189" title="space technologies" label="space technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="16330" end="16344" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445044" start="16587" end="16610" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Press" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570874" start="17067" end="17082" title="Global politics" label="Global Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446733" start="17561" end="17601" title="Jane&amp;#x27;s Defence Weekly" label="Jane&amp;#x27;s International Defence Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490261" start="17924" end="17942" title="Sharon Weinberger" label="Weinberger, Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="18052" end="18065" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="18761" end="18782" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185824" start="19020" end="19034" title="Democracy Now!" label="Democracy Now!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520129" start="19162" end="19182" title="Eisenhower Institute" label="Eisenhower Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520129" start="19257" end="19275" title="Gettysburg College" label="Gettysburg College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520129" start="19350" end="19368" title="Gettysburg College" label="Gettysburg College"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211684" wikidata="Q216217" url="?curid=211684" title="Megaphone">
<text>A megaphone, speaking trumpet, bullhorn, blowhorn, or loudhailer is usually a portable or hand-held, cone-shaped acoustic horn used to amplify a person&#x27;s voice or other sounds and direct it in a given direction. The sound is introduced into the narrow end of the megaphone, by holding it up to the face and speaking into it, and the sound waves radiate out the wide end. A megaphone increases the volume of sound by increasing the acoustic impedance seen by the vocal cords, matching the impedance of the vocal cords to the air, so that more sound power is radiated. It also serves to direct the sound waves in the direction the horn is pointing. It somewhat distorts the sound of the voice because the frequency response of the megaphone is greater at higher sound frequencies.

Since the 1960s the voice-powered &quot;acoustic megaphone&quot; described above has been replaced by the &quot;electric megaphone&quot;, which uses a microphone, an electrically-powered amplifier and a folded horn loudspeaker to amplify the voice.

==History==
Before it became a megaphone, the &quot;bull horn&quot; or &quot;cow horn&quot; or &quot;steer horn&quot; was a signaling device or bugle used from antiquity.

The initial inventor of the speaking trumpet is a subject of historical controversy. There have been references to speakers in Ancient Greece (5th Century B.C.) wearing masks with cones protruding from the mouth in order to amplify their voices in theatres. Hellenic architects may have also consciously utilized acoustic physics in their design of theatre amphitheaters.

A drawing by Louis Nicolas &quot;(right)&quot; on page 14 of the Codex canadensis, circa 1675 to 1682, shows a Native American chief named Iscouakité using a megaphone made of birch bark. The text of the illustration says that he is addressing his soldiers through a birch bark tube.
Both Samuel Morland and Athanasius Kircher have been credited with inventing megaphones around the same time in the 17th century. Morland, in a work published in 1672, wrote about his experimentation with different horns. His largest megaphone consisted of over 20 feet of copper tube and could reportedly project a person&#x27;s voice a mile and a half.

More than twenty years earlier, Kircher had described a device that could be used as both a megaphone and for &quot;overhearing&quot; people speaking outside a house. His coiled horn would be mounted into the side of a building, with a narrow end inside that could be either spoken into or listened to, and the wide mouth projecting through the outside wall.

Morland favored a straight, tube-shaped speaking device. Kircher&#x27;s horn, on the other hand, utilized a &quot;cochleate&quot; design, where the horn was twisted and coiled to make it more compact.

A later, papier-mâché trumpet of special design was the Sengerphone.

Additionally, in ruins of Tiwanaku are stones around the central place with holes shaped in a megaphone&#x27;s profile. Their purpose is today unknown, but as local guards can show, it is possible to amplify a human voice loud enough to hear it across a large area.
The term &#x27;megaphone&#x27; was first associated with Thomas Edison&#x27;s instrument 200 years later. In 1878, Edison developed a device similar to the speaking trumpet in hopes of benefiting the deaf and hard of hearing. His variation included three separate funnels lined up in a row. The two outer funnels, which were six feet and eight inches long, were made of paper and connected to a tube inserted in each ear. The middle funnel was similar to Morland&#x27;s speaking trumpet, but had a larger slot to insert a user&#x27;s mouth.

With Edison&#x27;s megaphone, a low whisper could be heard a thousand feet away, while a normal tone of voice could be heard roughly two miles away. On the listening end, the receiver could hear a low whisper at a thousand feet away. However the apparatus was much too large to be portable, limiting its use. George Prescott wrote: &quot;The principal drawback at present is the large size of the apparatus.&quot;

Prior to the invention of the electric microphone, early pop singers sang with a megaphone.

Since the 1960s, acoustic megaphones have generally been replaced by electric versions &quot;(below)&quot;, although the cheap, light, rugged acoustic megaphone is still used in a few venues, like cheering at sporting events and cheerleading, and by lifeguards at pools and beaches where the moisture could damage the electronics of electric megaphones.

==Electric megaphone==

An electric megaphone is a handheld public address system, an electronic device that amplifies the human voice like an acoustic megaphone, using electric power. It consists of a microphone to convert soundwaves into an electrical audio signal, an amplifier powered by a battery to increase the power of the audio signal, and a loudspeaker to convert the audio signal to sound waves again. Although slightly heavier than acoustic megaphones, electric megaphones can amplify the voice to a higher level, to over 90 dB. They have replaced acoustic megaphones in most applications, and are generally used to address congregations of people wherever stationary public address systems are not available; at outdoor sporting events, movie sets, political rallies, and street demonstrations.

Although electronic public address systems have existed since vacuum tube amplifiers were developed in the early 1920s, vacuum tube versions were too heavy to be portable. Practical portable electric megaphones had to await the development of microelectronics which followed the invention of the transistor in 1947. In 1954, TOA Corporation developed the EM-202, the world&#x27;s first transistorized megaphone.

Handheld versions are shaped generally like the old acoustic megaphone, with a microphone at one end and a horn speaker at the other, and a pistol grip on the side, with a trigger switch to turn it on. In use, the device is held up to the mouth, and the trigger is pressed to turn it on while speaking. Other larger versions hang from the shoulder on a strap, and have a separate handheld microphone on a cord to speak into, so users can address a crowd without the instrument obscuring their faces. A vast array of modern electric megaphones are available to purchase, and characteristics like power, weight, price, and the presence of alarms and shoulder straps all contribute to a consumer&#x27;s choice.

The shape of the megaphone directly affects the range of projection; narrower horns compensate for lower power by concentrating sound more sharply than wide horns.

== Impact on society ==

Portable megaphones are widely used for crowd management and mass communication. When needing to communicate information or directions to a large crowd of people in one place, an electric megaphone is valuable when other public address systems are not present.

Besides their practical implications, public address systems, including megaphones, also had a social impact. Public address systems helped promote women&#x27;s participation in society. In events like the National Republican and Democratic Conventions of 1920, when electronic public address systems were first becoming popularized, women used these amplifying technologies during the roll call of participants. Later, portable electric megaphones extended this equalizing influence to outdoor events. Some protest leaders use electric megaphones to speak to an outdoor crowd or to other protesters.

As of the 2010s, cheerleading is one of the few fields that still uses acoustic megaphones. Cheerleaders at the University of Minnesota are credited with first using acoustic megaphones in routines in 1898. Since then, cheerleaders have relied heavily on acoustic megaphones during performances at sporting events. Generally, female cheerleaders would use pom poms while male cheerleaders, with loud booming voices, would project cheers through megaphones. Vocal projection is an important aspect for cheerleading, so experts recommend the use of acoustic megaphones not only to increase the volume of sound, but also to protect performers’ voices in the process.

For decades, film directors have used megaphones to communicate with their cast and crew on sets where it was hard to hear. The acoustic megaphone became an iconic clichéd symbol of a movie director, although modern directors use electric megaphones. A major contributor to this cliche was Cecil B. DeMille, director of epic movies like &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot; and &quot;The King of Kings&quot;. Many of his films were biblical epics set on vast outdoor sets that required communication with hundreds of extras. 
The distinctive distorted sound of a human voice amplified by a megaphone is widely recognized, from its use in train and bus stations and sports arenas. Applied to music, it gives the sound of an antique acoustic gramophone record player. It has been used in radio advertisements and popular music to give retro and often humorous effects. A recorded voice or music can be processed to give it a &quot;megaphone&quot; sound effect without using an actual megaphone, by audio recording decks and software. In recording software like Logic Pro and Pro Tools, selecting certain filters and settings will produce an artificial sound almost indistinguishable from an electric megaphone.

==Legal restrictions==

Governments can pass laws restricting the use of electronically amplified megaphones. In the US the ability to use a megaphone in public can be restricted to certain decibel levels, time of day or banned in residential neighborhoods. However, under the First Amendment, the specific kinds of speech used with a megaphone cannot be restricted.

==See also==
* Long range acoustic device (LRAD)
* Water Talkie
* Human microphone

==References==
==External links==

* &quot;Controlling Public Protest: First Amendment Implications&quot; An article about restrictions that may legally be imposed on public protests (including use of bullhorns), by Daniel L. Schofield, S.J.D., published in the November 1994 issue of the FBI&#x27;s &quot;Law Enforcement Bulletin&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q216217" start="2" end="11" title="Megaphone" label="megaphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q216217" start="13" end="29" title="Megaphone" label="speaking trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q216217" start="31" end="39" title="Megaphone" label="bullhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q216217" start="41" end="49" title="Megaphone" label="blowhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q216217" start="54" end="64" title="Megaphone" label="loudhailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512054" start="113" end="126" title="horn (acoustic)" label="acoustic horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="135" end="142" title="amplifier" label="amplify"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="174" end="179" title="sound" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q975684" start="436" end="454" title="acoustic impedance" label="acoustic impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q215558" start="467" end="478" title="vocal cords" label="vocal cords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="480" end="488" title="impedance matching" label="matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054694" start="708" end="726" title="frequency response" label="frequency response"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="771" end="782" title="frequency" label="frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="936" end="946" title="microphone" label="microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628295" start="995" end="1011" title="horn loudspeaker" label="horn loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="1015" end="1022" title="amplifier" label="amplify"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665724" start="1159" end="1175" title="Blowing horn" label="signaling device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628293" start="1179" end="1184" title="bugle" label="bugle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1334" end="1348" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q371844" start="1593" end="1606" title="Louis Nicolas" label="Louis Nicolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106367" start="1645" end="1661" title="Codex canadensis" label="Codex canadensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1691" end="1706" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q950850" start="1869" end="1883" title="Samuel Morland" label="Samuel Morland"/>
<link wikidata="Q76738" start="1888" end="1906" title="Athanasius Kircher" label="Athanasius Kircher"/>
<link wikidata="Q899363" start="2791" end="2803" title="papier-mâché" label="papier-mâché"/>
<link wikidata="Q61750" start="2878" end="2886" title="Tiwanaku" label="Tiwanaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="3175" end="3188" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q61391" start="4397" end="4409" title="cheerleading" label="cheerleading"/>
<link wikidata="Q259327" start="4418" end="4427" title="lifeguard" label="lifeguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="4583" end="4604" title="public address system" label="public address system"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="4725" end="4735" title="microphone" label="microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650799" start="4777" end="4789" title="audio signal" label="audio signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="4794" end="4803" title="amplifier" label="amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="4817" end="4824" title="Battery (electricity)" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="4874" end="4885" title="loudspeaker" label="loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030906" start="5273" end="5282" title="movie set" label="movie set"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="5285" end="5302" title="political rally" label="political rallies"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="5308" end="5328" title="street demonstration" label="street demonstration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="5352" end="5373" title="public address system" label="public address system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="5394" end="5405" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="5406" end="5415" title="amplifier" label="amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q175403" start="5575" end="5591" title="microelectronics" label="microelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="5628" end="5638" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628295" start="5852" end="5864" title="horn speaker" label="horn speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493072" start="5885" end="5896" title="pistol grip" label="pistol grip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="6944" end="6965" title="public address system" label="public address system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="7184" end="7205" title="public address system" label="public address system"/>
<link wikidata="Q61391" start="7525" end="7537" title="cheerleading" label="cheerleading"/>
<link wikidata="Q61391" start="7600" end="7612" title="Cheerleaders" label="Cheerleaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="7620" end="7643" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187538" start="7864" end="7872" title="Pom-pon" label="pom poms"/>
<link wikidata="Q641169" start="7965" end="7981" title="Vocal projection" label="Vocal projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q72267" start="8463" end="8479" title="Cecil B. DeMille" label="Cecil B. DeMille"/>
<link wikidata="Q746733" start="8510" end="8542" title="The Ten Commandments (1956 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Ten Commandments&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795989" start="8547" end="8576" title="The King of Kings (1927 film)" label="&amp;quot;The King of Kings&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q658371" start="8686" end="8692" title="Extra (acting)" label="extras"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="8909" end="8919" title="Phonograph" label="gramophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="8920" end="8933" title="record player" label="record player"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286627" start="8955" end="8974" title="radio advertisement" label="radio advertisement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057445" start="9228" end="9237" title="Logic Pro" label="Logic Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q247670" start="9242" end="9251" title="Pro Tools" label="Pro Tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="9656" end="9671" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927571" start="9762" end="9788" title="Long range acoustic device" label="Long range acoustic device"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973400" start="9798" end="9810" title="Water Talkie" label="Water Talkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937887" start="9813" end="9829" title="Human microphone" label="Human microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="10120" end="10123" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980527" start="10131" end="10167" title="FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin" label="&amp;quot;Law Enforcement Bulletin&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211687" wikidata="Q7860893" url="?curid=211687" title="Type X">
<text>Type X may refer to:

* Typex, or Type X, British cipher machines used from 1937
* Taito Type X, an arcade system board 
* Type X submarine, a special type of German U-boat
* Grahame-White Type X, a 1910s British passenger-carrying biplane 
* Type X, a category of fire-resistant drywall
* Type-X (unmanned ground vehicle), a robotic combat vehicle by Milrem Robotics
* Type X, a European copper tubing standard
* Type X, one of the UIC passenger coach types

==See also==
*X-Type
*Type 10 (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7860893" start="0" end="6" title="Type X" label="Type X"/>
<link wikidata="Q635774" start="24" end="29" title="Typex" label="Typex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981066" start="83" end="95" title="Taito Type X" label="Taito Type X"/>
<link wikidata="Q819452" start="123" end="139" title="Type X submarine" label="Type X submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593400" start="175" end="195" title="Grahame-White Type X" label="Grahame-White Type X"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="280" end="287" title="drywall" label="drywall"/>
<link wikidata="Q104870699" start="290" end="322" title="Type-X (unmanned ground vehicle)" label="Type-X (unmanned ground vehicle)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="380" end="411" title="Copper tubing#Europe" label="European copper tubing standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467144" start="433" end="458" title="UIC passenger coach types" label="UIC passenger coach types"/>
<link wikidata="Q31905422" start="474" end="480" title="X-type (disambiguation)" label="X-Type"/>
<link wikidata="Q93784654" start="482" end="506" title="Type 10 (disambiguation)" label="Type 10 (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211692" wikidata="Q1630667" url="?curid=211692" title="Japanese cruiser Nachi">
<text>was the second vessel completed of the four-member of heavy cruisers of the Imperial Japanese Navy (IJN), which were active in World War II. The other ships of the class were , , and . She was named after a mountain in Wakayama Prefecture.

==Background==
The &quot;Myōkō&quot; class was approved under the 1922–1929 Fleet Modernization Program as the first heavy cruisers to be built by Japan within the design constraints imposed by the Washington Naval Treaty, and was the first of the &quot;10,000-ton&quot; cruisers built by any nation. Naval architect Vice Admiral Yuzuru Hiraga was able to keep the design from becoming dangerously top-heavy in its early years by continually rejecting demands from the IJN general staff for additional equipment to the upper decks. During modifications and rebuildings in the 1930s, though, the final displacement rose to 15,933 tons, well over the treaty limits.

==Design==
The &quot;Myōkō&quot; class displaced , with a hull design based on an enlarged version of the . &quot;Nachi&quot; was long, with a beam of and draft of , and was capable of 35.5 knots.

Propulsion was by 12 Kampon boilers driving four sets of single-impulse, geared turbine engines, with four shafts turning three-bladed propellers. The ship was armored with a side belt, and armored deck, but the bridge was not armored.

&quot;Nachi&quot;’s main battery was ten 20 cm/50 3rd Year Type naval guns, the heaviest armament of any heavy cruiser in the world at the time, mounted in five twin turrets. Her secondary armament included eight 12.7 cm/40 Type 89 naval guns in four twin mounts on each side, and 12 Type 93 Long Lance torpedoes in four triple launchers positioned below the aircraft deck. &quot;Nachi&quot; was also equipped with an aircraft catapult and carried up to three floatplanes for scouting purposes.

&quot;Nachi&quot; was repeatedly modernized and upgraded throughout her career to counter the growing threat of air strikes. She eventually mounted 52 Type 96 25 mm AT/AA Gun guns and two Type 93 13 mm AA guns after her final upgrade.

&quot;Nachi&quot; was laid down at Kure Naval Arsenal on 26 November 1924, launched and named on 15 June 1927, and commissioned on 26 November 1928. Although commissioned on 26 November, the ship was far from completed. Due to a political decision, the partially completed cruiser was sent to Yokosuka for the coronation naval review for Emperor Hirohito on 4 December. Afterwards, she was returned to Kure for the remaining work to be accomplished, and was only ready for service in April 1929. Emperor Hirohito visited the completed vessel at Kobe for a cruise on the Inland Sea on 28–29 May as part of his tour of the Kansai region of Japan to encourage domestic industrial production.

==Operational history==

===Early service===

All of the &quot;Myōkō&quot; class were assigned to the Sasebo Naval District, forming &quot;Sentai&quot;-4 of the IJN 3rd Fleet, and trained as a unit during the 1930s. During a naval review off Kobe on 26 October 1930, stack gases caused problems on the bridge, resulting in a lengthening of the forward smokestack by 2.0 m. During the First Shanghai Incident of February 1932, the cruisers escorted the transports conveying elements of the Imperial Japanese Army (IJA) to the continent. In December 1932, the cruisers were placed in reserve as the new was commissioned, becoming the new &quot;Sentai&quot;-4, whereas the &quot;Myōkō&quot; class was shifted to &quot;Sentai&quot;-5. Between 1933 and 1935, all &quot;Myōkō&quot;-class cruisers were retrofitted with their fixed triple torpedo launchers replaced by two quadruple rotatable launchers, and their secondary guns upgraded from 12 cm/45 10th Year Type naval guns to 12.7 cm/40 Type 89 naval gun. &quot;Nachi&quot; was commanded by Captain Teruhisa Komatsu from November 1934 to December 1935, followed by Captain Michitaro Totsuka to November 1936.

In 1936, &quot;Nachi&quot; underwent her first modernization program at Sasebo Naval Arsenal. With the start of the Second Sino-Japanese War in 1937, &quot;Nachi&quot; transported the headquarters elements of the IJA&#x27;s 3rd Division and 6th Infantry Regiment from Nagoya to China on 20 August, as part of a large combat force consisting of six cruisers and eight destroyers.

In December 1937, &quot;Nachi&quot; underwent her second modernization program at Sasebo Naval Arsenal, doubling the number of torpedoes to 16, adding another eight Type 96 25-mm antiaircraft guns and bulges to the hull to improve stability.

== Pacific War ==

=== Japanese invasions ===
In late 1941, &quot;Nachi&quot; was based at Mako Guard District in the Pescadores Islands, and at the time of the attack on Pearl Harbor, &quot;Myōkō&quot; and &quot;Nachi&quot; formed &quot;Sentai&quot;-5 of the IJN 3rd Fleet. &quot;Sentai&quot;-5 was commanded by Rear Admiral Takeo Takagi, and deployed from Palau to provide cover for the landings of Japanese forces under &quot;Operation M&quot; — the invasion of the southern Philippine Islands. After covering the landings of Japanese forces at Legaspi on 11 December 1941, &quot;Myōkō&quot; and &quot;Nachi&quot; returned to Palau, and were then reassigned to Rear Admiral Raizō Tanaka, whose attack force covered landings at Davao on 19 December and Jolo on 24 December.

On 4 January 1942 &quot;Nachi&quot; and the other vessels of Admiral Tanaka’s invasion force were attacked by U.S. Army Air Force B-17 Flying Fortress bombers while at anchor at Davao. &quot;Myōkō&quot; was hit by one bomb, causing only superficial damage, but Admiral Tanaka transferred his flag to &quot;Nachi&quot;, sending &quot;Myōkō&quot; back to Sasebo for repairs.

=== Battle of the Java Sea ===
In January 1942, &quot;Nachi&quot; and &quot;Haguro&quot; covered the landings of Japanese troops in the invasion of the Celebes in the Netherlands East Indies, followed by the invasion of Ambon. In the Battle of the Java Sea, &quot;Nachi&quot;, &quot;Haguro&quot;, and participated in the destruction of the last remaining Allied fleet units in the Netherlands East Indies. On 27 February, the reconnaissance floatplanes from &quot;Nachi&quot; spotted the Allied fleet, enabling &quot;Haguro&quot; to sink the destroyer with a torpedo and cripped the heavy cruiser with gunfire, and for the destroyer to sink the destroyer . For her part of the engagement, &quot;Nachi&quot; damaged the heavy cruiser USS &quot;Houston&quot; with a pair of 8-inch (203 mm) shell hits at distances beyond 22,000 yards, one passing through the bow, and the other punching through the aft section.

Later that same evening, Haguro and Nachi tracked down the allied force again and closed to 16,000 yards, firing their torpedo batteries. A torpedo from &quot;Nachi&quot; struck the Dutch light cruiser , blowing up her 5.9-inch (15 cm) magazines, tearing the cruiser in two as it sank in two minutes. Several minutes later a torpedo from &quot;Haguro&quot; hit the light cruiser , resulting in the cruiser sinking to progressive flooding over nearly three hours, and killing Admiral Karel Doorman.

Two days later, on 1 March, &quot;Nachi&quot; and &quot;Haguro&quot; and their accompanying destroyers spotted the crippled &quot;Exeter&quot; as she attempted to escape the Java Sea, and joined forced with the cruisers &quot;Myōkō&quot; and &quot;Ashigara&quot; (and their accompanying destroyers). The four cruisers hit &quot;Exeter&quot; with shells that disabled her electrical power and guns, set her aflame, and destroyed her remaining boilers, leaving her dead in the water, leading to the allied cruiser&#x27;s scuttling via her own crew. &quot;Nachi&quot; then retreated alongside &quot;Haguro&quot;, while &quot;Myōkō&quot; and &quot;Ashigara&quot; both engaged the destroyer , which they overpowered and sank. The destroyer , who was accompanying the two British ships, initially escaped the melee only to be caught and crippled about two hours later by planes from the Japanese light carrier Ryujo, &quot;and&quot; finished off by &quot;Myōkō&quot; and &quot;Ashigara&quot;.

====Operations in northern waters====
Later in March, &quot;Nachi&quot; received a refit at Sasebo for operations in northern waters, and patrolled the Kurile Islands in April and May. On 26 May, &quot;Nachi&quot; departed from Ōminato Guard District as flagship of Vice Admiral Boshiro Hosogaya&#x27;s force for the invasion of the Aleutian islands, and patrolled south of Attu, returning to Ōminato on 23 June. She departed Ōminato to escort another convoy to Kiska from 28 June, remaining in the Aleutian Islands until 7 July. After a refit at Yokosuka Naval Arsenal from 14–30 July, &quot;Nachi&quot; was reassigned to the IJN 5th Fleet with and . She continued patrols of the Kurile Islands though March 1943, and was sent as an escort for a reinforcement convoy to Attu from 7–10 March.

While escorting another convoy towards Attu on 26 March, &quot;Nachi&quot; spotted an American force consisting of the cruisers and and destroyers , , , and . Vice Admiral Hosogaya had the cruisers , &quot;Tama&quot;, and , in addition to two destroyers. However, &quot;Maya&quot; was not carrying any aircraft, and &quot;Nachi&quot; had left one of her three planes behind for repairs. Hosogaya ordered &quot;Nachi&quot;″s aircraft to launch, but before they did so, he also ordered that the cruiser&#x27;s main battery open fire. The aircraft on the starboard catapult was damaged by the blast and had to be jettisoned. The remaining aircraft launched and provided reconnaissance during the subsequent Battle of the Komandorski Islands. &quot;Nachi&quot; launched her Type 93 &quot;Long Lance&quot; torpedoes at the American task force, but failed to hit. In a four-hour gun battle, the Japanese fleet damaged &quot;Salt Lake City&quot; and &quot;Bailey&quot;, but five shells hit &quot;Nachi&quot;, killing 14 crewmen, and &quot;Maya&quot; suffered damage to her number-one gun turret. Hosogaya abandoned the attempt to reinforce Attu, and was relieved of command in disgrace.

&quot;Nachi&quot; was then repaired at Yokosuka, with eight Type 96 AA guns installed, returning to Paramushiro on 15 May, and then returning to Kiska from 10–15 July to evacuate the Japanese garrison. On 6 September, after departing Ōminato, &quot;Nachi&quot; was attacked by the submarine , which fired four torpedoes, two of which struck &quot;Nachi&quot; in her starboard side, but the torpedoes were duds and damage was minimal. &quot;Nachi&quot; remained based at Ōminato through July 1944.

====Operations in the Philippines and sinking====
&quot;Nachi&quot; was reassigned to Kure Naval District from 31 July 1944 and spent the month of August in training. Her antiaircraft defenses were updated with an additional two twin-mount and 20 single-mount Type 96 25-mm autocannon, bringing her final total to 48 barrels in September. In October 1944, she was sent to the Philippines as part of a cruiser force under the command of Vice Admiral Kiyohide Shima. During the Battle of Leyte Gulf from 24 October, &quot;Nachi&quot; and &quot;Ashigara&quot; were part of Vice Admiral Shoji Nishimura’s force, which included the battleships , and the cruiser . On 25 October, after the Battle of Surigao Strait, &quot;Nachi&quot; and &quot;Mogami&quot; collided, resulting in severe damage to both vessels. &quot;Nachi&quot; was forced to retire to Manila to repair damage to her bow.

While under repair at Manila on 29 October, &quot;Nachi&quot; and &quot;Kumano&quot; were attacked by aircraft from USN Task Force 38. &quot;Nachi&quot; was hit by a single bomb to her aircraft deck, and this, as well as strafing attacks, killed 53 crewmen and further delayed repairs. On 5 November, again in Manila Bay, &quot;Nachi&quot; was attacked by three waves of U.S. planes from the aircraft carriers and . She escaped the first wave undamaged, but was hit by five bombs and two or three torpedoes in the second wave while attempting to get underway. During the third wave, &quot;Nachi&quot; was hit by five torpedoes in her port side, which severed her bow and stern, and by an additional 20 bombs and 16 rockets. &quot;Nachi&quot;″s flag commander, Vice Admiral Kiyohide Shima, was ashore for a conference at the time of the attack, but arrived at dockside in time to see his flagship blown apart. The central portion of the vessel sank in of water about northeast of Corregidor (around ).

The original wartime caption of a picture taken of the sinking &quot;Nachi&quot; by &quot;Lexington&quot; aircraft reads, Of the crew, 807 were lost, including the captain, while 220 survived and were rescued by the destroyers and .

==Wreck==
In April and May 1945, divers from made 296 dives on the wreck, salvaging radar equipment, code books, and maps of Japanese fortifications on Luzon and other documents. John Prados, in his book, &quot;Combined Fleet Decoded&quot;, writes that this was a major intelligence &quot;coup&quot;. This is also verified by U.S. Navy Master Diver Joseph S. Karneke, who served as the master diver aboard &quot;Chanticleer&quot; while diving on the wreck of &quot;Nachi&quot;, in his book, &quot;Navy Diver&quot;.

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q898771" start="54" end="67" title="heavy cruiser" label="heavy cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="76" end="98" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="127" end="139" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q131314" start="219" end="238" title="Wakayama Prefecture" label="Wakayama Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q696550" start="439" end="462" title="Washington Naval Treaty" label="Washington Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136352" start="542" end="557" title="Naval architect" label="Naval architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472870" start="571" end="584" title="Yuzuru Hiraga" label="Yuzuru Hiraga"/>
<link wikidata="Q717305" start="710" end="727" title="Imperial Japanese Navy General Staff" label="IJN general staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951929" start="1125" end="1131" title="Kampon" label="Kampon"/>
<link wikidata="Q422887" start="1284" end="1288" title="Belt armor" label="belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q208123" start="1302" end="1306" title="Deck (ship)" label="deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q846929" start="1316" end="1322" title="Bridge (nautical)" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630620" start="1382" end="1414" title="20 cm/50 3rd Year Type naval gun" label="20 cm/50 3rd Year Type naval gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859765" start="1554" end="1582" title="12.7 cm/40 Type 89 naval gun" label="12.7 cm/40 Type 89 naval gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970825" start="1625" end="1651" title="Type 93 torpedo" label="Type 93 Long Lance torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031873" start="1759" end="1776" title="aircraft catapult" label="aircraft catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119075" start="1801" end="1811" title="floatplane" label="floatplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151563" start="1988" end="2011" title="Type 96 25 mm AT/AA Gun" label="Type 96 25 mm AT/AA Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q587366" start="2025" end="2046" title="Hotchkiss M1929 machine gun" label="Type 93 13 mm AA guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q14592615" start="2095" end="2104" title="Keel laying" label="laid down"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688386" start="2108" end="2126" title="Kure Naval Arsenal" label="Kure Naval Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="2148" end="2166" title="Ship naming and launching" label="launched and named"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="2188" end="2200" title="Ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q200578" start="2366" end="2374" title="Yokosuka, Kanagawa" label="Yokosuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275749" start="2394" end="2406" title="naval review" label="naval review"/>
<link wikidata="Q34479" start="2411" end="2427" title="Emperor Hirohito" label="Emperor Hirohito"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="2618" end="2622" title="Kobe" label="Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q231312" start="2643" end="2653" title="Seto Inland Sea" label="Inland Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q164256" start="2694" end="2707" title="Kansai region" label="Kansai region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753958" start="2865" end="2886" title="Sasebo Naval District" label="Sasebo Naval District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636768" start="2924" end="2937" title="IJN 3rd Fleet" label="IJN 3rd Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q515545" start="3147" end="3170" title="First Shanghai Incident" label="First Shanghai Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="3252" end="3274" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751683" start="3699" end="3732" title="12 cm/45 10th Year Type naval gun" label="12 cm/45 10th Year Type naval gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859765" start="3737" end="3765" title="12.7 cm/40 Type 89 naval gun" label="12.7 cm/40 Type 89 naval gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705305" start="3810" end="3826" title="Teruhisa Komatsu" label="Teruhisa Komatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837937" start="3884" end="3901" title="Michitaro Totsuka" label="Michitaro Totsuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754053" start="3993" end="4013" title="Sasebo Naval Arsenal" label="Sasebo Naval Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="4037" end="4061" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q700313" start="4145" end="4157" title="IJA 3rd Division" label="3rd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="4189" end="4195" title="Nagoya" label="Nagoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q15908936" start="4635" end="4654" title="Mako Guard District" label="Mako Guard District"/>
<link wikidata="Q918799" start="4662" end="4680" title="Pescadores Islands" label="Pescadores Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="4705" end="4727" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636768" start="4804" end="4817" title="IJN 3rd Fleet" label="IJN 3rd Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q508287" start="4870" end="4882" title="Takeo Takagi" label="Takeo Takagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="4902" end="4907" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="5022" end="5040" title="Philippine Islands" label="Philippine Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1696" start="5092" end="5099" title="Legazpi, Albay" label="Legaspi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929698" start="5221" end="5233" title="Raizō Tanaka" label="Raizō Tanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473" start="5274" end="5279" title="Davao City" label="Davao"/>
<link wikidata="Q860298" start="5299" end="5303" title="Jolo" label="Jolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="5431" end="5450" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="U.S. Army Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q185000" start="5451" end="5471" title="B-17 Flying Fortress" label="B-17 Flying Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="5847" end="5854" title="Celebes" label="Celebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="5862" end="5885" title="Netherlands East Indies" label="Netherlands East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392991" start="5903" end="5920" title="Battle of Ambon" label="invasion of Ambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q263142" start="5929" end="5951" title="Battle of the Java Sea" label="Battle of the Java Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="6050" end="6056" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="6318" end="6327" title="destroyer" label="destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890816" start="6428" end="6451" title="USS Houston (CA-30)" label="USS &amp;quot;Houston&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q437690" start="7089" end="7102" title="Karel Doorman" label="Karel Doorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140436" start="7986" end="8014" title="Japanese aircraft carrier Ryūjō" label="Japanese light carrier Ryujo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="8245" end="8259" title="Kurile Islands" label="Kurile Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407436" start="8321" end="8343" title="Ōminato Guard District" label="Ōminato Guard District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866955" start="8372" end="8388" title="Boshiro Hosogaya" label="Boshiro Hosogaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q249708" start="8410" end="8442" title="Aleutian Islands Campaign" label="invasion of the Aleutian islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q758260" start="8467" end="8471" title="Attu Island" label="Attu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096067" start="8555" end="8560" title="Kiska" label="Kiska"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="8592" end="8608" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790777" start="8640" end="8662" title="Yokosuka Naval Arsenal" label="Yokosuka Naval Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641306" start="8720" end="8733" title="IJN 5th Fleet" label="IJN 5th Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q548819" start="9591" end="9624" title="Battle of the Komandorski Islands" label="Battle of the Komandorski Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q818749" start="10168" end="10179" title="Paramushiro" label="Paramushiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="10349" end="10358" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q705782" start="10652" end="10671" title="Kure Naval District" label="Kure Naval District"/>
<link wikidata="Q646375" start="11015" end="11029" title="Kiyohide Shima" label="Kiyohide Shima"/>
<link wikidata="Q308999" start="11042" end="11062" title="Battle of Leyte Gulf" label="Battle of Leyte Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q935282" start="11149" end="11164" title="Shoji Nishimura" label="Shoji Nishimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="11193" end="11203" title="battleship" label="battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q308999" start="11250" end="11274" title="Battle of Surigao Strait" label="Battle of Surigao Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791961" start="11522" end="11528" title="Japanese cruiser Kumano" label="Kumano"/>
<link wikidata="Q496770" start="11570" end="11583" title="Task Force 38" label="Task Force 38"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="11842" end="11858" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q646375" start="12223" end="12237" title="Kiyohide Shima" label="Kiyohide Shima"/>
<link wikidata="Q928075" start="12429" end="12439" title="Corregidor" label="Corregidor"/>
<link wikidata="Q163500" start="12616" end="12623" title="Captain (naval)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q58808243" start="12865" end="12876" title="John Prados" label="John Prados"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211693" wikidata="Q611349" url="?curid=211693" title="Dhani Harrison">
<text>Dhani Harrison ( ; born 1 August 1978) is a British-American musician, composer and singer-songwriter. He is the only child of George Harrison, lead guitarist of the Beatles, and Olivia Harrison. Dhani debuted as a professional musician assisting in recording his father&#x27;s final album, &quot;Brainwashed&quot;, and completing it with the assistance of Jeff Lynne after his father&#x27;s death in November 2001.

Harrison formed his own band, thenewno2, in 2002 and has performed at festivals, including Coachella, where &quot;Spin&quot; magazine called their performance one of the &quot;best debut performances of the festival.&quot; The band also played Lollapalooza three times, with Harrison joining the festival&#x27;s founder Perry Farrell on a cover of The Velvet Underground&#x27;s &quot;Sweet Jane&quot; at 2010&#x27;s event. In 2017, Harrison released his debut solo album &quot;In Parallel&quot;. The 2019 film &quot;In///Paralive&quot;, showcases the live version of his debut solo album and was recorded in the round at Henson Studios in Los Angeles. Harrison&#x27;s 2019 single, &quot;Motorways (Erase It)&quot;, was described by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; as &quot;a psychedelic track with a robust beat&quot;.

In 2013, Harrison launched his career as a composer. Alongside his writing partner Paul Hicks, Harrison scored the Warner Bros. movie &quot;Beautiful Creatures&quot;. Harrison has gone on to score the music for the TV show &quot;Good Girls Revolt&quot;, AMC&#x27;s &quot;The Divide&quot;, &quot;Seattle Road&quot;, &quot;Learning to Drive&quot;, and for the Paul Giamatti–produced show &quot;Outsiders&quot;. In 2018, Harrison and his writing partner Hicks received a nomination for &#x27;Best Music Score&#x27; at the International Documentary Association Awards for their work on the Sundance Film Festival Award Winning documentary &quot;Matangi/Maya/M.I.A.&quot; Most recently, Harrison wrote and recorded the title song for the Netflix original series &quot;Dogs&quot; and, along with Paul Hicks, scored the four-part HBO documentary series &quot;The Case Against Adnan Syed&quot;, the Bill Gates Netflix docuseries &quot;Inside Bill&#x27;s Brain: Decoding Bill Gates&quot;, and the 2020 RZA movie &quot;Cut Throat City&quot;.

Harrison&#x27;s music collaborations span a diverse range of genres that have seen him tour with Eric Clapton, appear on the Wu-Tang Clan track &quot;The Heart Gently Weeps&quot;, and join Pearl Jam live on stage several times over the years. One of Harrison&#x27;s notable collaborations was in 2004 at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, where he appeared alongside Tom Petty, Jeff Lynne, and Prince on &quot;While My Guitar Gently Weeps&quot;, which was performed to mark the posthumous induction of his father. Harrison guests on the UNKLE album &quot;The Road: Part II/Lost Highway&quot;, and also appears on Perry Farrell&#x27;s solo album, &quot;Kind Heaven&quot;. Harrison united with his long-time family friend Jeff Lynne when he opened for Lynne&#x27;s band ELO on the band&#x27;s sold out 2019 North American summer tour.

==Early life==
Harrison was born on 1 August 1978 at HRH Princess Christian&#x27;s Hospital in Windsor, Berkshire. Harrison is named after the sixth and seventh notes of the Indian music scale, &quot;dha&quot; and &quot;ni&quot;. &quot;Dhani&quot; is also a raga in North Indian classical music.

He grew up with his parents in Henley-on-Thames, in Friar Park, the estate on which his father had lived since 1970. His mother, Olivia Harrison, is an American of Mexican descent. One of Harrison&#x27;s earliest memories, from the age of six, is receiving a drumming lesson from his father&#x27;s friend and bandmate, &quot;Uncle&quot; Ringo Starr. He recalled that before the lesson, he had been an avid drummer. However, when Starr began to play, the loud noise frightened him so much that he ran out of the room screaming.

Harrison attended Dolphin School near Twyford, a Montessori method school, followed by Badgemore Primary School, Henley-on-Thames. He later attended Shiplake College, also near Henley, where he enrolled in the Combined Cadet Force, and showed a keen interest in rowing which continued into his later years.

Harrison is an alumnus of Brown University, Rhode Island, where he studied industrial design and physics, earning a bachelor&#x27;s degree. Harrison pursued a career as a car designer at McLaren Automotive before deciding to follow in his father&#x27;s footsteps as a professional musician.

==Musical career==
Harrison assisted his father in home recording sessions which eventually became part of the &quot;Brainwashed&quot; album project. In this process he gained experience in performing and production techniques.

After his father&#x27;s death in 2001, Harrison, in collaboration with Jeff Lynne, completed his father&#x27;s final album, &quot;Brainwashed&quot;, which was released in 2002 and went on to win a Grammy for Best Pop Instrumental Performance, in &quot;Marwa Blues&quot;, at the 46th Annual Grammy Awards in 2004. Harrison participated in the &quot;Concert for George&quot; on the first anniversary of his father&#x27;s death. The concert was organized by Eric Clapton and featured some of his father&#x27;s friends and collaborators, including former Beatles bandmates Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr as well as Clapton, Billy Preston, Ravi Shankar, Jeff Lynne, Tom Petty, Jim Keltner, and Joe Brown. Harrison played backup acoustic guitar for most of the concert. Before the finale, Paul McCartney relayed to the audience, &quot;Olivia said that with Dhani up on stage, it looks like George stayed young and we all got old&quot;, referencing the physical similarities between father and son.

In 2004 Harrison appeared onstage with Tom Petty, Steve Winwood, Jeff Lynne, Prince and others for a performance of &quot;While My Guitar Gently Weeps&quot; during his father&#x27;s induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.

In March 2006, Harrison made a guest appearance on Liam Lynch&#x27;s Podcast Video Variety Show, &quot;Lynchland&quot;. They performed a duet that will appear on a Lynch album. He collaborated with Jakob Dylan on the John Lennon song &quot;Gimme Some Truth&quot; for the Lennon tribute album &quot;Instant Karma: The Amnesty International Campaign to Save Darfur&quot;, which was released on 12 June 2007.In April 2006, it was announced that Harrison&#x27;s band, thenewno2, had begun recording. The band released a music video, &quot;Choose What You&#x27;re Watching&quot;, on its website. thenewno2 features Harrison on lead guitar, synthesiser and vocals and Oli Hecks on drums and synths. He was involved in a re-working of the Beatles&#x27; &quot;While My Guitar Gently Weeps&quot; entitled &quot;The Heart Gently Weeps&quot;, which was the first single on the Wu-Tang Clan&#x27;s album &quot;8 Diagrams&quot;, released in December 2007.

Thenewno2&#x27;s debut album, &quot;You Are Here&quot;, was released online on 11 August 2008 and in stores on 31 March 2009. The song &quot;Yomp&quot; was featured as a downloadable song for the &quot;Rock Band&quot; series, and &quot;Crazy Tuesday&quot; was featured as one of the 20 free songs that were downloadable with the purchase of &quot;Rock Band 2&quot;.

In August 2010, Dhani Harrison, Ben Harper and Joseph Arthur joined to form Fistful of Mercy.

In 2013, Harrison was the face of Gap&#x27;s fall global campaign, entitled &quot;Back To Blue.&quot;

Harrison&#x27;s dedication to his father&#x27;s musical legacy resulted in a week long run of shows on &quot;Conan&quot; in September 2014, dedicated to George Harrison, which culminated in a sold out George Fest event at The Fonda Theatre in Los Angeles, which was later released as an album and documentary. He participated in &quot;The Night That Changed America: A Grammy Salute to The Beatles&quot; the same year.

Harrison produced &quot;George Fest&quot;, a live album and concert DVD package documenting The George Fest tribute concert in honor of his father. The tribute was held at the Fonda Theatre in Los Angeles on 28 September 2014. The album and documentary were released on 26 February 2016.

In 2017 Harrison played his first-ever solo show at the Panorama Festival in New York City. Harrison released his first solo album, &quot;In Parallel&quot;, in October 2017.

In 2019, he toured as the opening act for Jeff Lynne&#x27;s ELO, and typically performed with the group singing the vocals for the Traveling Wilburys song &quot;Handle with Care.&quot;

Following two live performances in Omeara, London, on 18 and 19 October 2023, Harrison&#x27;s second solo album, &quot;Innerstanding&quot;, was released on 20 October 2023.

==Film composing==
In between working on albums, Harrison, along with Paul Hicks, began their film composing partnership scoring the 2013 film &quot;Beautiful Creatures&quot;. In 2014, they scored the film &quot;Learning to Drive&quot; and the television series &quot;The Divide&quot;. In 2016, they composed music for the Amazon Video television series &quot;Good Girls Revolt&quot; and continue scoring the WGN TV series &quot;Outsiders&quot;.

More recently, Harrison wrote and recorded the title song for the Netflix original series &quot;Dogs&quot; and, along with Paul Hicks, scored the four-part HBO documentary series &quot;The Case Against Adnan Syed&quot; and the 2020 RZA movie &quot;Cut Throat City&quot;.

==Discography==
===Solo===
====Albums====
* &quot;In Parallel&quot; (2017)
* &quot;Innerstanding&quot; (2023)

===With Thenewno2===
====Albums====
* &quot;You Are Here&quot; (2008)
* &quot;thefearofmissingout&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Beautiful Creatures&quot; (2013)

====EPs====
* &quot;EP001&quot; (2006)
* &quot;EP002&quot; (2011)

===With Fistful of Mercy===
====Albums====
* &quot;As I Call You Down&quot; (2010)

===Other collaborations===
* &quot;Brainwashed&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Concert for George&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Instant Karma: The Amnesty International Campaign to Save Darfur&quot; (2007)
* &quot;8 Diagrams&quot; (2007)
* &quot;George Fest&quot; (2016)

==Personal life==
Harrison married Sólveig &quot;Sóla&quot; Káradóttir in 2012. They announced their separation in 2016. The couple had no children.

==Video games==
Harrison collaborated in the development of &quot;The Beatles: Rock Band&quot;, a music video game released on 9 September 2009 on the Xbox 360, PlayStation 3 and Wii gaming platforms. He was instrumental in the creation of the game and urged McCartney and Starr to participate. When asked about the game production Dhani stated, &quot;I took the project to Apple and sort of convinced everybody to have a presentation. My job description is...being enthusiastic. We&#x27;ve been working on it for the past two years. This is the first one that is going to be totally, historically accurate. It&#x27;s been a real headache, but it&#x27;s been the most enjoyable work I&#x27;ve done in my life.&quot;

To promote the game&#x27;s release, he appeared on &quot;The Tonight Show with Conan O&#x27;Brien&quot; on 8 September 2009 and at the end of the show they played &quot;Birthday&quot; with Dhani on drums, Conan O&#x27;Brien on bass, and Aaron Bleyaert and Mark Pender on guitar.

In 2009, Harrison told the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; in an interview that he was &quot;working on &quot;Rock Band 3&quot; and making the controllers more real so people can actually learn how to play music while playing the game&quot;.

==References==
==External links==

* Thenewno2 Official Band Site
* HOT Records</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q611349" start="0" end="14" title="Dhani Harrison" label="Dhani Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="127" end="142" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="162" end="173" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q442991" start="179" end="194" title="Olivia Harrison" label="Olivia Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q666903" start="297" end="308" title="Brainwashed (George Harrison album)" label="Brainwashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q314358" start="357" end="367" title="Jeff Lynne" label="Jeff Lynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984088" start="447" end="456" title="thenewno2" label="thenewno2"/>
<link wikidata="Q889872" start="508" end="517" title="Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival" label="Coachella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="525" end="541" title="Spin (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="661" end="673" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q918838" start="737" end="750" title="Perry Farrell" label="Perry Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="765" end="787" title="The Velvet Underground" label="The Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414013" start="801" end="811" title="Sweet Jane" label="Sweet Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q47083161" start="894" end="905" title="In Parallel (album)" label="In Parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q24904690" start="1038" end="1052" title="Jim Henson Company Lot" label="Henson Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="1155" end="1168" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151275" start="1314" end="1324" title="Paul Hicks (musician)" label="Paul Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="1346" end="1357" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros"/>
<link wikidata="Q738704" start="1365" end="1396" title="Beautiful Creatures (2013 film)" label="&amp;quot;Beautiful Creatures&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885739" start="1460" end="1477" title="Good Girls Revolt" label="Good Girls Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072810" start="1502" end="1512" title="The Divide (TV series)" label="The Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151617" start="1552" end="1569" title="Learning to Drive (film)" label="Learning to Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q208649" start="1589" end="1602" title="Paul Giamatti" label="Paul Giamatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q21808799" start="1623" end="1632" title="Outsiders (U.S. TV series)" label="Outsiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504953" start="1750" end="1787" title="International Documentary Association" label="International Documentary Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="1817" end="1839" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q55227056" start="1872" end="1891" title="Matangi/Maya/M.I.A." label="Matangi/Maya/M.I.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="1964" end="1971" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848843" start="1994" end="1998" title="Dogs (TV series)" label="Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="2054" end="2057" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q85806732" start="2083" end="2110" title="The Case Against Adnan Syed" label="The Case Against Adnan Syed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="2122" end="2132" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2158" end="2203" title="Inside Bill&amp;#x27;s Brain: Decoding Bill Gates" label="Inside Bill&amp;#x27;s Brain: Decoding Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q52447" start="2224" end="2227" title="RZA" label="RZA"/>
<link wikidata="Q62595377" start="2240" end="2255" title="Cut Throat City" label="Cut Throat City"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="2361" end="2373" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q52463" start="2389" end="2401" title="Wu-Tang Clan" label="Wu-Tang Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521230" start="2414" end="2436" title="The Heart Gently Weeps" label="The Heart Gently Weeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="2453" end="2462" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="2572" end="2598" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q311655" start="2628" end="2637" title="Tom Petty" label="Tom Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="2655" end="2661" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q548046" start="2671" end="2699" title="While My Guitar Gently Weeps" label="While My Guitar Gently Weeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032426" start="2798" end="2803" title="UNKLE" label="UNKLE"/>
<link wikidata="Q918838" start="2874" end="2887" title="Perry Farrell" label="Perry Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q218255" start="3029" end="3032" title="Electric Light Orchestra" label="ELO"/>
<link wikidata="Q464955" start="3190" end="3208" title="Windsor, Berkshire" label="Windsor, Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380503" start="3269" end="3287" title="swara" label="Indian music scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785223" start="3331" end="3336" title="Dhani (raga)" label="Dhani"/>
<link wikidata="Q216926" start="3353" end="3357" title="raga" label="raga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770695" start="3361" end="3389" title="Hindustani classical music" label="North Indian classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q990253" start="3423" end="3439" title="Henley-on-Thames" label="Henley-on-Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087616" start="3444" end="3454" title="Friar Park" label="Friar Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="3729" end="3740" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3158262" start="3938" end="3952" title="Dolphin School (Berkshire)" label="Dolphin School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774391" start="3958" end="3965" title="Twyford, Berkshire" label="Twyford"/>
<link wikidata="Q190218" start="3969" end="3986" title="Montessori method" label="Montessori method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498004" start="4069" end="4085" title="Shiplake College" label="Shiplake College"/>
<link wikidata="Q731977" start="4130" end="4150" title="Combined Cadet Force" label="Combined Cadet Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="4254" end="4270" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351854" start="4415" end="4433" title="McLaren Automotive" label="McLaren Automotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q666903" start="4637" end="4648" title="Brainwashed (George Harrison album)" label="Brainwashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q666903" start="4879" end="4890" title="Brainwashed (George Harrison album)" label="Brainwashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q60774993" start="5001" end="5012" title="Marwa Blues" label="Marwa Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542330" start="5027" end="5052" title="46th Annual Grammy Awards" label="46th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q868678" start="5097" end="5115" title="Concert for George" label="Concert for George"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="5204" end="5216" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="5318" end="5332" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q311450" start="5369" end="5382" title="Billy Preston" label="Billy Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q103774" start="5384" end="5396" title="Ravi Shankar" label="Ravi Shankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q453565" start="5421" end="5432" title="Jim Keltner" label="Jim Keltner"/>
<link wikidata="Q324588" start="5438" end="5447" title="Joe Brown (singer)" label="Joe Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q314397" start="5792" end="5805" title="Steve Winwood" label="Steve Winwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372139" start="6023" end="6033" title="Liam Lynch (musician)" label="Liam Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q555426" start="6170" end="6181" title="Jakob Dylan" label="Jakob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="6189" end="6200" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039445" start="6212" end="6228" title="Gimme Some Truth" label="Gimme Some Truth"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6270" end="6334" title="Instant Karma: The Amnesty International Campaign to Save Darfur" label="Instant Karma: The Amnesty International Campaign to Save Darfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984088" start="6436" end="6445" title="thenewno2" label="thenewno2"/>
<link wikidata="Q548046" start="6724" end="6752" title="While My Guitar Gently Weeps" label="While My Guitar Gently Weeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521230" start="6774" end="6796" title="The Heart Gently Weeps" label="The Heart Gently Weeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q52463" start="6838" end="6850" title="Wu-Tang Clan" label="Wu-Tang Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706934" start="6870" end="6880" title="8 Diagrams" label="8 Diagrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056854" start="6952" end="6964" title="You Are Here (thenewno2 album)" label="You Are Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323659" start="7112" end="7140" title="Rock Band" label="&amp;quot;Rock Band&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569492" start="7263" end="7274" title="Rock Band 2" label="Rock Band 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q380849" start="7315" end="7325" title="Ben Harper" label="Ben Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415155" start="7330" end="7343" title="Joseph Arthur" label="Joseph Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421040" start="7359" end="7375" title="Fistful of Mercy" label="Fistful of Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q420822" start="7412" end="7415" title="Gap Inc." label="Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814593" start="7590" end="7595" title="Conan (talk show)" label="Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22082479" start="7682" end="7693" title="George Fest" label="George Fest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941453" start="7703" end="7720" title="The Fonda Theatre" label="The Fonda Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7816" end="7878" title="The Night That Changed America: A Grammy Salute to The Beatles" label="The Night That Changed America: A Grammy Salute to The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q22082479" start="7925" end="7936" title="George Fest" label="George Fest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941453" start="8077" end="8090" title="Fonda Theatre" label="Fonda Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468805" start="8246" end="8263" title="Panorama Festival" label="Panorama Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q47083161" start="8328" end="8339" title="In Parallel (album)" label="In Parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q314358" start="8407" end="8417" title="Jeff Lynne" label="Jeff Lynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q218255" start="8425" end="8428" title="Electric Light Orchestra" label="ELO"/>
<link wikidata="Q332399" start="8496" end="8514" title="Traveling Wilburys" label="Traveling Wilburys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405772" start="8526" end="8542" title="Handle with Care (song)" label="Handle with Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q123663242" start="8670" end="8683" title="Innerstanding (Dhani Harrison album)" label="Innerstanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q738704" start="8874" end="8893" title="Beautiful Creatures (2013 film)" label="Beautiful Creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151617" start="8937" end="8954" title="Learning to Drive (film)" label="Learning to Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072810" start="8993" end="9003" title="The Divide (TV series)" label="The Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="9048" end="9060" title="Amazon Video" label="Amazon Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885739" start="9085" end="9102" title="Good Girls Revolt" label="Good Girls Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q21808799" start="9154" end="9163" title="Outsiders (American TV series)" label="Outsiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="9238" end="9245" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848843" start="9268" end="9272" title="Dogs (TV series)" label="Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="9328" end="9331" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q52447" start="9404" end="9407" title="RZA" label="RZA"/>
<link wikidata="Q62595377" start="9420" end="9435" title="Cut Throat City" label="Cut Throat City"/>
<link wikidata="Q47083161" start="9494" end="9505" title="In Parallel (album)" label="In Parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123663242" start="9527" end="9540" title="Innerstanding (Dhani Harrison album)" label="Innerstanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056854" start="9599" end="9611" title="You Are Here (thenewno2 album)" label="You Are Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777750" start="9633" end="9652" title="thefearofmissingout" label="thefearofmissingout"/>
<link wikidata="Q280048" start="9728" end="9733" title="EP001" label="EP001"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866233" start="9826" end="9844" title="As I Call You Down" label="As I Call You Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q666903" start="9894" end="9905" title="Brainwashed (George Harrison album)" label="Brainwashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757554" start="9927" end="9945" title="Concert for George (album)" label="Concert for George"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9967" end="10031" title="Instant Karma: The Amnesty International Campaign to Save Darfur" label="Instant Karma: The Amnesty International Campaign to Save Darfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706934" start="10053" end="10063" title="8 Diagrams" label="8 Diagrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q22082479" start="10085" end="10096" title="George Fest" label="George Fest"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10327" end="10349" title="The Beatles: Rock Band" label="The Beatles: Rock Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q584105" start="10359" end="10375" title="music video game" label="music video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q48263" start="10412" end="10420" title="Xbox 360" label="Xbox 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q10683" start="10422" end="10435" title="PlayStation 3" label="PlayStation 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="10440" end="10443" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q621231" start="10635" end="10640" title="Apple Corps" label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269507" start="11035" end="11075" title="The Tonight Show with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="The Tonight Show with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168321" start="11147" end="11155" title="Birthday (The Beatles song)" label="Birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q486740" start="11183" end="11201" title="Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769208" start="11234" end="11245" title="Mark Pender" label="Mark Pender"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="11291" end="11306" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543862" start="11364" end="11375" title="Rock Band 3" label="Rock Band 3"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211694" wikidata="Q1568768" url="?curid=211694" title="Japanese cruiser Haguro">
<text>Haguro (羽黒) was a heavy cruiser of the Imperial Japanese Navy, named after Mount Haguro in Yamagata Prefecture. Commissioned in 1929, &quot;Haguro&quot; saw significant service during World War II, participating in nine naval engagements between 1942 and 1945. As a heavy cruiser, she was better armed and armored than most surface vessels, and had multiple battles during her combat career. In the early part of the war, she engaged in vigorous shore bombardment duties to support the Japanese invasions of the Philippines and Dutch East Indies, and took part in the destruction of the Allied cruiser force defending the Dutch East Indies at the Battle of the Java Sea from 27 February to 1 March 1942. With torpedo hits, &quot;Haguro&quot; sank the Allied flagship, the light cruiser , and the destroyer , and with gunfire scored primary credit for sinking the heavy cruiser , and was not damaged during the entire battle.

After patrol duty, from 7–8 May, &quot;Haguro&quot; escorted aircraft carriers during the Battle of the Coral Sea, escorted the invasion force at the Battle of Midway, and escorted carriers during the Battle of the Eastern Solomons on 24 August. After a long series of patrol and escorting duties, &quot;Haguro&quot; fought an American cruiser-destroyer force at the battle of Empress Augusta Bay, where she helped to damage the light cruiser , but was hit by ten shells from enemy cruisers, but most were duds as she got off with light damage. After more patrol duties and surviving the occasional air raid, &quot;Haguro&quot; escorted carriers at the Battle of the Philippine Sea, where she aided the sinking aircraft carrier &quot;Taihō&quot;, and fought in the Battle of Leyte Gulf, surviving the submarine and air attacks that sank several Japanese ships, and in turn damaging several US warships and helping to sink the destroyer while taking minor damage from shell and bomb hits.

After escaping back to mainland Japan, &quot;Haguro&quot; spent most of 1945 transiting between bases for cargo transport mission. In May, she was transporting troops when she was ambushed by Royal Navy destroyers in the Malacca Strait, the last surface battle between enemy warships. &quot;Haguro&quot; was sunk by at least nine torpedo hits and nearly an hour of gunfire. The wreck was discovered in 2010 and illegally salvaged in 2014.

==Design==

&quot;Haguro&quot; was the third of the four-member of heavy cruisers (sometimes referred to as the &quot;Nachi&quot; class due to the second ship, , being completed before , despite starting construction after); the other ships were &quot;Myōkō&quot; (妙高), &quot;Nachi&quot; (那智), and (足柄). The ships of this class displaced 13,300 tons, were long, and were capable of .

=== Armament ===
&quot;Haguro&quot; was originally equipped with ten 20 cm (7.9-inch)/50 naval guns in five twin turrets, three forward and two aft, making her the most powerful heavy cruiser in the world at the time of her commissioning. Her secondary battery consisted of six Type 10 12 cm (4.7-inch) dual purposed guns in six single mounts, a pair of 13.2 mm machine guns, and twelve 61 cm (24 inch) torpedo tubes in four triple mounts, a pair on each side.

In the mid 1930s, &quot;Haguro&quot;″s offensive capabilities were drastically improved. Her 20 cm (7.9 inch) guns were removed and replaced by ten 203 mm (8-inch) guns, improving rate of fire and penetration power. Her 12 cm (4.7 inch) dual guns were replaced by eight 127 mm/40 dual purposed naval gun in four twin turrets, a pair on each side, and her triple torpedo tubes were replaced by quadruple torpedo mounts, making her total torpedo tubes a number of sixteen. &quot;Haguro&quot;″s new AA battery also consisted of various 25 mm (1 inch) machine guns.

=== Armor ===
&quot;Haguro&quot;″s main belt was very thick for a cruiser, at 102 mm (4 inches) in thickness. She also carried 35 mm (1.4 inch) deck armor. She carried 76 mm (3 inch) barbette armor, and 25 mm (1 inch) turret armor. Her superstructure was mostly unarmored to avoid stability issues.
==Construction and career==
&quot;Haguro&quot; was laid down at the Mitsubishi shipyard in Nagasaki on 16 March 1925, launched and named on 24

March 1928, and was commissioned into the Imperial Navy on 25 April 1929. In October 1930, &quot;Haguro&quot; embarked on a voyage carrying Emperor Hirohito from Kobe to the battleship from the 22nd to 25th,

Between 1931 and 1933 she was commanded by Nomura Naokuni who subsequently achieved flag rank. In 1936, &quot;Haguro&quot; received her first modernizations, and took part in a variety of troop-ferrying and convoy-escorting missions during the Sino-Japanese war, but did not see combat.

== Second World War ==

By the time of Japan&#x27;s entry into World War II with the attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941, &quot;Haguro&quot; was en route to the Philippines as part of a large cover force to support Japanese landings. &quot;Haguro&quot; saw her first action just four days later bombarding Legaspi, then she bombarded Davao on the night of 19–20 December after escorting troop transports, before she conducted more shore bombardment on Jolo on the 24th. On 4 January 1942, she survived B-17 air attacks undamaged, then &quot;Haguro&quot; took part in several more shore bombardment missions to aid in the invasion of Celebes. On 26 January, the submarine fired four torpedoes at &quot;Haguro&quot;, but none made their mark. On 10 February, &quot;Haguro&quot; bombarded Makassar, then on the 20th bombarded Timor to support Japanese troop landings.

=== Battle of the Java Sea ===
On 26 February, &quot;Haguro&quot; and her sistership &quot;Nachi&quot; were escorting a large Japanese troop convoy departing through the Java Sea to support the Japanese invasion of the Dutch East Indies. En route, one of &quot;Nachi&quot;″s floatplanes spotted a large Allied task force consisting of two heavy cruisers, three light cruisers, and nine destroyers attempting to intercept and destroy Japanese troop convoys. &quot;Haguro&quot; sped at full speed as &quot;Nachi&quot;″s floatplane radioed the Allied ships&#x27; action.

==== Afternoon battle ====
By 6:00 on the 27th &quot;Haguro&quot; located the enemy ships and closed to a reasonable firing range. At around , &quot;Haguro&quot; fired her eight 203 mm (8 in) guns at the enemy ships, immediately targeting the Allied flagship, the Dutch light cruiser . As the range drew closer, &quot;Haguro&quot; succeeded in hitting &quot;De Ruyter&quot; twice. The first hit the axillary motor room and started a small fire, killing one crewman and injuring six others, while the second over penetrated unarmored portions of the ship without exploding. Even when they did not hit, &quot;Haguro&quot;″s shells still straddled &quot;De Ruyter&quot; several times, causing light damage. In turn, several Allied cruisers targeted &quot;Haguro&quot;, which they reported to have blown up and sank with gunfire damage.

In reality, &quot;Haguro&quot; was not hit once, and as a torpedo attack from Japanese destroyers forced the Allied ships to conduct evasive maneuvers, &quot;Haguro&quot; switched fire to the heavy cruiser , one of the most capable ships of the task force. &quot;Exeter&quot; responded back, but gunnery was poor, and by the eighth salvo she had only managed to straddle &quot;Haguro&quot;. In stark contrast, closing to about &quot;Haguro&quot; hit &quot;Exeter&quot; twice. One 203 mm (8 in) shell hit was a dud, but the other penetrated deep inside the ship and exploded, destroying six of her eight boilers as &quot;Exeter&quot;″s speed dropped to , The damage killed 40 men as the crippled &quot;Exeter&quot; was forced to withdraw from the battle. Almost simultaneously, &quot;Haguro&quot; fired a spread of eight type 93 torpedoes, and around 15 minutes later, one of these torpedoes hit the Dutch destroyer . Within an instant, the destroyer was blown in half, the bow section rapidly sinking, and the stern section sinking several minutes later. 40 sailors went down with the ship. Fired from a distance of 22,000 yards, this would be probably the longest ranged torpedo hit in history.

==== Night ambush ====
Immediately afterwards, Japanese ships sank the destroyer , and with one cruiser crippled and two destroyers sunk, Admiral Doorman aboard &quot;De Ruyter&quot; ordered an immediate retreat from the battle, and seemed to do so successfully. However, unknown to Doorman, one of &quot;Haguro&quot;″s floatplanes tracked down his ships and trailed the force. &quot;Haguro&quot;, joined by &quot;Nachi&quot;, used the details given to them to sail to an interception point. It was just before midnight that &quot;Haguro&quot; located the enemy force again, which were unaware of her presence. At around , a stealthy torpedo attack was prepared, &quot;Nachi&quot; let out eight torpedoes, while &quot;Haguro&quot; unleashed four. A torpedo from &quot;Nachi&quot; hit the light cruiser , which ignited her main battery magazines, blowing the cruiser in two and sinking her in two minutes with the loss of all but 19 men. Four minutes later, one of &quot;Haguro&quot;″s torpedoes hit &quot;De Ruyter&quot;. The hit immediately killed much of the cruiser&#x27;s damage control team, started a large fire, and overwhelming flooding disabled her engines and &quot;De Ruyter&quot; stopped dead in the water. Over three hours, &quot;De Ruyter&quot; capsized and sank with the loss of 367 men, including Admiral Doorman and Captain Eugène Lacomblé. Having sunk the Allied flagship, &quot;Haguro&quot; steamed from the battlefield. Depending on the source, she was either undetected, or spotted but Allied gunfire was ineffective.

==== Second battle of the Java Sea ====

On 1 March 1942, Haguro was assiting in the Java Sea landings when intelligence informed her that the still crippled &quot;Exeter&quot;, escorted by the destroyers and unintentionally stumbled into her sisterships &quot;Myōkō&quot; and &quot;Ashigara&quot; while trying to escape from the Java Sea, with a long range gunfight ensuing. &quot;Haguro&quot; and &quot;Nachi&quot; joined the battle almost an hour later, and neither side had managed to land a single hit. Together &quot;Haguro&quot; and &quot;Nachi&quot; engaged the cruiser, scoring their first hit 5 minutes later as a critical 8-inch (203 mm) shell hit disabled Exeter&#x27;s electrical power, followed by another that exploded and destroyed Exeter&#x27;s two remaining boilers, leaving her dead in the battle. Gunfire from all four cruisers then destroyed &quot;Exeter&#x27;s&quot; guns and lit her aflame, leading to her crew scuttling her. By this point, Haguro was almost entirely out of ammunition, left with enough rounds for 13 salvos and just 4 torpedoes, causing her to retire from the engagement while &quot;Myōkō&quot; and &quot;Ashigara&quot; and the destroyers &quot;Kawakaze&quot; and &quot;Yamakaze&quot; combined fire to sink &quot;Encounter&quot;. &quot;Pope&quot; temporarily escaped, but within two hours was crippled by aircraft from the light carrier and then finished off by gunfire with the arrival of &quot;Ashigara&quot; and &quot;Myōkō&quot;.

=== Further Operations ===
After the battle, the almost completely depleted &quot;Haguro&quot; returned to Kendari on the 3rd, and spend the rest of March transiting between various naval facilities before returning to mainland Japan. On April 18, &quot;Haguro&quot; was present during the attack on Tokyo by the aircraft carrier but was not damaged, and in turn served in the force that failed to track down the US task force responsible for the air raid, anchoring at Yokosuka on the 22nd. &quot;Haguro&quot; spent the rest of the month in preparation for supporting the planned invasion of Port Moresby. This commenced on May 1 when &quot;Haguro&quot; alongside &quot;Myōkō&quot; and six destroyers departed Truk as part of a larger escort to the aircraft carriers and in what became known as the Battle of the Coral Sea. &quot;Haguro&quot;″s crew watched as the first aircraft carrier battle in history unfolded from 7–8 May, and for her part survived the carrier raids which crippled &quot;Shōkaku&quot; without damage herself before helping to assist the mauled but still afloat flattop. &quot;Haguro&quot; arrived back at Truk on the 17th, and returned to Kure on the 22nd, then on the 27th arrived at Hashirajima in preparation for the Battle of Midway, where &quot;Haguro&quot; escorted a large troop convoy for the planned invasion of Midway Island, a convoy which was called off on June 6 after the battle turned into a devastating defeat which lost Japan four aircraft carriers and a heavy cruiser. &quot;Haguro&quot; spend the rest of the month assisting invasion convoys.

&quot;Haguro&quot; did not sortie during July, only seeing her next action as an escort for Japanese aircraft carriers during the battle of the Eastern Solomons on August 24, coming under light air attacks but receiving no damage. In turn, &quot;Shōkaku&quot; and &quot;Zuikaku&quot; crippled the aircraft carrier USS &quot;Enterprise&quot;, but failed to stop the sinking of the light carrier &quot;Ryūjō&quot;, the destroyer &quot;Mutsuki&quot;, and a troop transport to US dive and torpedo bombers, ending the battle in an American victory. &quot;Haguro&quot; spent the rest of August and into September transiting between ports, surviving attacks by B-17 bombers without damage, before being docked for refit on October 5. On November 27, &quot;Haguro&quot; departed Sasebo alongside &quot;Myōkō&quot; on a troop transport mission to Truk, then returned to Kure by the end of the year.

On January 31, 1943, &quot;Haguro&quot; escorted Japanese aircraft carriers which served as a cover force for what became the evacuation of Guadalcanal. She returned to Truk on February 9. For the next few months, &quot;Haguro&quot; engaged in a series of peaceful patrol duties throughout the Indian Ocean, which failed to yield combat, finally returning to Yokosuka later that May, before escorting navy responses to the invasion of Attu until June when she was docked for refit which installed new sets of radar and several anti-aircraft guns. She returned to Japan on July 19. Throughout August and September, &quot;Haguro&quot; engaged in troop and supply transport missions, surviving a raid from US carrier aircraft on September 18 without damage. At the end of September, &quot;Haguro&quot; attempted to track down the US navy task force 15, but failed to make contact, then took part in convoy escorting missions throughout October.

=== Battle of the Empress Augusta Bay ===
After a very, very long series of patrol and escorting duties without seeing combat, &quot;Haguro&quot; finally saw some big action again on 1 November, as she was moored near Rabaul when the Japanese command hatched a plan. &quot;Haguro&quot; and &quot;Myōkō&quot;, with an escort of the light cruisers &quot;Agano&quot; and &quot;Sendai&quot; and six destroyers, the &quot;Shiratsuyu&quot;, &quot;Shigure,&quot; &quot;Samidare&quot;, &quot;Hatsukaze&quot;, &quot;Naganami&quot;, and &quot;Wakatsuki&quot;, were tasked with intercepting and destroying the allied protection forces escorting American troop convoys destined to Bougainville Island in an attempt to replicate a battle of Savo Island style victory. While underway, one of &quot;Haguro&#x27;s&quot; floatplanes spotted her target, an American task force consisting of four light cruisers, USS &quot;Cleveland&quot;, &quot;Columbia&quot;, &quot;Denver&quot;, and &quot;Montpelier&quot;, escorted by 8 destroyers. &quot;Haguro&quot; and the others steamed in hopes of engaging the enemy force.

By 2:25 the next morning, the two forces came within contact of each other. &quot;Haguro&quot; fired away, her salvos extremely tight, but missed her mark as the optical based fire control was causing trouble with scoring early hits. In stark contrast, the four American cruisers with radar all opened fire on &quot;Sendai&quot;, immediately blasting her with a hellfire of 6-inch (152 mm) gunfire, setting her on fire and disabling her guns and engines. In turn, &quot;Shiratsuyu&quot;, &quot;Shigure&quot;, and &quot;Samidare&quot; all fired their torpedoes at 16,000 yards, prompting one of &quot;Samidare&#x27;s&quot; torpedoes to cripple the destroyer USS &quot;Foote&quot;, blowing off her entire stern and taking the destroyer out of action. However, due to her proximity to &quot;Sendai&quot;, &quot;Samidare&quot; was hit by three stray 6-inch (152 mm) shells before colliding with &quot;Shiratsuyu,&quot; heavily damaging both ships. &quot;Haguro&quot; avoided colliding with &quot;Wakatsuki&quot;, in contrast to &quot;Myōkō&quot; which collided with &quot;Hatsukaze&quot;, damaging both ships.

However, shortly afterwards &quot;Haguro&quot; finally found the range, and along with &quot;Myōkō&quot; displayed excellent marksmanship. With just three salvos each at 22,000 yards, they gouged &quot;Denver&quot; with three waterline 8-inch (203 mm) shells, causing her to fall out of formation due to a flooded bow, damaged &quot;Columbia&quot; with an 8-inch (203 mm) shell that punched through her plating and landed in a sail locker, and straddled &quot;Montpelier&quot; several times. However, &quot;Cleveland&quot;, &quot;Columbia&quot;, and &quot;Montpelier&quot; all fired on &quot;Haguro&quot;, hitting the ship with ten 6-inch (152 mm) shells over a 10 minute period, smashing into &quot;Haguro&#x27;s&quot; turret 2, port flight deck and catapult, aft deck hospital room, and paint shed. However, six out of the ten hits were duds, and thus only superficial damage was inflicted, killing only one of &quot;Haguro&#x27;s&quot; men and injuring five others. Shortly afterwards, &quot;Myōkō&quot; hit the destroyer USS &quot;Spence&quot; with an 8-inch (203 mm) waterline hit right as the destroyer began to shell the already damaged &quot;Hatsukaze&quot; which forced her back.

However, the Japanese received far more damage than they inflicted, &quot;Sendai&quot; had already been blasted into a floating flaming wreck by gunfire from the four American cruisers and sank in a one sided massacre with most of her crew. &quot;Spence&quot; then called upon Admiral Arleigh Burke&#x27;s destroyer division 45, consisting of USS &quot;Charles Ausburne&quot;&quot;, Claxton, Dyson&quot;, and &quot;Stanly&quot;, to deliver the final blow to the crippled &quot;Hatsukaze&quot;, which they successfully finished off with gunfire. Deciding to cut their losses, &quot;Haguro&quot; and the other Japanese ships retreated from the engagement, not only had they lost more tonnage than they damaged, but failed to disrupt the American landings in any way. Upon arriving back at Rabaul, the port came under attack from nearly 160 American aircraft in what became known as the bombing of Rabaul, which ended the Japanese treat to Bougainville. &quot;Haguro&quot; was attacked and photographed several times, but was not damaged. Three days later, &quot;Haguro&quot; fled Rabaul for Truk, arriving five days later, before further retreating to Sasebo for repairs. &quot;Haguro&quot; spent the rest of the year ferrying ground troops to Truk.

Throughout the early half of 1944, &quot;Haguro&quot; often transited between various Japanese occupied ports, but did not see combat. On the 13th of June, &quot;Haguro&quot; assembled in Tokyo as part of a large force intended to defend the Philippines against American recapture. &quot;Haguro&quot; departed two days later as an escort for the Japanese aircraft carriers, specifically supporting the new armored aircraft carrier &quot;Taihō&quot;. However, the force was immediately spotted by US submarines and tracked for the next few days. On the 19th, the force came under attack by the submarine USS &quot;Albacore&quot;, which unleashed a spread of six torpedoes, one of which hit &quot;Taihō&quot;. The damage was initially manageable, but damage control leaked gas fumes throughout the ship, causing the carrier to ignite in a fiery explosion and sink. &quot;Haguro&quot; assisted the sinking carrier, with the idea of &quot;Haguro&quot; taking the flat top under tow being abandoned as &quot;Taihō&quot; was left to sink. The destroyer &quot;Wakatsuki&quot; then ferried Admiral Ozawa from the sinking &quot;Taihō&quot; to &quot;Haguro&quot;, with the cruiser serving as the Japanese flagship for the rest of the day before Ozawa again transferred to the &quot;Zuikaku&quot;. &quot;Haguro&quot; the next day survived the follow up attacks by American aircraft carrier attacks, watching as the aircraft carrier &quot;Hiyō&quot; and two oil tankers were sunk.

&quot;Haguro&quot; returned to Okinawa on 22 June, and two days later was drydocked in Kure for refit, receiving 52 additional AA guns and upgraded type 13 and 22 radar. She was undocked six days later and immediately departed on a troop transport mission to Manila. She then spent July operating off Singapore, before spending the next few months on vigorous training duties.
=== Battle of Leyte Gulf ===

On 18 October 1944, &quot;Haguro&quot; departed with a massive Japanese fleet for Brunei, arriving two days later. The fleet, led by Admiral Takao Kurita, consisted of Japan&#x27;s two &quot;super battleships&quot; &quot;Yamato&quot; and &quot;Musashi&quot;, the largest and most powerful battleships in the world, supported by the older battleships &quot;Nagato, Kongō&quot;, and &quot;Haruna&quot;, ten heavy cruisers (including &quot;Haguro&quot;), two light cruisers, and 15 destroyers. Their plan was to intercept the extremely critical US invasion convoys heading through the Leyte Gulf for the Philippine invasion, as the Philippines served as a crucial supply point between the Dutch East Indies and Japan.

On the 22nd, the fleet departed Brunei for battle, &quot;Haguro&quot; serving in a line of cruisers following the battleships. However, in the darkness of the early morning of the 23rd, the plan immediately had its faults as the fleet was intercepted by the submarines USS &quot;Darter&quot; and USS &quot;Dace&quot;, which torpedoed and sank the heavy cruisers and respectively. Shortly afterwards, another torpedo salvo from &quot;Darter&quot; was let out, two of these torpedoes were nearing &quot;Haguro&quot;, forcing her to maneuver. She avoided damage. The same could not be said for the heavy cruiser &quot;Takao&quot;, hit by two torpedoes and forced to retire from the battle, taking the destroyers &quot;Asashimo&quot; and &quot;Naganami&quot; for protection.

With three heavy cruisers and two destroyers out of the fight, the fleet regrouped into two circular formations, &quot;Haguro&quot; serving in the leading group centering around &quot;Yamato&quot; in anticipation of air attacks. These fears proved correct when aircraft from five US fleet carriers raided the center force in the afternoon of the 24th. &quot;Haguro&quot; came under attack several times, being strafed and near missed, but was not directly hit and able to continue. This was because the majority of the air attacks were focused on &quot;Musashi&quot;, which over nine hours was hit by at least 17 bombs and 19-20 torpedoes, sinking by the bow that evening. Meanwhile, the &quot;Myōkō&quot; was hit by an ariel torpedo which dropped her speed to 15 knots and forced her to retire, resulting in Vice Admiral Hashimoto transpiring his flag to &quot;Haguro&quot; as she continued on with the fleet.

==== Battle off Samar ====
On the morning of the 25th, &quot;Haguro&quot; was underway when the centerforce happened to run into Taffy 3, a force of six US escort carriers, three destroyers, and four destroyer escorts. Admiral Kurita aboard &quot;Yamato&quot; mistook the escort carriers for full sized fleet carriers, and by size comparison the destroyers for cruisers and destroyer escorts for full sized destroyers, and ordered an all out attack. &quot;Haguro&quot; charged at the enemy fleet, hoping to catch up to the carriers, but at 7:23, at 10,300 yards, &quot;Haguro&quot; located a US &quot;cruiser&quot; attempting a torpedo charge and turned to engage. This &quot;cruiser&quot; was actually the destroyer USS &quot;Hoel&quot; attempting an attack on &quot;Kongō&quot;. On her first salvo, &quot;Haguro&quot; hit &quot;Hoel&quot; with two 8-inch (203 mm) shells, one hitting her bridge and the other her main rangefinder, destroying her mark 37 director, FD radar, PPI scope, machine gun control, and all voice radio communications. A second salvo left &quot;Haguro&#x27;s&quot; guns and hit &quot;Hoel&quot; with another 8-inch (203 mm) shell above her boiler room. &quot;Haguro&#x27;s&quot; third salvo then hit &quot;Hoel&quot; with three more 8-inch (203 mm) shells, the first two hit and destroyed the after generator and port engine, flooding the after engine and disabling all lighting aft. The third hit her No 3 handing room, starting a powder fire and destroying her turret 3. This damage prompted &quot;Hoel&quot; to unleashed five torpedoes and retreat, only to be hit by three more 8-inch (203 mm) shells, two shells hit both her turrets 4 and 5, taking both out of action, while the third destroyed two 20 mm AA guns. Finally, one of &quot;Haguro&#x27;s&quot; 5-inch (127 mm) secondary shells hit &quot;Hoel&#x27;s&quot; bow below the waterline, causing minor flooding.

With four salvos, &quot;Haguro&quot; hit &quot;Hoel&quot; with nine 8-inch (203 mm) shells and one 5-inch (127 mm) shell, destroying three of &quot;Hoel&#x27;s&quot; five 5-inch (127 mm) guns, her port engine, after generator, bridge, and main battery director, alongside other damage. Had &quot;Haguro&quot; correctly identified &quot;Hoel&quot; as a destroyer and not a cruiser, the hits to the turrets and handing room would have likely detonated her magazines and sank her then and there. However, &quot;Haguro&quot; fired armor piercing shells that overpenetrated &quot;Hoel&#x27;s&quot; unarmored hull without exploding. Still, the damage was significant, and the crippled &quot;Hoel&quot; continued on, only to be finished off by gunfire from &quot;Yamato&quot; and &quot;Nagato&quot;, scoring &quot;Haguro&quot; another kill.

After helping to sink &quot;Hoel, Haguro&quot; continued on to engage the escort carriers. At 7:50, &quot;Haguro&quot; engaged the escort carrier USS &quot;Fanshaw Bay&quot; at a distance of 17,200 yards, and succeeded in hitting her twice. Both 8-inch (203 mm) shells hit her flight deck near the bow, poking holes in the ship but not causing any significant damage, again due to the use of AP shells. Shortly after 8:00, &quot;Haguro&quot; switched fire to the escort carrier USS &quot;Kalinin Bay&quot;, with the carrier responding with her lone 5-inch (127 mm) gun. In a running gun duel, which the heavy cruiser &quot;Tone&quot; joined in at 8:18, &quot;Kalinin Bay&quot; was hit by three 8-inch (203 mm) shells, two hit the stern and caused minor flooding, while the third holed her bow. Two near misses also detonated underneath her fantail, causing more damage to &quot;Kalinin Bay&quot; than the direct hits and flooded her stern. In turn, &quot;Haguro&quot; was hit by two 5-inch (127 mm) shells from &quot;Kalinin Bay&quot;, neither of which caused notable damage. However, more concerningly at 8:25, planes from &quot;Fanshaw Bay&quot; hit &quot;Haguro&quot; with two 100 pound bombs, one of which hit the ammunition storage of her turret 2, killing 30 sailors and injuring 12, forcing the flooding of her turret 2 barbette to prevent a magazine detonation and taking the turret out of action for the rest of the battle.

&quot;Haguro&quot; temporally retreated to conduct repairs, and after 8:30 returned to the battlefield, where she joined &quot;Tone&quot; in continuing to pound &quot;Kalinin Bay&quot;. Closing to 10,100 yards, &quot;Haguro&quot; and &quot;Tone&quot; smacked &quot;Kalinin Bay&quot; with another eleven 8-inch (203 mm) shell hits, the first two punching through her hanger bay, while the third holed &quot;Kalinin Bay&quot; below the waterline, passed through the ship, and detonated after coming out the other side and hitting the water, effectively acting as a near miss. This shell disabled the ship&#x27;s fuel lines, shredded her forward bulkhead, and caused notable flooding. The next two hits again punched through the flight deck, while another again holed her bow above the waterline. The rest of the hits all plunged into &quot;Kalinin Bay&#x27;s&quot; flight deck, starting a fire which raged throughout the hanger bay. Alongside the direct hits, several damaging near misses resulted in seawater flooding the ship. In total, &quot;Kalinin Bay&quot; took fourteen direct 8-inch (203 mm) rounds, seven each from &quot;Haguro&quot; and &quot;Tone&quot;, a 14-inch (356 mm) shell from &quot;Haruna&quot;, and after the surface action two Kamikazes. Despite this, she would not sink, undoubtedly due to the use of armor piercing shells that failed to explode upon hitting the ship, as where high explosive shells would have detonated and sank the carrier.

Concluding her target had sunk, at 8:55, &quot;Haguro&quot; and &quot;Tone&quot; switched fire back to &quot;Fanshaw Bay&quot;, &quot;Tone&quot; hit &quot;Fanshaw Bay&quot; once, while &quot;Haguro&quot; hit her three times, the combined damage starting four small fires in her hanger bay as a result of cutting power lines and disabling one of her catapults. Finally, &quot;Haguro&quot; engaged the destroyer escort USS &quot;Dennis&quot;, and succeeded in hitting her with four 8-inch (203 mm) shells, resulting in minor flooding to &quot;Dennis&#x27;s&quot; bow and disabling her forward 5-inch (127 mm) gun turret.

==== Japanese retreat ====

&quot;Haguro&quot; fired her last salvo at 9:12. During the course of the engagement, she unleashed a total of 345 8-inch (203 mm) rounds. With the sinking of the heavy cruisers &quot;Chikuma, Chōkai,&quot; and &quot;Suzuya&quot; to air attacks, and the damaging of several more, while believing his ships had sunk at least two fleet carriers (if not more) and multiple cruisers and destroyers, Kurita ordered a withdraw, &quot;Haguro&quot; followed the other Japanese ships in retreating, during which &quot;Haguro&quot; spotted the formation of escort carriers that made up Taffy 2, but chose not to attack. Just before 11:00, aircraft from US carriers attacked, &quot;Haguro&#x27;s&quot; AA guns opened fire in response, but they failed to shoot down any planes. &quot;Haguro&quot; was undamaged as most of the planes ignored her and pounced on &quot;Yamato&quot;, which they too failed to damage. More air attacks ensued the next two days, sinking the light cruiser &quot;Noshiro&quot; and the destroyers &quot;Hayashimo, Fujunami&quot;, and &quot;Shiranui&quot;. However, &quot;Haguro&quot; was attacked by a single plane whose bomb landed a damaging near miss to her port side.

On 28 October 1944, &quot;Haguro&quot; returned to Brunei with the rest of the fleet. The battle was a devastating defeat, Japan lost 3 battleships, 1 aircraft carrier, 3 light carriers, 6 heavy cruisers, 3 light cruisers, and 11 destroyers, and in turn sank just 1 US light carrier, 2 escort carriers, 2 destroyers, and 2 destroyer escorts. This battle crippled the Japanese navy, rendering them unable to effectively operate as a fleet due to the oil fields of the Dutch East Indies being cut off and the sheer number of Japanese ships sunk in both the battle and its immediate aftermath. Despite helping to sink a destroyer and damaging several other ships, &quot;Haguro&quot; failed to engage her intended target of the American troop convoys, as with the rest of the fleet, rendering the battle of Leyte Gulf both a crushing tactical and strategic victory for allied forces.

===Battle of the Malacca Strait===
In May 1945, &quot;Haguro&quot; was the target of the British &quot;Operation Dukedom&quot; and was ambushed. The 26th Destroyer Flotilla found her with the destroyer just after midnight on 16 May 1945, and began the attack. During the battle, &quot;Kamikaze&quot; was lightly damaged, but &quot;Haguro&quot; was hit by gunfire and three Mark IX torpedoes from the British destroyers. She soon began to slow down and took a 30-degree list to port.

At 02:32, after receiving an hour of gunfire and around nine torpedoes, &quot;Haguro&quot; finally began to go down stern first in the Malacca Strait, off Penang; &quot;Kamikaze&quot; rescued 320 survivors, but 751 men, including Vice Admiral Hashimoto and Rear Admiral Sugiura, perished with her. Rear Admiral Sugiura was posthumously promoted to vice admiral on 16 May. &quot;Haguro&quot; was the last major Japanese warship to be sunk in a surface action during the war.

&quot;Haguro&quot; was stricken from the Navy list on 20 June 1945.
===Shipwreck===
On 4 March 2003, a group of specialized shipwreck divers operating off MV &quot;Empress&quot; discovered the wreck of &quot;Haguro&quot; in of water in the Malacca Strait south of Penang. The wreck sits upright, covered in places by discarded trawler nets with her hull opposite her forward turrets buried in the seabed to about her original waterline, but this level gradually reduces until at the stern her outer propellers and shafts are actually up above the seabed. Her foremast and the top half of the bridge structure are missing/collapsed. Her mainmast is collapsed. Her funnels are missing. British hits are visible in places. The bow section forward of No. 2 turret is badly damaged by torpedo hits. &quot;Haguro&quot;″s No. 1 turret and barbette are uprooted and lie against the hull, the rear of the turret on the starboard sea bed and the barrels pointing vertically towards the surface. Her No. 2 turret is trained to starboard at approximately the 1 o&#x27;clock position, with its roof collapsed and both barrels and breeches missing, as they were not replaced after being damaged by a bomb at the earlier Battle of Leyte Gulf. Her No. 3 turret&#x27;s guns are askew and trained to the port quarter at the 8 o&#x27;clock position. Both her stern main turrets&#x27; guns point almost directly astern. Just behind the No. 5 turret, the wreck is broken in half, although the very stern section is still &quot;partially&quot; attached and heavily damaged on the port side.

In 2010 a further diving expedition surveyed the wreck in detail. In 2014 the wreck was among five located in the region reported to have been heavily destroyed by illegal salvors.

==Notes==

==References==

===Books===
*
*
*
*Hara, Capt. Tameichi (1961). &quot;Japanese Destroyer Captain&quot;. New York: Ballantine Books. 

==External links==

*&quot;Haguro&quot;″s history in detail</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q898771" start="18" end="31" title="heavy cruiser" label="heavy cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="39" end="61" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090765" start="75" end="87" title="Mount Haguro" label="Mount Haguro"/>
<link wikidata="Q125863" start="91" end="110" title="Yamagata Prefecture" label="Yamagata Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="184" end="196" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982006" start="446" end="463" title="Naval gunfire support" label="shore bombardment"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="512" end="523" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="528" end="545" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="587" end="593" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q263142" start="647" end="669" title="Battle of the Java Sea" label="Battle of the Java Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="709" end="716" title="torpedo" label="torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="758" end="766" title="flagship" label="flagship"/>
<link wikidata="Q778129" start="772" end="785" title="light cruiser" label="light cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="796" end="805" title="destroyer" label="destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="987" end="1003" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q207165" start="1016" end="1039" title="Battle of the Coral Sea" label="Battle of the Coral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q173034" start="1076" end="1092" title="Battle of Midway" label="Battle of Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q696479" start="1127" end="1157" title="Battle of the Eastern Solomons" label="Battle of the Eastern Solomons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165486" start="1293" end="1322" title="battle of Empress Augusta Bay" label="battle of Empress Augusta Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q504347" start="1579" end="1607" title="Battle of the Philippine Sea" label="Battle of the Philippine Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891409" start="1660" end="1665" title="Japanese aircraft carrier Taihō" label="Taihō"/>
<link wikidata="Q308999" start="1691" end="1711" title="Battle of Leyte Gulf" label="Battle of Leyte Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="1727" end="1736" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="2107" end="2117" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="2136" end="2150" title="Malacca Strait" label="Malacca Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q898771" start="2422" end="2435" title="heavy cruiser" label="heavy cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630620" start="2809" end="2839" title="20 cm/50 3rd Year Type naval gun" label="20 cm (7.9-inch)/50 naval guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751683" start="3018" end="3061" title="Type 10 120 mm AA gun" label="Type 10 12 cm (4.7-inch) dual purposed guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q587366" start="3094" end="3114" title="Hotchkiss 13.2 mm machine gun" label="13.2 mm machine guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859765" start="3472" end="3505" title="12.7 cm/40 Type 89 naval gun" label="127 mm/40 dual purposed naval gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q14592615" start="4115" end="4124" title="Keel laying" label="laid down"/>
<link wikidata="Q183275" start="4132" end="4142" title="Mitsubishi" label="Mitsubishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="4155" end="4163" title="Nagasaki, Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="4182" end="4200" title="Ship naming and launching" label="launched and named"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="4228" end="4240" title="Ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q34479" start="4348" end="4364" title="Hirohito" label="Emperor Hirohito"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="4370" end="4374" title="Kobe" label="Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964588" start="4460" end="4474" title="Nomura Naokuni" label="Nomura Naokuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="4661" end="4678" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Sino-Japanese war"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4768" end="4780" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="4790" end="4812" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="4872" end="4883" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1696" start="5017" end="5024" title="Legazpi, Albay" label="Legaspi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13694" start="5045" end="5050" title="Davao Region" label="Davao"/>
<link wikidata="Q671079" start="5098" end="5114" title="Troopship" label="troop transports"/>
<link wikidata="Q860298" start="5163" end="5167" title="Jolo" label="Jolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q185000" start="5213" end="5217" title="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress" label="B-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="5344" end="5351" title="Celebes" label="Celebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14634" start="5497" end="5505" title="Makassar" label="Makassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83067" start="5534" end="5539" title="Timor" label="Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49364" start="5747" end="5755" title="Java Sea" label="Java Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970825" start="7800" end="7815" title="type 93 torpedo" label="type 93 torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q437690" start="8315" end="8330" title="Karel Doorman" label="Admiral Doorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375040" start="9518" end="9533" title="Eugène Lacomblé" label="Eugène Lacomblé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937266" start="10903" end="10911" title="Japanese destroyer Kawakaze (1936)" label="Kawakaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356815" start="10928" end="10936" title="Japanese destroyer Yamakaze (1936)" label="Yamakaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q15379" start="11300" end="11307" title="Kendari" label="Kendari"/>
<link wikidata="Q713516" start="11483" end="11498" title="Doolittle Raid" label="attack on Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q200578" start="11663" end="11671" title="Yokosuka" label="Yokosuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q36526" start="11786" end="11798" title="Port Moresby" label="Port Moresby"/>
<link wikidata="Q207165" start="11993" end="12016" title="Battle of the Coral Sea" label="Battle of the Coral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407298" start="12402" end="12413" title="Hashirajima" label="Hashirajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q173034" start="12437" end="12453" title="Battle of Midway" label="Battle of Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q47863" start="12538" end="12551" title="Midway Island" label="Midway Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q696479" start="12910" end="12940" title="battle of the Eastern Solomons" label="battle of the Eastern Solomons"/>
<link wikidata="Q369987" start="13094" end="13120" title="USS Enterprise (CV-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Enterprise&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140436" start="13180" end="13185" title="Japanese aircraft carrier Ryūjō" label="Ryūjō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138033" start="13213" end="13220" title="Japanese destroyer Mutsuki" label="Mutsuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q328000" start="13551" end="13557" title="Sasebo" label="Sasebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314453" start="13797" end="13822" title="Operation Ke" label="evacuation of Guadalcanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="13965" end="13977" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q390455" start="14966" end="14971" title="Japanese cruiser Agano" label="Agano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490069" start="14988" end="14994" title="Japanese cruiser Sendai" label="Sendai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16573" start="15031" end="15041" title="Japanese destroyer Shiratsuyu (1935)" label="Shiratsuyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937254" start="15055" end="15062" title="Japanese destroyer Shigure (1935)" label="Shigure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356866" start="15076" end="15084" title="Japanese destroyer Samidare (1935)" label="Samidare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597229" start="15098" end="15107" title="Japanese destroyer Hatsukaze" label="Hatsukaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463783" start="15121" end="15129" title="Japanese destroyer Naganami" label="Naganami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035199" start="15147" end="15156" title="Japanese destroyer Wakatsuki" label="Wakatsuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q201766" start="15283" end="15302" title="Bougainville Island" label="Bougainville Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q700032" start="15332" end="15353" title="battle of Savo Island" label="battle of Savo Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129569" start="15508" end="15533" title="USS Cleveland (CL-55)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cleveland&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868462" start="15541" end="15549" title="USS Columbia (CL-56)" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134608" start="15563" end="15569" title="USS Denver (CL-58)" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134522" start="15587" end="15597" title="USS Montpelier (CL-57)" label="Montpelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650069" start="16369" end="16390" title="USS Foote (DD-511)" label="USS &amp;quot;Foote&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471203" start="17844" end="17866" title="USS Spence" label="USS &amp;quot;Spence&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q127730" start="18294" end="18314" title="Arleigh Burke" label="Arleigh Burke&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468810" start="18352" end="18384" title="USS Charles Ausburne (DD-570)" label="USS &amp;quot;Charles Ausburne&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463546" start="18392" end="18399" title="USS Claxton (DD-571)" label="Claxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239245" start="18401" end="18406" title="USS Dyson" label="Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471240" start="18424" end="18430" title="USS Stanly" label="Stanly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089635" start="18893" end="18910" title="Bombing of Rabaul (November 1943)" label="bombing of Rabaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891409" start="19695" end="19700" title="Japanese aircraft carrier Taihō" label="Taihō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347169" start="19861" end="19885" title="USS Albacore (SS-218)" label="USS &amp;quot;Albacore&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035199" start="20311" end="20320" title="Japanese destroyer Wakatsuki" label="Wakatsuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q354197" start="20340" end="20353" title="Jisaburō Ozawa" label="Admiral Ozawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q543348" start="20685" end="20689" title="Japanese aircraft carrier Hiyō" label="Hiyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="21217" end="21223" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q187698" start="21276" end="21288" title="Takeo Kurita" label="Takao Kurita"/>
<link wikidata="Q215010" start="21356" end="21362" title="Japanese battleship Yamato" label="Yamato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127368" start="21379" end="21386" title="Japanese battleship Musashi" label="Musashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291512" start="21491" end="21497" title="Japanese battleship Nagato" label="Nagato"/>
<link wikidata="Q255306" start="21499" end="21504" title="Japanese battleship Kongō" label="Kongō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066681" start="21522" end="21528" title="Japanese battleship Haruna" label="Haruna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868745" start="22120" end="22142" title="USS Darter (SS-227)" label="USS &amp;quot;Darter&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136529" start="22147" end="22167" title="USS Dace (SS-247)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dace&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812747" start="22466" end="22471" title="Japanese cruiser Takao (1930)" label="Takao"/>
<link wikidata="Q946846" start="22566" end="22574" title="Japanese destroyer Asashimo" label="Asashimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463783" start="22591" end="22599" title="Japanese destroyer Naganami" label="Naganami"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348033" start="23985" end="24030" title="Battle off Samar" label="&amp;quot;Haguro&amp;quot; charged at the enemy fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392622" start="24252" end="24272" title="USS Hoel (DD-533)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hoel&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869320" start="26412" end="26439" title="USS Fanshaw Bay" label="USS &amp;quot;Fanshaw Bay&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870655" start="26744" end="26771" title="USS Kalinin Bay" label="USS &amp;quot;Kalinin Bay&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116806" start="26889" end="26893" title="Japanese cruiser Tone (1937)" label="Tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q133194" start="28946" end="28954" title="Kamikaze" label="Kamikaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868827" start="29581" end="29603" title="USS Dennis" label="USS &amp;quot;Dennis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072658" start="29996" end="30003" title="Japanese cruiser Chikuma (1938)" label="Chikuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091137" start="30005" end="30011" title="Japanese cruiser Chōkai" label="Chōkai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781617" start="30029" end="30035" title="Japanese cruiser Suzuya (1934)" label="Suzuya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574602" start="30788" end="30795" title="Japanese cruiser Noshiro" label="Noshiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463715" start="30827" end="30836" title="Japanese destroyer Hayashimo" label="Hayashimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465291" start="30838" end="30846" title="Japanese destroyer Fujinami" label="Fujunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990051" start="30864" end="30872" title="Japanese destroyer Shiranui (1938)" label="Shiranui"/>
<link wikidata="Q552392" start="31981" end="31998" title="Operation Dukedom" label="Operation Dukedom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32251" end="32268" title="British 21 inch torpedo#21 inch Mark IX" label="Mark IX torpedoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="32497" end="32511" title="Malacca Strait" label="Malacca Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="32517" end="32523" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q344529" start="32605" end="32614" title="Shintarō Hashimoto" label="Hashimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6349053" start="32632" end="32639" title="Kaju Sugiura" label="Sugiura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982656" start="32878" end="32887" title="Navy list" label="Navy list"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211696" wikidata="Q89889" url="?curid=211696" title="Günther Schifter">
<text>Günther Schifter (23 December 1923 – 11 August 2008) was an Austrian journalist, radio presenter and record collector.

Born in Vienna, Schifter started collecting 78s of the popular music of the interwar years already as a boy. American popular music was banned by the authorities as &quot;Negermusik&quot;; Schifter was arrested at a dance in December 1944 and interned at Oberlanzendorf until 2 April 1945.

After the war, he played jazz and swing music in occupied Austria, becoming, in 1949, one of the first disc jockeys on Austrian radio. From 1967 to 2000 Schifter had a weekly radio programme, &quot;Günther Schifters Schellacks&quot;, where he played 78s from his vast personal archives (including, for example, more than 100 cover versions of W.C. Handy&#x27;s &quot;St. Louis Blues&quot;) while always refusing to resort to reissues of older material on vinyl records, audiotape or, later, CDs. In between songs Schifter developed his style of giving enjoyable history lessons.

Ousted by the Austrian state radio (ORF) in 2000 due to a switch to the more commercial music radio format, Schifter continued broadcasting for a while from Bavaria, Germany. He died on 11 August 2008, aged 84, in Salzburg.

== See also ==
* Swing Movement in Nazi Germany

== References ==
==External links==
*Günther Schifter: &quot;Unterhaltung in den vierziger Jahren&quot; (&quot;Entertainment during the 1940s&quot;) (1998) (an essay very similar to his radio show; in German).
* &quot;Howdy! Günther Schifter&quot;, an Internet exhibition (2006) by the Austrian Mediathek.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q89889" start="0" end="16" title="Günther Schifter" label="Günther Schifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="60" end="67" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="128" end="134" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="164" end="167" title="gramophone record" label="78s"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="175" end="188" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974358" start="291" end="301" title="Negermusik" label="Negermusik"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="436" end="440" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q203775" start="445" end="456" title="swing music" label="swing music"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="514" end="525" title="disc jockey" label="disc jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="539" end="544" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="736" end="749" title="cover version" label="cover version"/>
<link wikidata="Q352967" start="754" end="764" title="W.C. Handy" label="W.C. Handy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086635" start="778" end="793" title="St. Louis Blues (song)" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="866" end="878" title="vinyl record" label="vinyl record"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="902" end="905" title="compact disc" label="CDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q379833" start="981" end="987" title="lesson" label="lesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q262386" start="1027" end="1030" title="ORF (broadcaster)" label="ORF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942427" start="1079" end="1090" title="music radio" label="music radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="1148" end="1155" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1157" end="1164" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="1205" end="1213" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q512889" start="1233" end="1263" title="Swing Movement in Nazi Germany" label="Swing Movement in Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q303798" start="1551" end="1569" title="Österreichische Mediathek" label="Austrian Mediathek"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211697" wikidata="Q642698" url="?curid=211697" title="Japanese destroyer Ikazuchi (1931)">
<text>was the twenty-third , or the third (if that sub-class is regarded as a separate class), built for the Imperial Japanese Navy in the inter-war period.

&quot;Ikazuchi&quot;, built at the Uraga Dock Company, was the third of the “Type III” improved series of &quot;Fubuki&quot; destroyers, incorporating a modified gun turret which could elevate her main battery of Type 3 127 mm 50 caliber naval guns to 75° as opposed to the original 40°, thus permitting the guns to be used as dual purpose guns against aircraft. &quot;Ikazuchi&quot; was laid down on 7 March 1930, launched on 22 October 1931 and commissioned on 15 August 1932.

==History==
Construction of the advanced &quot;Akatsuki&quot;-class destroyers was authorized as part of the Imperial Japanese Navy&#x27;s expansion program from fiscal 1923, intended to give Japan a qualitative edge with the world&#x27;s most modern ships. The &quot;Akatsuki&quot; class had performance that was a quantum leap over previous destroyer designs, so much so that they were designated . The large size, powerful engines, high speed, large radius of action and unprecedented armament gave these destroyers the firepower similar to many light cruisers in other navies. The &quot;Akatsuki&quot; sub-class was an improved version of the &quot;Fubuki&quot;, externally almost identical, but incorporating changes to her propulsion system.

==Operational history==
On completion, &quot;Ikazuchi&quot; was assigned to Destroyer Division 6 along with her sister ships, , , and , under the IJN 1st Fleet and participated in operations in the Second Sino-Japanese War.

===World War II===
At the time of the attack on Pearl Harbor, &quot;Ikazuchi&quot; was assigned to Destroyer Division 6 of Desron 1 of the IJN 1st Fleet, and had deployed from Mako Guard District to provide cover for landing operations in the Invasion of Hong Kong. After assisting the cruiser in sinking British gunboats HMS &quot;Cicada&quot; and HMS &quot;Robin&quot;, she helped secure Victoria Harbour. After the start of 1942, &quot;Ikazuchi&quot; deployed from Hong Kong to Davao, providing cover for landing operations during the Battle of Ambon, and Battle of Timor in the Netherlands East Indies.

On 2 March 1942, &quot;Ikazuchi&quot; rescued the remaining 400 odd survivors who were still in the water from the Royal Navy cruiser (some of whose survivors had been rescued on 1 March) and the destroyer , both ships having been sunk the previous day in the Second Battle of the Java Sea between Java and Borneo. The survivors had been adrift for some 20 hours, in rafts and life jackets or clinging to floats, many coated in oil and unable to see. Among the rescued was Lieutenant (later Sir) Sam Falle, an officer aboard &quot;Encounter&quot;, who would go on to become a British diplomat.
This humanitarian decision by Lieutenant Commander Shunsaku Kudō placed &quot;Ikazuchi&quot; at risk of submarine attack, and interfered with her fighting ability due to the sheer numbers of rescued sailors. The action was later the subject of a book and a 2007 TV programme.

&quot;Ikazuchi&quot; deployed from Ōminato Guard District in support of Admiral Boshiro Hosogaya’s Northern Force in the Aleutians campaign, patrolling waters around Kiska and Attu during June and July, and towing the damaged destroyer from Kiska back to Shimushu in the Chishima Islands. She continued to be assigned to northern patrols in the Chishima islands and Aleutian islands through the beginning of August.

From September, &quot;Ikazuchi&quot; was reassigned as escort for the new aircraft carriers and , which the destroyer accompanied to Truk, and missions in the Solomon Islands and back to Kure Naval District.

From October, &quot;Ikazuchi&quot; was used for numerous “Tokyo Express&quot; high speed transport runs throughout the Solomon Islands.

On 25 October 1942 &quot;Ikazuchi&quot;, , and conducted a daylight raid into the waters off Guadalcanal. In the resulting action, the fast minesweeper was damaged and fleet tug and patrol craft &quot;YP-284&quot; were sunk before the Japanese ships were driven off by US Marine coastal artillery. &quot;Ikazuchi&quot; suffered light damage from strafing attacks by Allied aircraft, with four crewmen killed.

&quot;Ikazuchi&quot; participated in the first night action of the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal on 13 November 1942. Stationed on the right flank of the battleships and with two other destroyers, she engaged several U.S. warships, among them the cruiser , and received hits to her forward gun mount, which caught fire. In the battle, 21 crewmen were killed and 20 injured, and she had to return to Truk for emergency repairs.

After repairs at Yokosuka Naval Arsenal from December to the end of February 1943, &quot;Ikazuchi&quot; returned to the north Pacific, and was present at the Battle of the Komandorski Islands on 26 March but saw no action. On 30 March, she collided with the destroyer , suffering moderate damage. &quot;Ikazuchi&quot; was reassigned to Desron 11 of the IJN 1st Fleet on 1 April 1943. After repairs at Yokosuka, she returned to Truk, and escorted convoys between Truk and the Japanese home islands until mid-April 1944.

Under the command of Lieutenant Commander Ikunaga Kunio, on 13 April 1944, while escorting the transport &quot;Sanyō Maru&quot; to Woleai, &quot;Ikazuchi&quot; was torpedoed and sunk by the submarine , approximately south-southwest of Guam at position . There were no survivors. On 10 June 1944, &quot;Ikazuchi&quot; was removed from the navy list.

==Notes==
==References==
*
* 
*
*

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="103" end="125" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813947" start="187" end="205" title="Uraga Dock Company" label="Uraga Dock Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="314" end="324" title="gun turret" label="gun turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548054" start="365" end="399" title="Type 3 127 mm 50 caliber naval gun" label="Type 3 127 mm 50 caliber naval gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310234" start="479" end="495" title="dual purpose gun" label="dual purpose gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q14592615" start="540" end="549" title="Keel laying" label="laid down"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="567" end="575" title="ceremonial ship launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="599" end="611" title="Ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q778129" start="1181" end="1194" title="light cruiser" label="light cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q923085" start="1493" end="1504" title="sister ship" label="sister ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596340" start="1527" end="1540" title="IJN 1st Fleet" label="IJN 1st Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="1579" end="1603" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="1644" end="1666" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15908936" start="1782" end="1801" title="Mako Guard District" label="Mako Guard District"/>
<link wikidata="Q697059" start="1849" end="1870" title="Battle of Hong Kong" label="Invasion of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="1911" end="1918" title="Royal Navy" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q214196" start="1919" end="1926" title="gunboat" label="gunboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q155643" start="1996" end="2012" title="Victoria Harbour" label="Victoria Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473" start="2087" end="2092" title="Davao City" label="Davao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392991" start="2144" end="2159" title="Battle of Ambon" label="Battle of Ambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440764" start="2165" end="2180" title="Battle of Timor" label="Battle of Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="2188" end="2211" title="Netherlands East Indies" label="Netherlands East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="2329" end="2339" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440134" start="2474" end="2503" title="Second Battle of the Java Sea" label="Second Battle of the Java Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="2512" end="2516" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="2521" end="2527" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429021" start="2710" end="2719" title="Sam Falle" label="Sam Falle"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2790" end="2797" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148649" start="2859" end="2872" title="Shunsaku Kudō" label="Shunsaku Kudō"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407436" start="3120" end="3142" title="Ōminato Guard District" label="Ōminato Guard District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866955" start="3165" end="3181" title="Boshiro Hosogaya" label="Boshiro Hosogaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q249708" start="3206" end="3224" title="Aleutians campaign" label="Aleutians campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096067" start="3251" end="3256" title="Kiska" label="Kiska"/>
<link wikidata="Q758260" start="3261" end="3265" title="Attu Island" label="Attu"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="3356" end="3372" title="Chishima Islands" label="Chishima Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="3451" end="3467" title="Aleutian islands" label="Aleutian islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593555" start="3635" end="3639" title="Chuuk Lagoon" label="Truk"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="3661" end="3676" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q705782" start="3689" end="3708" title="Kure Naval District" label="Kure Naval District"/>
<link wikidata="Q376667" start="3769" end="3782" title="Tokyo Express" label="Tokyo Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q192767" start="3941" end="3952" title="Guadalcanal" label="Guadalcanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q202527" start="3988" end="3999" title="Minesweeper (ship)" label="minesweeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="4117" end="4126" title="USMC" label="US Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358324" start="4127" end="4144" title="coastal artillery" label="coastal artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="4214" end="4220" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q696438" start="4325" end="4352" title="Naval Battle of Guadalcanal" label="Naval Battle of Guadalcanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="4410" end="4420" title="battleship" label="battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790777" start="4701" end="4723" title="Yokosuka Naval Arsenal" label="Yokosuka Naval Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q548819" start="4842" end="4875" title="Battle of the Komandorski Islands" label="Battle of the Komandorski Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q567984" start="5335" end="5341" title="Woleai" label="Woleai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="5439" end="5443" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982656" start="5542" end="5551" title="navy list" label="navy list"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="211704" wikidata="Q843915" url="?curid=211704" title="Extraterritoriality">
<text>In international law, extraterritoriality or exterritoriality is the state of being exempted from the jurisdiction of local law, usually as the result of diplomatic negotiations.

Historically, this primarily applied to individuals, as jurisdiction was usually claimed on peoples rather than on lands. Extraterritoriality can also be partly applied to physical places. For example, such is the immunity granted to diplomatic missions, military bases of foreign countries, or offices of the United Nations. The three most common cases recognized today internationally relate to the persons and belongings of foreign heads of state and government, the persons and belongings of ambassadors and other diplomats, and ships in international waters.

== Forms ==
In the past, pre-modern states generally claimed sovereignty over persons, creating something known as personal jurisdiction. As people move between borders, this led, in the framework of a territorial jurisdiction, to certain persons being under the laws of countries in which they did not reside. Extraterritoriality, in this sense, emerges from the interaction of these two conceptions of jurisdiction, personal and territorial, when laws are applied based on &quot;who&quot; a person is rather than &quot;where&quot; they are.

Extraterritoriality can now take various forms. Most famous are examples of diplomatic extraterritoriality, where diplomats and their belongings do not operate under the laws of their host nations, but rather, under the laws of the diplomat&#x27;s nation.

Similarly, many nations claim the right to prosecute foreign combatants and violators of human rights under doctrines of universal jurisdiction, irrespective of the nationality of those persons or the place in which the alleged crimes occurred. This extends to domestic criminal codes as well: for example, the People&#x27;s Republic of China claims the right to prosecute Chinese citizens for crimes committed abroad and Canada will prosecute sexual abuse of minors by a Canadian anywhere in the world. 

In practice, it means Chinese national security laws and restrictions on freedom of speech apply to every Chinese citizen across the world, while in Canada&#x27;s case, local ages of consent are ignored in favour of the Canadian law, meaning a Canadian engaging in sexual activity with a person above age of consent in a jurisdiction which is lower than Canada&#x27;s, they will be prosecuted according to Canadian law. For example, in Poland where the age of consent is 15, were a Canadian adult to participate in such an activity, they would be prosecuted in Canadian law regardless of what local law says, for a crime committed outside Canadian jurisdiction. The same applies to China: restrictions on freedom of speech, such as criticism of the Chinese Communist Party, will be prosecuted according to Chinese law when that person steps foot on Chinese soil, regardless if said comments were made by a student in London or Vancouver.

In some military and commercial agreements, nations cede legal jurisdiction for foreign bases or ports to other countries. For example, Japan cedes jurisdiction over American military bases on its soil in Okinawa to US military tribunals pursuant to a bilateral status of forces agreement.

In maritime law, a ship in international waters is governed by the laws of the jurisdiction in which that ship is registered. This can be conceived of as a form of extraterritoriality, where a nation&#x27;s jurisdiction extends beyond its border.

==Historical cases==

===14th century===
During the 13th and 14th centuries, the Italian sea republics of Genoa, Venice and Pisa obtained extraterritoriality for their merchants who operated in designated quarters (Pera and Galata) in the Byzantine capital, Constantinople, as well as in Egypt and the Barbary states.

===Ottoman Empire===
A series of capitulations were made in the form of treaties between the Sublime Porte and Western nations, from the sixteenth through the early nineteenth centuries. The legal impenetrability of the Ottoman legal code created during the Tanzimat era began to weaken continuously through the spread of European empires and the prevalence of legal positivism.

The laws and regulations created for Ottoman subjects to abide by often did not apply to European nationals conducting business and trade in the provinces of the empire, and thus various capitulations were brought into effect with respect to many foreign powers. The various overlapping governmental laws led to legal pluralism in which jurisdiction often was left up to the great powers to institute and organize their own legal structures to represent their citizens abroad.

The capitulations ceased to have effect in Turkey in 1923, by virtue of the Treaty of Lausanne, and in Egypt they were abolished by the Montreux Convention in 1949.

===British India===
During the Second World War, the military personnel of the Allied forces within the British Raj were governed by their own military codes by the &quot;Allied Forces Ordinance, 1942&quot; and the members of the United States Armed Forces were entirely governed by their own laws, even in criminal cases.

===United States===
Historically, the United States has had extraterritoriality agreements with 15 nations with non-Western legal systems: Algeria, Borneo, China, Egypt, Iran, Japan, South Korea, Libya, Madagascar, Morocco, Samoa, Tanzania, Thailand, Tunisia, and the Ottoman Empire. Americans in the military or civilians working on American military bases overseas generally have extraterritoriality, so they can only be tried by the U.S. military. This is regulated by a status of forces agreement.

===Canada===
Princess Margriet of the Netherlands was born on 19 January 1943 in Ottawa Civic Hospital in Ottawa, Ontario, as the family had been living in Canada since June 1940 after the occupation of the Netherlands by Nazi Germany. The maternity ward of Ottawa Civic Hospital in which Princess Margriet was born was temporarily declared to be extraterritorial by the Canadian government. Making the maternity ward outside of the Canadian domain caused it to be unaffiliated with any jurisdiction and technically international territory. This was done to ensure that the newborn would derive her citizenship from her mother only, thus making her solely Dutch, which could be very important had the child been male, and as such, the heir of Princess Juliana.

===East Asia===
The most famous cases of extraterritoriality in East Asia are those of 19th century China, Japan, and Siam, emerging from what is termed the &quot;unequal treaties&quot;. The practice of extraterritoriality, however, was not confined to the 19th century or these nations, as the monarchs and governments of pre-modern East Asia primarily claimed sovereignty over people rather than tracts of land.

====China====
The creation of extraterritoriality for treaty nations &quot;was not introduced into East Asia &quot;ex novo&quot;, but built atop a long-standing legal edifice&quot;. Jurisdiction in Qing China, with differential treatment for Han and Manchu subjects, was not determined by geography, but rather, by the identity of the subjects. For example, the ruling Manchu elite possessed legal privileges which placed them outside the jurisdiction of local ethnically Chinese administrators.

Before the 1842 Treaty of Nanking, which ended the First Opium War, foreign merchants were not satisfied with the state of the Qing legal system. Prior to the Treaty, British merchants were only able to trade in the region of Canton, exclusively with Chinese merchants called Cohongs. Chinese merchants benefitted significantly out of the deal, contributing to the British dissatisfaction with the Chinese. British merchants were &quot;suspicious of what they regarded as a tendency in the Qing legal order to impose collective responsibility; they were also resentful of the Qing practice of meting out capital punishment in cases of accidental manslaughter&quot;. After the &quot;Lady Hughes&quot; affair, a controversial 1784 incident where a British sailor was executed for fatally wounding two Chinese subjects while firing a gun salute, East India Company officials generally spirited away Britons before Qing officials could react.

Grants of extraterritoriality were regular in China. In the 1830s, when the Qing government concluded a treaty with the Uzbek khanate of Khoqand, it granted extraterritorial privileges to its traders. And in dealing with foreign merchants through the centuries, the Qing government rarely attempted to impose jurisdiction based on territorial sovereignty, instead entrusting the punishment of foreigners to the respective authority in practically all cases except homicide.

At the negotiations of the Treaty of Nanjing, Qing negotiators readily extended a grant of extraterritoriality. Cassel writes &quot;the imperial commissioner and Manchu nobleman Qiying readily conceded extraterritorial privileges to the British in an exchange of notes with Pottinger [the British plenipotentiary] at the time of the conclusion of the treaty&quot;. This was in line with Qing practices at the time, where sovereignty was held by peoples rather than imposed on lands.

A more formal declaration of extraterritoriality was concluded in the 1843 Supplementary Treaty of the Bogue, which established that &quot;Britons were to be punished according to English law and Chinese were to be &#x27;tried and punished by their own laws&#x27;&quot;. These provisions only applied to the treaty ports, since foreigners were barred from entering the Chinese interior.

Under imperial edict earlier in the year, these privileges were extended to most western countries. Other nations wanted reassurances and guarantees. For example, the United States negotiated the 1844 Treaty of Wanghia, which stated in article 21:

The Wanghia treaty included an exception for American trading in opium and also subjected American ships trading outside treaty ports to confiscation by the Chinese government in articles 33 and 3. Similarly, the French also pursued protections in the Treaty of Huangpu, which further introduced a distinction between criminal and civil jurisdiction (non-existent in Qing dynasty law) and gave Frenchmen the full protections of Chinese law outside concessionary areas.

The 1858 Sino-British Treaty of Tientsin, which ended the Second Opium War, expanded the rights of western visitors. They were permitted to enter the Chinese interior after passporting. However, extraterritorial rights were not extended outside the treaty ports. Similar rights were granted to the interested western powers due to the &quot;most-favoured-nation&quot; clause: all privileges the Qing empire granted to one power were automatically granted to the others. In 1868, when the Tientsin treaties were renegotiated, British merchants clamoured to lift the travel restrictions on the Chinese interior. The Qing position was adamantly opposed, unless extraterritoriality was also abolished. No compromise was reached; and the Qing government was successful in preventing foreigners from visiting the Chinese interior with extraterritorial privileges.

Extraterritorial rights were not limited to Western nations. Under the 1871 Sino-Japanese Friendship and Trade Treaty, Japan and China granted each other reciprocal extraterritorial rights. China itself imposed reciprocal extraterritoriality rights for its own citizens in Joseon Korea. However, in 1895, under the Treaty of Shimonoseki after the First Sino-Japanese War, China gave up its extraterritorial rights in Japan, without reciprocity.

===== International Mixed Court =====
By far the most important of the treaty ports established after 1842 was Shanghai, where the vague extraterritoriality provisions of the various treaties were most sophisticatedly implemented. The two main courts judging extraterritorial cases were the Shanghai Mixed Court and the British Supreme Court for China. Similar courts were established for treaty countries, e.g. the United States Court for China. These had jurisdiction over the concession areas, which formally remained under Qing sovereignty. Initially, Chinese people who committed crimes in, say, the British zone, were remanded to Chinese authorities.

===== End of extraterritoriality in China =====
By the early 20th century, some Western powers were willing to relinquish extraterritorial rights given the improved state of Chinese legal reform. For example, the 1902 Sino-British &quot;Mackay treaty&quot; article 12 read:

Qing law did not make a formal distinction between criminal and civil law. While efforts at legal reform were pursued in earnest in the last decade of the Qing dynasty, what was actually achieved failed to meaningfully address this lack of law in the areas of contracts, trade, or commerce.

After the collapse of the Chinese government in 1911 and the ensuing administrative vacuum, the Chinese members of the Mixed Court were subsequently appointed by the Western powers, placing all inhabitants of the international settlement under &quot;de facto&quot; foreign jurisdiction. The success of the Northern Expedition in strengthening the authority of the Chinese republic in the mid-1920s led many governments to give up their more minor treaty ports without a fight. However, the treaty powers were unwilling to give up Shanghai, or their privileges within it, which remained the most prominent economic centre and treaty port. It was only after a confrontation between Shanghai police and Nationalist demonstrators in 1925 that Chinese authorities refused to enforce the verdicts of the Mixed Court; this led to its disestablishment in 1927 and replacement with a Chinese-run local court.

In 1921, at the Conference on the Limitation of Armament in Washington, an international treaty called the Nine-Power Treaty was signed which expressed the willingness of the parties to end extraterritoriality in China once a competent legal system was established by China. As a result, a commission was established in 1926 that published a detailed report which contained its findings and recommendations for the Chinese legal system.

Extraterritoriality in China for non-diplomatic personnel ended at various times in the 20th century. Germany and Austria-Hungary lost their rights in China in 1917 after China declared war on them. The Soviet Union made secret agreements that kept its rights until 1960, although it publicly falsely stated that it gave them up in 1924.

In 1937, the status of the various foreign powers was thus:

In 1929 the Nationalist government announced its goal of ending extraterritoriality completely. Negotiations with Britain, the main holder of such rights, went slowly. They ended with the Japanese invasion of 1937 when Japan seized Shanghai and the main treaty ports where extraterritoriality was in operation. When both countries declared war on Japan in late 1941, they became formal allies of China and made ending extraterritoriality an urgent goal which both the U.S. and Britain fulfilled with the treaties they signed with China in 1943.

===== Legacy =====

The legacy of this for jurisdictional control continues to the modern day. Cassel writes, &quot;extraterritoriality has left many policy-makers in mainland China with a legacy of deeply felt suspicions toward international law, international organisations, and more recently, human rights&quot;. With part of its legitimacy resting on claims to strengthening national sovereignty and territorial integrity, the Constitution of the People&#x27;s Republic of China explicitly states that foreigners must abide by PRC law. And the PRC government claims the right, under article 10 of its criminal code, to prosecute Chinese citizens for crimes against the criminal code which are committed abroad, even if already punished for the crime. These emerge from significant claims of the importance of national sovereignty, a reaction to its abridgement in the past, where almost no nations emphasise the importance of their sovereignty more than China does today.

====Japan====
Japan recognized extraterritoriality in the treaties concluded with the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Netherlands, and Russia in 1858, in connection with the concept of the &quot;most favoured nation&quot;. Various commercial treaties extended extraterritorial protections in Japan with various parties, including with Peru, in 1873. Most countries exercised extraterritorial jurisdiction through consular courts. Britain established the British Court for Japan in 1879.

In 1887, only 2,389 non-Chinese foreigners lived in Japan, with strict limitations on freedom of movement. These limitations meant that foreigners in Japan were not able to commit crime with impunity, in contrast with China, where foreigners were granted the ability to travel to the interior after passporting. Rather, it was in the context of the Japanese state&#x27;s desire to eliminate all competing jurisdictions and calls for legal reform based on the models of those jurisdictions that Japan&#x27;s government desired to abolish foreign courts.

Having convinced the Western powers that its legal system was &quot;sufficiently modern&quot;, Japan succeeded in reforming its unequal status with Britain through the 1894 Anglo-Japanese Treaty of Commerce and Navigation, in which London would relinquish its Japanese extraterritorial rights within five years. Similar treaties were signed with other extraterritorial powers around the same time. These treaties all came into effect in 1899, ending extraterritoriality in Japan.

After the Allied victory in 1945, the Mutual Security Assistance Pact, and its successor treaties, between the United States, to the modern day, grant US military personnel on American bases in Okinawa extraterritorial privileges.

====Siam====
King Mongkut (Rama IV) of Siam signed the Bowring Treaty granting extraterritorial rights to Britain in 1855. Sir Robert Hermann Schomburgk, British Consul-General from 1859 to 1864, gives an account of his judicial training and responsibilities in a letter to his cousin dated 6 September 1860. Unequal treaties were later signed with 12 other European powers and with Japan. Extraterritoriality came to end in 1917 with respect to the German Empire and Austria-Hungary.

In 19251926, the treaties were revised to provide for consular jurisdiction to be terminated, and nationals of the parties to the treaty were to come under the jurisdiction of Thai courts after the introduction of all Thai legal codes and a period of 5 years thereafter. By 1930, extraterritoriality was in effect no longer in force. After absolute monarchy was replaced by constitutional monarchy in the bloodless Siamese revolution of 1932, the constitutional government promulgated a set of legal codes, setting the stage for new treaties signed in 19371938 which canceled extraterritorial rights completely.

== Current examples ==
Contrary to popular belief, diplomatic missions do not generally enjoy full extraterritorial status and are not sovereign territory of the represented state.

=== Countries ceding some control but not sovereignty ===
Countries which have ceded some control over their territory (for example, the right to enter at will for law enforcement purposes) without ceding sovereignty include:
* Extraterritorial properties of the Holy See in Italy
* Headquarters of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta in Rome
* Fort St. Angelo in Malta (only partial)
* the headquarters of the European Commission in Brussels, Belgium (as well as the building of the European Parliament there)
* the seat of the European Parliament in Strasbourg, France
* United Nations headquarters in New York, United Nations offices in Geneva, Vienna, Bonn, Nairobi, The Hague (International Court of Justice), Hamburg (International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea), Copenhagen and elsewhere.
* CERN (European Organization for Nuclear Research) – for convenience, some facilities that cross into France are under Swiss jurisdiction
* European Patent Office in Munich, Berlin, and The Hague
* International Maritime Organization Headquarters in London
* Juxtaposed controls for the Channel Tunnel. The United Kingdom have pre-boarding passport checks in France and Belgium, and France or Belgium operate passport checks in the UK.
* the Pays Quint is located on Spanish soil but rented by France since an 1856 treaty
* Saimaa Canal is partly located in Russia, but the Russian part is rented by Finland
* In Svalbard, which is part of Norway, other countries have the right to extract some natural resources and build establishments for this
* U.S.–Japan Status of Forces Agreement
* Japan–Djibouti Status of Forces Agreement
* Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe, the military headquarters of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, in Belgium
* Khmeimim Air Base in Syria is leased to the Russian Air Force for a period of 49 years, with the Russian Federation having extraterritorial jurisdiction over the air base and its personnel.
* Tomb of Suleyman Shah of Turkey in Syria
* Various free ports exist outside the main customs territory of their host country.
* The countries pavilions of Venice Biennale
* The Russian Federation maintains a lease until 2050 on the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan in the city of Baikonur

=== Transfers of ownership of land ===
Special concessions are sometimes made for cemeteries and memorials. National governments can also own property or special concessions in other host countries without gaining any sort of legal jurisdiction or sovereignty, in which case they are treated similarly to other private property owners. For example, ownership of land under the John F. Kennedy Memorial at Runnymede, England, was given to the United States by the United Kingdom, but required an Act of Parliament (the John F. Kennedy Memorial Act 1964) to do so, because the land was part of the Crown Estate, which cannot otherwise be given away for free. Another example of these types of special concessions are the numerous cemeteries and monuments administered by the American Battle Monuments Commission. These are located in Belgium, Cuba, France, Gibraltar, Italy, Luxembourg, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, Panama, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, the Solomon Islands, Tunisia, and the United Kingdom. The most popular site among these is the Normandy American Cemetery and Memorial in France. Land under the Canadian National Vimy Memorial and surrounding 100 hectares was gifted by France to Canada.

A similar case is the French domains of St Helena: the Government of France bought land property on St. Helena island to commemorate the exile of Napoleon Bonaparte there.

=== Internal cases ===
Internal cases (both parties are part of the same unitary sovereign state but have different border control and legal systems):
* Shenzhen Bay Port in Shenzhen, Guangdong where an area in a port is leased by Shenzhen to the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and Hong Kong law applies. Although both jurisdictions, Shenzhen and Hong Kong, are in the same country, Hong Kong maintains a common law legal system different from the civil law system in Mainland China. Hong Kong law now applies in the port area.
* Hengqin Campus of University of Macau in Zhuhai, Guangdong, administered by Macau SAR in a situation similar to above
* Macau half of Hengqin Border Crossing, adjacent to above

==Obligations==
==See also==
* Akmal Shaikh
* Antarctic Treaty System
* Basilica Major
* British Supreme Court for China and Japan
* British Court for Japan
* Demilitarized zone
* Diplomatic immunity
*Embassy church
* Enclave and exclave
* EuroAirport Basel-Mulhouse-Freiburg
* Extraterritorial jurisdiction
* Extraterritorial operation
* Harris Treaty
* Imperialism in Asia
* International waters
* International zone
* Law of the Sea
* Moon Treaty
* Neutral territory
* Outer Space Treaty
* Prerogative
* &quot;Rasul v. Bush&quot;
* Status of forces agreement
* Terra nullius
* U.S.–Japan Status of Forces Agreement
* United Nations Headquarters
* List of territories governed by the United Nations

==References==
==Further reading==
* Bickers, Robert, and Isabella Jackson, eds. &quot;Treaty Ports in Modern China: Law, Land and Power&quot; (Routledge, 2016).
* Chan, K. Chan. &quot;The Abrogation of British Extraterritoriality in China 1942-43: A Study of Anglo-American-Chinese Relations.&quot; &quot;Modern Asian Studies&quot; 11.2 (1977): 257-291 online.
* , Vol. 1: ; Vol. 2: ; Vol. 3: 
* Davids, Jules, and Jonathan M. Nielson. &quot;Extraterritoriality.&quot; in &quot;Encyclopedia of American Foreign Policy&quot; ed. by Alexander DeConde et al. (2002) 2:81–92.
* “Developments in the Law: Extraterritoriality.” &quot;Harvard Law Review&quot;, vol. 124, no. 5, 2011, pp. 1226–1304. www.jstor.org/stable/25800158 online
* Fenwick, C. G. &quot;The Nine Power Treaty and the Present Crisis in China.&quot; &quot;American Journal of International Law&quot; 31.4 (1937): 671-674. online
* Kayaoglu, Turan. &quot;Legal imperialism: sovereignty and extraterritoriality in Japan, the Ottoman Empire, and China&quot; (Cambridge UP, 2010).
* Keeton, George W. &quot;The development of extraterritoriality in China&quot; (2 vol 1928). comprehensive on China and briefer coverage across the world in vol 2 pp 155–172. vol 2 online
* Liu, Shih Shun. &quot;Extraterritoriality, Its Rise and Its Decline&quot; (1925) online; comprehensive scholarly history in global history perspective.
* Scully, Eileen P. &quot;Historical Wrongs and Human Rights in Sino-Foreign Relations: The Legacy of Extraterritoriality.&quot; &quot;Journal of American-East Asian Relations&quot; 9.1-2 (2000): 129-146.
* Thomson, Janice E. &quot;Mercenaries, Pirates, and Sovereigns: State-Building and Extraterritorial Violence in Early Modern Europe&quot; (Princeton UP, 1994) online

==External links==

* The Extraterritorial Voting Rights and Restrictions Dataset (1950–2020)
* Columbia Encyclopedia—&quot;Extraterritoriality&quot;
* Report of the Extraterritoriality Commission in China (1926)
* Law Ministry of India </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="3" end="20" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q843915" start="22" end="41" title="Extraterritoriality" label="extraterritoriality"/>
<link wikidata="Q843915" start="45" end="61" title="Extraterritoriality" label="exterritoriality"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="102" end="114" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="414" end="432" title="diplomatic mission" label="diplomatic mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q245016" start="435" end="448" title="military base" label="military base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="490" end="504" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="615" end="629" title="heads of state" label="heads of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="634" end="644" title="head of government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q121998" start="676" end="686" title="ambassador" label="ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q193391" start="698" end="706" title="diplomat" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25855" start="722" end="742" title="international waters" label="international waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170598" start="860" end="881" title="personal jurisdiction" label="personal jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q753022" start="1434" end="1448" title="Diplomatic immunity" label="do not operate"/>
<link wikidata="Q928801" start="1667" end="1689" title="universal jurisdiction" label="universal jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1857" end="1888" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="1990" end="2012" title="sexual abuse of minors" label="sexual abuse of minors"/>
<link wikidata="Q20640049" start="2082" end="2104" title="National Security Law of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="national security laws"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2109" end="2142" title="restrictions on freedom of speech" label="restrictions on freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="2801" end="2824" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="3196" end="3203" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933804" start="3207" end="3228" title="Military tribunals in the United States" label="US military tribunals"/>
<link wikidata="Q382113" start="3285" end="3297" title="maritime law" label="maritime law"/>
<link wikidata="Q288587" start="3619" end="3632" title="Thalassocracy" label="sea republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="3636" end="3641" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="3643" end="3649" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13375" start="3654" end="3658" title="Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217411" start="3745" end="3749" title="Beyoğlu" label="Pera"/>
<link wikidata="Q501817" start="3754" end="3760" title="Galata" label="Galata"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="3788" end="3802" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728629" start="3870" end="3895" title="Capitulations of the Ottoman Empire" label="A series of capitulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q18871" start="3942" end="3955" title="Sublime Porte" label="Sublime Porte"/>
<link wikidata="Q330961" start="4107" end="4115" title="Tanzimat" label="Tanzimat"/>
<link wikidata="Q644971" start="4210" end="4226" title="legal positivism" label="legal positivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="4750" end="4756" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q193258" start="4783" end="4801" title="Treaty of Lausanne" label="Treaty of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="4810" end="4815" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906418" start="4843" end="4862" title="Montreux Convention Regarding the Abolition of the Capitulations in Egypt" label="Montreux Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4904" end="4920" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="4952" end="4965" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="4977" end="4988" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="5103" end="5129" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="5336" end="5343" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="5345" end="5351" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="5393" end="5398" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="5400" end="5410" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="5421" end="5426" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="5428" end="5436" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="5438" end="5446" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="5448" end="5455" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="5465" end="5479" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q931855" start="5671" end="5697" title="status of forces agreement" label="status of forces agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q268821" start="5713" end="5749" title="Princess Margriet of the Netherlands" label="Princess Margriet of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145270" start="5781" end="5802" title="The Ottawa Hospital" label="Ottawa Civic Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5889" end="5934" title="Netherlands in World War II#German Occupation" label="occupation of the Netherlands by Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q131538562" start="6020" end="6063" title="Extraterritoriality of Princess Margriet&amp;#x27;s birth" label="temporarily declared to be extraterritorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152565" start="6216" end="6239" title="international territory" label="international territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q154946" start="6316" end="6326" title="Juliana of the Netherlands" label="her mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q864737" start="6625" end="6641" title="Unequal treaty" label="unequal treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="7075" end="7085" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing China"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="7119" end="7122" title="Han Chinese" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="7127" end="7133" title="Manchu people" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q238262" start="7390" end="7407" title="Treaty of Nanking" label="Treaty of Nanking"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="7425" end="7440" title="First Opium War" label="First Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q114152574" start="8050" end="8080" title="Lady Hughes Affair" label="&amp;quot;Lady Hughes&amp;quot; affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143986" start="8205" end="8215" title="gun salute" label="gun salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="8217" end="8235" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q238262" start="8816" end="8833" title="Treaty of Nanking" label="Treaty of Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q697733" start="8967" end="8973" title="Keying (official)" label="Qiying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607189" start="9063" end="9072" title="Henry Pottinger" label="Pottinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368222" start="9362" end="9381" title="Treaty of the Bogue" label="Treaty of the Bogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="9453" end="9464" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326406" start="9862" end="9879" title="Treaty of Wanghia" label="Treaty of Wanghia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194381" start="10162" end="10179" title="Treaty of Huangpu" label="Treaty of Huangpu"/>
<link wikidata="Q612577" start="10402" end="10420" title="Treaty of Tientsin" label="Treaty of Tientsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q418151" start="10438" end="10454" title="Second Opium War" label="Second Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q701091" start="11315" end="11356" title="Sino-Japanese Friendship and Trade Treaty" label="Sino-Japanese Friendship and Trade Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="11358" end="11363" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="11512" end="11524" title="Joseon" label="Joseon Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q269655" start="11554" end="11575" title="Treaty of Shimonoseki" label="Treaty of Shimonoseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="11586" end="11609" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q101242840" start="11976" end="11996" title="Shanghai Mixed Court" label="Shanghai Mixed Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001101" start="12005" end="12036" title="British Supreme Court for China" label="British Supreme Court for China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889672" start="12101" end="12130" title="United States Court for China" label="United States Court for China"/>
<link wikidata="Q18331179" start="12580" end="12593" title="Mackay Treaty" label="Mackay treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="13216" end="13235" title="Northern Expedition" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050213" start="13827" end="13881" title="Washington Naval Conference" label="Conference on the Limitation of Armament in Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659185" start="13918" end="13935" title="Nine-Power Treaty" label="Nine-Power Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="14363" end="14378" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q19429115" start="15117" end="15121" title="Treaty between the United States and China for the Relinquishment of Extraterritorial Rights in China" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q4714539" start="15126" end="15133" title="Sino-British Treaty for the Relinquishment of Extra-Territorial Rights in China" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q200800" start="15626" end="15677" title="Constitution of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Constitution of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q835068" start="15726" end="15733" title="Law of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="PRC law"/>
<link wikidata="Q936190" start="15743" end="15757" title="Government of China" label="PRC government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974471" start="15828" end="15844" title="Chinese nationality law" label="Chinese citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="16301" end="16312" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="16318" end="16324" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q827518" start="16378" end="16398" title="most favoured nation" label="most favoured nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135274" start="16596" end="16610" title="consular court" label="consular court"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080515" start="16637" end="16660" title="British Court for Japan" label="British Court for Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344824" start="16757" end="16776" title="freedom of movement" label="freedom of movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915092" start="17398" end="17446" title="Anglo-Japanese Treaty of Commerce and Navigation" label="Anglo-Japanese Treaty of Commerce and Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="17900" end="17907" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q312849" start="17956" end="17963" title="Mongkut" label="Mongkut"/>
<link wikidata="Q745728" start="17993" end="18007" title="Bowring Treaty" label="Bowring Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q62118" start="18065" end="18090" title="Robert Hermann Schomburgk" label="Robert Hermann Schomburgk"/>
<link wikidata="Q864737" start="18247" end="18263" title="Unequal treaty" label="Unequal treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="18388" end="18401" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="18406" end="18421" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="18764" end="18781" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="18798" end="18821" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120252" start="18839" end="18865" title="Siamese revolution of 1932" label="Siamese revolution of 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="19088" end="19106" title="diplomatic mission" label="diplomatic mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636502" start="19464" end="19490" title="properties of the Holy See" label="properties of the Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="19494" end="19499" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190353" start="19522" end="19555" title="Sovereign Military Order of Malta" label="Sovereign Military Order of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207146" start="19566" end="19581" title="Fort St. Angelo" label="Fort St. Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="19632" end="19651" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="19655" end="19663" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="19705" end="19724" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="19750" end="19769" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="19773" end="19783" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11297" start="19794" end="19821" title="United Nations headquarters" label="United Nations headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q594846" start="19861" end="19867" title="Palais des Nations" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q686431" start="19869" end="19875" title="Vienna International Centre" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="19877" end="19881" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="19883" end="19890" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="19892" end="19901" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="19903" end="19933" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="19936" end="19943" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q639118" start="19945" end="19990" title="International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea" label="International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="19993" end="20003" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="20021" end="20025" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132151" start="20160" end="20182" title="European Patent Office" label="European Patent Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="20186" end="20192" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="20206" end="20215" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="20218" end="20253" title="International Maritime Organization" label="International Maritime Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6319135" start="20279" end="20298" title="Juxtaposed controls" label="Juxtaposed controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554283" start="20462" end="20472" title="Pays Quint" label="Pays Quint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129324" start="20544" end="20556" title="Saimaa Canal" label="Saimaa Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="20633" end="20641" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="20660" end="20666" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863500" start="20769" end="20806" title="U.S.–Japan Status of Forces Agreement" label="U.S.–Japan Status of Forces Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20809" end="20850" title="Japan–Djibouti Status of Forces Agreement" label="Japan–Djibouti Status of Forces Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432908" start="20853" end="20894" title="Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe" label="Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="20929" end="20963" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="20968" end="20975" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q21582584" start="20978" end="20995" title="Khmeimim Air Base" label="Khmeimim Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="20999" end="21004" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q209833" start="21022" end="21039" title="Russian Air Force" label="Russian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="21075" end="21093" title="Russia" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818644" start="21170" end="21191" title="Tomb of Suleyman Shah" label="Tomb of Suleyman Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="21221" end="21230" title="free port" label="free port"/>
<link wikidata="Q218631" start="21255" end="21272" title="customs territory" label="customs territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q205751" start="21325" end="21340" title="Venice Biennale" label="Venice Biennale"/>
<link wikidata="Q177477" start="21402" end="21421" title="Baikonur Cosmodrome" label="Baikonur Cosmodrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21838" end="21862" title="Runnymede#John F. Kennedy Memorial" label="John F. Kennedy Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483542" start="21866" end="21875" title="Runnymede" label="Runnymede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="21956" end="21973" title="Act of Parliament" label="Act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21979" end="22012" title="John F. Kennedy Memorial Act 1964" label="John F. Kennedy Memorial Act 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469078" start="22057" end="22069" title="Crown Estate" label="Crown Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q463527" start="22234" end="22270" title="American Battle Monuments Commission" label="American Battle Monuments Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="22293" end="22300" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="22302" end="22306" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="22308" end="22314" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="22316" end="22325" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="22327" end="22332" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="22334" end="22344" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="22346" end="22352" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="22354" end="22361" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="22367" end="22378" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="22380" end="22386" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="22388" end="22404" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="22410" end="22421" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="22427" end="22442" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="22444" end="22451" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="22461" end="22475" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134416" start="22518" end="22557" title="Normandy American Cemetery and Memorial" label="Normandy American Cemetery and Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561040" start="22584" end="22615" title="Canadian National Vimy Memorial" label="Canadian National Vimy Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034662" start="22700" end="22727" title="French domains of St Helena" label="French domains of St Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="22824" end="22842" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972370" start="23004" end="23021" title="Shenzhen Bay Port" label="Shenzhen Bay Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="23025" end="23033" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="23035" end="23044" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="23098" end="23137" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong Special Administrative Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109938" start="23142" end="23155" title="Law of Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong law"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="23328" end="23342" title="Mainland China" label="Mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563050" start="23408" end="23427" title="University of Macau" label="University of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q59095" start="23431" end="23437" title="Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="23439" end="23448" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="23466" end="23475" title="Macau" label="Macau SAR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23524" end="23547" title="Hengqin Border Crossing" label="Hengqin Border Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q420218" start="23599" end="23611" title="Akmal Shaikh" label="Akmal Shaikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q182814" start="23614" end="23637" title="Antarctic Treaty System" label="Antarctic Treaty System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846867" start="23640" end="23654" title="Basilica Major" label="Basilica Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001101" start="23657" end="23698" title="British Supreme Court for China and Japan" label="British Supreme Court for China and Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080515" start="23701" end="23724" title="British Court for Japan" label="British Court for Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41691" start="23727" end="23745" title="Demilitarized zone" label="Demilitarized zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q753022" start="23748" end="23767" title="Diplomatic immunity" label="Diplomatic immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610799" start="23769" end="23783" title="Embassy church" label="Embassy church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="23786" end="23805" title="Enclave and exclave" label="Enclave and exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q156971" start="23808" end="23843" title="EuroAirport Basel-Mulhouse-Freiburg" label="EuroAirport Basel-Mulhouse-Freiburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="23846" end="23875" title="Extraterritorial jurisdiction" label="Extraterritorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206970" start="23878" end="23904" title="Extraterritorial operation" label="Extraterritorial operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194699" start="23907" end="23920" title="Harris Treaty" label="Harris Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234208" start="23923" end="23942" title="Western imperialism in Asia" label="Imperialism in Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25855" start="23945" end="23965" title="International waters" label="International waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152565" start="23968" end="23986" title="International zone" label="International zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088099" start="23989" end="24003" title="Law of the Sea" label="Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q281140" start="24006" end="24017" title="Moon Treaty" label="Moon Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q218719" start="24020" end="24037" title="Neutral territory" label="Neutral territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q256608" start="24040" end="24058" title="Outer Space Treaty" label="Outer Space Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758424" start="24061" end="24072" title="Prerogative" label="Prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295336" start="24081" end="24094" title="Rasul v. Bush" label="Rasul v. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q931855" start="24103" end="24129" title="Status of forces agreement" label="Status of forces agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q312461" start="24132" end="24145" title="Terra nullius" label="Terra nullius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863500" start="24148" end="24185" title="U.S.–Japan Status of Forces Agreement" label="U.S.–Japan Status of Forces Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11297" start="24188" end="24215" title="Headquarters of the United Nations" label="United Nations Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888987" start="24218" end="24268" title="List of territories governed by the United Nations" label="List of territories governed by the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q595827" start="26123" end="26144" title="Columbia Encyclopedia" label="Columbia Encyclopedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
