<doc id="416798" wikidata="Q1516823" url="?curid=416798" title="History of the Jews in Poland">
<text>The history of the Jews in Poland dates back at least 1,000 years. For centuries, Poland was home to the largest and most significant Ashkenazi Jewish community in the world. Poland was a principal center of Jewish culture, because of the long period of statutory religious tolerance and social autonomy which ended after the Partitions of Poland in the 18th century. During World War II there was a nearly complete genocidal destruction of the Polish Jewish community by Nazi Germany and its collaborators of various nationalities, during the German occupation of Poland between 1939 and 1945, called the Holocaust. Since the fall of communism in Poland, there has been a renewed interest in Jewish culture, featuring an annual Jewish Culture Festival, new study programs at Polish secondary schools and universities, and the opening of Warsaw&#x27;s Museum of the History of Polish Jews.

From the founding of the Kingdom of Poland in 1025 until the early years of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth created in 1569, Poland was the most tolerant country in Europe. Historians have used the label &quot;paradisus iudaeorum&quot; (Latin for &quot;Paradise of the Jews&quot;). Poland became a shelter for Jews persecuted and expelled from various European countries and the home to the world&#x27;s largest Jewish community of the time. According to some sources, about three-quarters of the world&#x27;s Jews lived in Poland by the middle of the 16th century. With the weakening of the Commonwealth and growing religious strife (due to the Protestant Reformation and Catholic Counter-Reformation), Poland&#x27;s traditional tolerance began to wane from the 17th century. After the Partitions of Poland in 1795 and the destruction of Poland as a sovereign state, Polish Jews became subject to the laws of the partitioning powers, including the increasingly antisemitic Russian Empire, as well as Austria-Hungary and Kingdom of Prussia (later a part of the German Empire). When Poland regained independence in the aftermath of World War I, it was still the center of the European Jewish world, with one of the world&#x27;s largest Jewish communities of over 3 million. Antisemitism was a growing problem throughout Europe in those years, from both the political establishment and the general population. Throughout the interwar period, Poland supported Jewish emigration from Poland and the creation of a Jewish state in Palestine. The Polish state also supported Jewish paramilitary groups such as the Haganah, Betar, and Irgun, providing them with weapons and training.

In 1939, at the start of World War II, Poland was partitioned between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union (see Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact). One-fifth of the Polish population perished during World War II; the 3,000,000 Polish Jews murdered in the Holocaust, who constituted 90% of Polish Jewry, made up half of all Poles killed during the war. While the Holocaust occurred largely in German-occupied Poland, it was orchestrated and perpetrated by the Nazis. Polish attitudes to the Holocaust varied widely, from actively risking death in order to save Jewish lives, and passive refusal to inform on them, to indifference, blackmail, and in extreme cases, committing premeditated murders such as in the Jedwabne pogrom. Collaboration by non-Jewish Polish citizens in the Holocaust was sporadic, but incidents of hostility against Jews are well documented and have been a subject of renewed scholarly interest during the 21st century.

In the post-war period, many of the approximately 200,000 Jewish survivors registered at the Central Committee of Polish Jews or CKŻP (of whom 136,000 arrived from the Soviet Union) left the Polish People’s Republic for the nascent State of Israel or the Americas. Their departure was hastened by the destruction of Jewish institutions, post-war anti-Jewish violence, and the hostility of the Communist Party to both religion and private enterprise, but also because in 1946–1947 Poland was the only Eastern Bloc country to allow free Jewish aliyah to Israel, without visas or exit permits. Most of the remaining Jews left Poland in late 1968 as the result of the &quot;anti-Zionist&quot; campaign. After the fall of the Communist regime in 1989, the situation of Polish Jews became normalized and those who were Polish citizens before World War II were allowed to renew Polish citizenship. The contemporary Polish Jewish community is estimated to have between 10,000 and 20,000 members. The number of people with Jewish heritage of any sort is several times larger.

==Early history to Golden Age: 966–1572==

===Early history: 966–1385===
The first Jews to visit Polish territory were traders, while permanent settlement began during the Crusades. Travelling along trade routes leading east to Kyiv and Bukhara, Jewish merchants, known as Radhanites, crossed Silesia. One of them, a diplomat and merchant from the Moorish town of Tortosa in Spanish Al-Andalus, known by his Arabic name, Ibrahim ibn Yaqub, was the first chronicler to mention the Polish state ruled by Prince Mieszko I. In the summer of 965 or 966, Jacob made a trade and diplomatic journey from his native Toledo in Muslim Spain to the Holy Roman Empire and then to the Slavic countries. The first actual mention of Jews in Polish chronicles occurs in the 11th century, where it appears that Jews then lived in Gniezno, at that time the capital of the Polish kingdom of the Piast dynasty. Among the first Jews to arrive in Poland in 1097 or 1098 were those banished from Prague. The first permanent Jewish community is mentioned in 1085 by a Jewish scholar Jehuda ha-Kohen in the city of Przemyśl.

As elsewhere in Central and Eastern Europe, the principal activity of Jews in medieval Poland was commerce and trade, including the export and import of goods such as cloth, linen, furs, hides, wax, metal objects, and slaves.
The first extensive Jewish migration from Western Europe to Poland occurred at the time of the First Crusade in 1098. Under Bolesław III (1102–1139), Jews, encouraged by the tolerant regime of this ruler, settled throughout Poland, including over the border in Lithuanian territory as far as Kyiv. Bolesław III recognized the utility of Jews in the development of the commercial interests of his country. Jews came to form the backbone of the Polish economy. Mieszko III employed Jews in his mint as engravers and technical supervisors, and the coins minted during that period even bear Hebraic markings. Jews worked on commission for the mints of other contemporary Polish princes, including Casimir the Just, Bolesław I the Tall and Władysław III Spindleshanks. Jews enjoyed undisturbed peace and prosperity in the many principalities into which the country was then divided; they formed the middle class in a country where the general population consisted of landlords (developing into &quot;szlachta&quot;, the unique Polish nobility) and peasants, and they were instrumental in promoting the commercial interests of the land.

Another factor for the Jews to emigrate to Poland was the Magdeburg rights (or Magdeburg Law), a charter given to Jews, among others, that specifically outlined the rights and privileges that Jews had in Poland. For example, they could maintain communal autonomy, and live according to their own laws. This made it very attractive for Jewish communities to pick up and move to Poland.

The first mention of Jewish settlers in Płock dates from 1237, in Kalisz from 1287 and a Żydowska (Jewish) street in Kraków in 1304.

The tolerant situation was gradually altered by the Roman Catholic Church on the one hand, and by the neighboring German states on the other. There were, however, among the reigning princes some determined protectors of the Jewish inhabitants, who considered the presence of the latter most desirable as far as the economic development of the country was concerned. Prominent among such rulers was Bolesław the Pious of Kalisz, Prince of Great Poland. With the consent of the class representatives and higher officials, in 1264 he issued a General Charter of Jewish Liberties (commonly called the Statute of Kalisz), which granted all Jews the freedom to worship, trade, and travel. Similar privileges were granted to the Silesian Jews by the local princes, Henryk IV Probus of Wrocław in 1273–90, Henryk III of Głogów in 1274 and 1299, Henryk V the Fat of Legnica in 1290–95, and Bolko III the Generous of Legnica and Wrocław in 1295. Article 31 of the Statute of Kalisz tried to rein in the Catholic Church from disseminating blood libels against the Jews, by stating: &quot;Accusing Jews of drinking Christian blood is expressly prohibited. If despite this a Jew should be accused of murdering a Christian child, such charge must be sustained by testimony of three Christians and three Jews.&quot;

During the next hundred years, the Church pushed for the persecution of Jews while the rulers of Poland usually protected them. The Councils of Wrocław (1267), Buda (1279), and Łęczyca (1285) each segregated Jews, ordered them to wear a special emblem, banned them from holding offices where Christians would be subordinated to them, and forbade them from building more than one prayer house in each town. However, those church decrees required the cooperation of the Polish princes for enforcement, which was generally not forthcoming, due to the profits which the Jews&#x27; economic activity yielded to the princes.

In 1332, King Casimir III the Great (1303–1370) amplified and expanded Bolesław&#x27;s old charter with the Wiślicki Statute. Under his reign, streams of Jewish immigrants headed east to Poland and Jewish settlements are first mentioned as existing in Lvov (1356), Sandomierz (1367), and Kazimierz near Kraków (1386). Casimir, who according to a legend had a Jewish lover named Esterka from Opoczno was especially friendly to the Jews, and his reign is regarded as an era of great prosperity for Polish Jewry, and was nicknamed by his contemporaries &quot;King of the serfs and Jews.&quot; Under penalty of death, he prohibited the kidnapping of Jewish children for the purpose of enforced Christian baptism. He inflicted heavy punishment for the desecration of Jewish cemeteries. Nevertheless, while the Jews of Poland enjoyed tranquility for the greater part of Casimir&#x27;s reign, toward its close they were subjected to persecution on account of the Black Death. In 1348, the first blood libel accusation against Jews in Poland was recorded, and in 1367 the first pogrom took place in Poznań. Compared with the pitiless destruction of their co-religionists in Western Europe, however, Polish Jews did not fare badly; and Jewish refugees from Germany fled to the more hospitable cities in Poland.

===The early Jagiellon era: 1385–1505===

As a result of the marriage of Władysław II Jagiełło to Jadwiga, daughter of Louis I of Hungary, Lithuania was united with the kingdom of Poland. In , broad privileges were extended to Lithuanian Jews including freedom of religion and commerce on equal terms with the Christians. Under the rule of Władysław II, Polish Jews had increased in numbers and attained prosperity. However, religious persecution gradually increased, as the dogmatic clergy pushed for less official tolerance, pressured by the Synod of Constance. In 1349 pogroms took place in many towns in Silesia. There were accusations of blood libel by the priests, and new riots against the Jews in Poznań in 1399. Accusations of blood libel by another fanatic priest led to the riots in Kraków in 1407, although the royal guard hastened to the rescue. Hysteria caused by the Black Death led to additional 14th-century outbreaks of violence against the Jews in Kalisz, Kraków and Bochnia. Traders and artisans jealous of Jewish prosperity, and fearing their rivalry, supported the harassment. In 1423, the statute of Warka forbade Jews the granting of loans against letters of credit or mortgage and limited their operations exclusively to loans made on security of moveable property.

In the 14th and 15th centuries, rich Jewish merchants and moneylenders leased the royal mint, salt mines and the collecting of customs and tolls. The most famous of them were Jordan and his son Lewko of Kraków in the 14th century and Jakub Slomkowicz of Łuck, Wolczko of Drohobycz, Natko of Lviv, Samson of Zydaczow, Josko of Hrubieszów and Szania of Belz in the 15th century. For example, Wolczko of Drohobycz, King Ladislaus Jagiełło&#x27;s broker, was the owner of several villages in the Ruthenian voivodship and the soltys (administrator) of the village of Werbiz. Also, Jews from Grodno were in this period owners of villages, manors, meadows, fish ponds and mills. However, until the end of the 15th century, agriculture as a source of income played only a minor role among Jewish families. More important were crafts for the needs of both their fellow Jews and the Christian population (fur making, tanning, tailoring).
In 1454 anti-Jewish riots flared up in Bohemia&#x27;s ethnically-German Wrocław and other Silesian cities, inspired by a Franciscan friar, John of Capistrano, who accused Jews of profaning the Christian religion. As a result, Jews were banished from Lower Silesia. Zbigniew Olesnicki then invited John to conduct a similar campaign in Kraków and several other cities, to lesser effect.

The decline in the status of the Jews was briefly checked by Casimir IV Jagiellon (1447–1492), but soon the nobility forced him to issue the Statute of Nieszawa, which, among other things, abolished the ancient privileges of the Jews &quot;as contrary to divine right and the law of the land.&quot; Nevertheless, the king continued to offer his protection to the Jews. Two years later Casimir issued another document announcing that he could not deprive the Jews of his benevolence on the basis of &quot;the principle of tolerance which in conformity with God&#x27;s laws obliged him to protect them&quot;. The policy of the government toward the Jews of Poland oscillated under Casimir&#x27;s sons and successors, John I Albert (1492–1501) and Alexander Jagiellon (1501–1506). In 1495, Jews were ordered out of the center of Kraków and allowed to settle in the &quot;Jewish town&quot; of Kazimierz. In the same year, Alexander, when he was the Grand Duke of Lithuania, followed the 1492 example of Spanish rulers and banished Jews from Lithuania. For several years they took shelter in Poland until he reversed his decision eight years later in 1503 after becoming King of Poland and allowed them back to Lithuania. The next year he issued a proclamation in which he stated that a policy of tolerance befitted &quot;kings and rulers&quot;.

===Center of the Jewish world: 1505–1572===

Poland became more tolerant just as the Jews were expelled from Spain in 1492, as well as from Austria, Hungary and Germany, thus stimulating Jewish immigration to the much more accessible Poland. Indeed, with the expulsion of the Jews from Spain, Poland became the recognized haven for exiles from Western Europe; and the resulting accession to the ranks of Polish Jewry made it the cultural and spiritual center of the Jewish people.

The most prosperous period for Polish Jews began following this new influx of Jews with the reign of Sigismund I the Old (1506–1548), who protected the Jews in his realm. During his reign, in 1538, the Polish Sejm passed a law making illegal the leasing of royal perogatives, such as salt mines, the mint, and customs to Jews. While these so-called &quot;great arenda&quot; became one of the protected privileges of the szlachta, in the 16th and 17th centuries, Jews were the primary administrators of agricultural arenda (administrating landed estates leased from the nobility). Sigismund II Augustus (1548–1572), mainly followed his father&#x27;s tolerant policy and also granted communal-administration autonomy to the Jews and laid the foundation for the power of the &quot;Qahal&quot;, or autonomous Jewish community. According to some sources, about three-quarters of all Jews lived in Poland by the middle of the 16th century. In the 16h and 17th centuries, Poland welcomed Jewish immigrants from Italy, as well as Sephardi Jews and Romaniote Jews migrating there from the Ottoman Empire. Arabic-speaking Mizrahi Jews and Persian Jews also migrated to Poland during this time. Jewish religious life thrived in many Polish communities. In 1503, the Polish monarchy appointed Rabbi Jacob Pollak the first official Rabbi of Poland. By 1551, Jews were given permission to choose their own Chief Rabbi. The Chief Rabbinate held power over law and finance, appointing judges and other officials. Some power was shared with local councils. The Polish government permitted the Rabbinate to grow in power, to use it for tax collection purposes. Only 30% of the money raised by the Rabbinate served Jewish causes, the rest went to the Crown for protection. In this period Poland-Lithuania became the main center for Ashkenazi Jewry and its &quot;yeshivot&quot; achieved fame from the early 16th century.

Moses Isserles (1520–1572), an eminent Talmudist of the 16th century, established his yeshiva in Kraków. In addition to being a renowned Talmudic and legal scholar, Isserles was also learned in Kabbalah, and studied history, astronomy, and philosophy. He is considered the &quot;Maimonides of Polish Jewry.&quot; The Remuh Synagogue was built for him in 1557. &quot;Rema&quot; (רמ״א) is the Hebrew acronym for his name.

==The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth: 1572–1795==

After the childless death of Sigismund II Augustus, the last king of the Jagiellon dynasty, nobles (szlachta) gathered at Warsaw in 1573 and signed a document in which representatives of all major religions pledged mutual support and tolerance. The following eight or nine decades of material prosperity and relative security experienced by Polish Jews – wrote Professor Gershon Hundert – witnessed the appearance of &quot;a virtual galaxy of sparkling intellectual figures.&quot; Jewish academies were established in Lublin, Kraków, Brześć (Brisk), Lwów, Ostróg and other towns. Poland-Lithuania was the only country in Europe where the Jews cultivated their own farmer&#x27;s fields. The central autonomous body that regulated Jewish life in Poland from the middle of the 16th to mid-18th century was known as the Council of Four Lands. It was during this period that a rueful pasquinade claiming that Poland was a &quot;paradise for the Jews&quot; gave birth to a proverb, which after subsequent extrapolations became &quot;heaven for the nobles, purgatory for the townspeople, hell for the peasants, and paradise for the Jews&quot;. 

===Decline===
Despite the Warsaw Confederation agreement, it did not last for long due to beginning of Counter-Reformation in the Commonwealth and growing influence of the Jesuits. By 1590s there were anti-Semitic outbreaks in Poznań, Lublin, Kraków, Vilnius and Kyiv. In Lwów alone mass attacks of Jews started in 1572 and then repeated in 1592, 1613, 1618, and from 1638 every year with Jesuit students being responsible for many of them. At the same time Privilegium de non tolerandis Judaeis and Privilegium de non tolerandis Christianis were introduced to limit Jews living in the Christian cities, which intensified their migration to the Eastern parts of the country where they were invited by the magnates to their private towns. By the end of the 18th century two-thirds of the royal towns and cities in the Commonwealth had pressed the king to grant them that privilege.

After the Union of Brest in 1595–1596, the Orthodox church was outlawed in Polish-Lithuanian commonwealth and that caused massive religious, social and political tensions in Ruthenia. In part it was also caused due to mass migration of the Jews to Ruthenia and their role perceived by local population and in turn led to multiple Cossack uprisings. The largest one of them started in 1648 and was followed by several conflicts, in which the country lost over a third of its population (over three million people). The Jewish losses were counted in the hundreds of thousands. The first of these large-scale atrocities was the Khmelnytsky Uprising, in which the Cossacks of the Zaporozhian Host under Bohdan Khmelnytsky massacred tens of thousands of Jews as well as Catholic and Uniate population in the eastern and southern areas of Polish-occupied Ukraine. The precise number of dead is not known, but the decrease of the Jewish population during this period is estimated at 100,000 to 200,000, which also includes emigration, deaths from diseases and &quot;jasyr&quot; (captivity in the Ottoman Empire). The Jewish community suffered greatly during the 1648 Ukrainian Cossack uprising which had been directed primarily against the wealthy nobility and landlords. The Jews, perceived as allies of the Poles, were also victims of the revolt, during which about 20% of them were killed.

Ruled by the elected kings of the House of Vasa since 1587, the embattled Commonwealth was invaded by the Swedish Empire in 1655 in what became known as the Deluge. Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth which had already suffered from the Khmelnytsky Uprising and from the recurring invasions of the Russians, Crimean Tatars and Ottomans, became the scene of even more atrocities. Charles X of Sweden, at the head of his victorious army, overran the cities of Kraków and Warsaw. The amount of destruction, pillage and methodical plunder during the Siege of Kraków (1657) was so enormous that parts the city never again recovered. Which was later followed by the massacres of the Crown hetman Stefan Czarniecki of the Ruthenian and Jewish population. He defeated the Swedes in 1660 and was equally successful in his battles against the Russians. Meanwhile, the horrors of the war were aggravated by pestilence. Many Jews along with the townsfolk of Kalisz, Kraków, Poznań, Piotrków and Lublin fell victim to recurring epidemics.

As soon as the disturbances had ceased, the Jews began to return and to rebuild their destroyed homes; and while it is true that the Jewish population of Poland had decreased, it still was more numerous than that of the Jewish colonies in Western Europe. Poland continued to be the spiritual center of Judaism. Through 1698, the Polish kings generally remained supportive of the Jews. Although Jewish losses in those events were high, the Commonwealth lost one-third of its population – approximately three million of its citizens.

The environment of the Polish Commonwealth, according to Hundert, profoundly affected Jews due to genuinely positive encounter with the Christian culture across the many cities and towns owned by the Polish aristocracy. There was no isolation. The Jewish dress resembled that of their Polish neighbor. &quot;Reports of romances, of drinking together in taverns, and of intellectual conversations are quite abundant.&quot; Wealthy Jews had Polish noblemen at their table, and served meals on silver plates. By 1764, there were about 750,000 Jews in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. The worldwide Jewish population at that time was estimated at 1.2 million.

In 1768, the Koliivshchyna, a rebellion in Right-bank Ukraine west of the Dnieper in Volhynia, led to ferocious murders of Polish noblemen, Catholic priests and thousands of Jews by haydamaks. Four years later, in 1772, the military Partitions of Poland had begun between Russia, Prussia and Austria.

==The development of Judaism in Poland and the Commonwealth==
The culture and intellectual output of the Jewish community in Poland had a profound impact on Judaism as a whole. Some Jewish historians have recounted that the word Poland is pronounced as &quot;Polania&quot; or &quot;Polin&quot; in Hebrew, and as transliterated into Hebrew, these names for Poland were interpreted as &quot;good omens&quot; because &quot;Polania&quot; can be broken down into three Hebrew words: &quot;po&quot; (&quot;here&quot;), &quot;lan&quot; (&quot;dwells&quot;), &quot;ya&quot; (&quot;God&quot;), and &quot;Polin&quot; into two words of: &quot;po&quot; (&quot;here&quot;) &quot;lin&quot; (&quot;[you should] dwell&quot;). The &quot;message&quot; was that Poland was meant to be a good place for the Jews. During the time from the rule of Sigismund I the Old until the Holocaust, Poland would be at the center of Jewish religious life. Many agreed with Rabbi David HaLevi Segal that Poland was a place where &quot;most of the time the gentiles do no harm; on the contrary they do right by Israel&quot; (&quot;Divre David;&quot; 1689).

===Jewish learning===

Yeshivot were established, under the direction of the rabbis, in the more prominent communities. Such schools were officially known as gymnasia, and their rabbi principals as rectors. Important &quot;yeshivot&quot; existed in Kraków, Poznań, and other cities. Jewish printing establishments came into existence in the first quarter of the 16th century. In 1530 a Torah was printed in Kraków; and at the end of the century the Jewish printing houses of that city and Lublin issued a large number of Jewish books, mainly of a religious character. The growth of Talmudic scholarship in Poland was coincident with the greater prosperity of the Polish Jews; and because of their communal autonomy educational development was wholly one-sided and along Talmudic lines. Exceptions are recorded, however, where Jewish youth sought secular instruction in the European universities. The learned rabbis became not merely expounders of the Law, but also spiritual advisers, teachers, judges, and legislators; and their authority compelled the communal leaders to make themselves familiar with the abstruse questions of Jewish law. Polish Jewry found its views of life shaped by the spirit of Talmudic and rabbinical literature, whose influence was felt in the home, in school, and in the synagogue.

In the first half of the 16th century the seeds of Talmudic learning had been transplanted to Poland from Bohemia, particularly from the school of Jacob Pollak, the creator of &quot;Pilpul&quot; (&quot;sharp reasoning&quot;). Shalom Shachna (c. 1500–1558), a pupil of Pollak, is counted among the pioneers of Talmudic learning in Poland. He lived and died in Lublin, where he was the head of the &quot;yeshivah&quot; which produced the rabbinical celebrities of the following century. Shachna&#x27;s son Israel became rabbi of Lublin on the death of his father, and Shachna&#x27;s pupil Moses Isserles (known as the &quot;ReMA&quot;) (1520–1572) achieved an international reputation among the Jews as the co-author of the &quot;Shulkhan Arukh&quot;, (the &quot;Code of Jewish Law&quot;). His contemporary and correspondent Solomon Luria (1510–1573) of Lublin also enjoyed a wide reputation among his co-religionists; and the authority of both was recognized by the Jews throughout Europe. Heated religious disputations were common, and Jewish scholars participated in them. At the same time, the &quot;Kabbalah&quot; had become entrenched under the protection of Rabbinism; and such scholars as Mordecai Jaffe and Yoel Sirkis devoted themselves to its study. This period of great Rabbinical scholarship was interrupted by the [Khmelnytsky Uprising and The Deluge.

===The rise of Hasidism===
The decade from the Khmelnytsky Uprising until after the Deluge (1648–1658) left a deep and lasting impression not only on the social life of the Polish–Lithuanian Jews, but on their spiritual life as well. The intellectual output of the Jews of Poland was reduced. The Talmudic learning which up to that period had been the common possession of the majority of the people became accessible to a limited number of students only. What religious study there was became overly formalized, some rabbis busied themselves with quibbles concerning religious laws; others wrote commentaries on different parts of the Talmud in which hair-splitting arguments were raised and discussed; and at times these arguments dealt with matters which were of no practical importance. At the same time, many miracle-workers made their appearance among the Jews of Poland, culminating in a series of false &quot;Messianic&quot; movements, most famously as Sabbatianism was succeeded by Frankism.

In this time of mysticism and overly formal Rabbinism came the teachings of Israel ben Eliezer, known as the &quot;Baal Shem Tov&quot;, or &quot;BeShT&quot;, (1698–1760), which had a profound effect on the Jews of Eastern Europe and Poland in particular. His disciples taught and encouraged the new fervent brand of Judaism based on &quot;Kabbalah&quot; known as Hasidism. The rise of Hasidic Judaism within Poland&#x27;s borders and beyond had a great influence on the rise of Haredi Judaism all over the world, with a continuous influence through its many Hasidic dynasties including those of Chabad, Aleksander, Bobov, Ger, Nadvorna, among others.

==The Partitions of Poland==

In 1742 most of Silesia was lost to Prussia. Further disorder and anarchy reigned supreme in Poland during the second half of the 18th century, from the accession to the throne of its last king, Stanislaus II Augustus Poniatowski in 1764. His election was bought by Catherine the Great for 2.5 million rubles, with the Russian army stationing only away from Warsaw. Eight years later, triggered by the Confederation of Bar against Russian influence and the pro-Russian king, the outlying provinces of Poland were overrun from all sides by different military forces and divided for the first time by the three neighboring empires, Russia, Austria, and Prussia. The Commonwealth lost 30% of its land during the annexations of 1772, and even more of its peoples. Jews were most numerous in the territories that fell under the military control of Austria and Russia.

The permanent council established at the instance of the Russian government (1773–1788) served as the highest administrative tribunal, and occupied itself with the elaboration of a plan that would make practicable the reorganization of Poland on a more rational basis. The progressive elements in Polish society recognized the urgency of popular education as the first step toward reform. The famous &quot;Komisja Edukacji Narodowej&quot; (&quot;Commission of National Education&quot;), the first ministry of education in the world, was established in 1773 and founded numerous new schools and remodeled the old ones. One of the members of the commission, &quot;kanclerz&quot; Andrzej Zamoyski, along with others, demanded that the inviolability of their persons and property should be guaranteed and that religious toleration should be to a certain extent granted them; but he insisted that Jews living in the cities should be separated from the Christians, that those of them having no definite occupation should be banished from the kingdom, and that even those engaged in agriculture should not be allowed to possess land. On the other hand, some &quot;szlachta&quot; and intellectuals proposed a national system of government, of the civil and political equality of the Jews. This was the only example in modern Europe before the French Revolution of tolerance and broadmindedness in dealing with the Jewish question. But all these reforms were too late: a Russian army soon invaded Poland, and soon after a Prussian one followed.

A second partition of Poland was made on 17 July 1793. Jews, in a Jewish regiment led by Berek Joselewicz, took part in the Kościuszko Uprising the following year, when the Poles tried to again achieve independence, but were brutally put down. Following the revolt, the third and final partition of Poland took place in 1795. The territories which included the great bulk of the Jewish population was transferred to Russia, and thus they became subjects of that empire, although in the first half of the 19th century some semblance of a vastly smaller Polish state was preserved, especially in the form of the Congress Poland (1815–1831).

Under foreign rule many Jews inhabiting formerly Polish lands were indifferent to Polish aspirations for independence. However, most Polonized Jews supported the revolutionary activities of Polish patriots and participated in national uprisings. Polish Jews took part in the November Insurrection of 1830–1831, the January Insurrection of 1863, as well as in the revolutionary movement of 1905. Many Polish Jews were enlisted in the Polish Legions, which fought for the Polish independence, achieved in 1918 when the occupying forces disintegrated following World War I.

==Jews of Poland within the Russian Empire (1795–1918)==

Official Russian policy would eventually prove to be substantially harsher to the Jews than that under independent Polish rule. The lands that had once been Poland were to remain the home of many Jews, as, in 1772, Catherine II, the &quot;Tzarina&quot; of Russia, instituted the Pale of Settlement, restricting Jews to the western parts of the empire, which would eventually include much of Poland, although it excluded some areas in which Jews had previously lived. By the late 19th century, over four million Jews would live in the Pale.

Tsarist policy towards the Jews of Poland alternated between harsh rules, and inducements meant to break the resistance to large-scale conversion. In 1804, Alexander I of Russia issued a &quot;Statute Concerning Jews&quot;, meant to accelerate the process of assimilation of the Empire&#x27;s new Jewish population. The Polish Jews were allowed to establish schools with Russian, German or Polish curricula. However, they were also restricted from leasing property, teaching in Yiddish, and from entering Russia. They were banned from the brewing industry. The harshest measures designed to compel Jews to merge into society at large called for their expulsion from small villages, forcing them to move into towns. Once the resettlement began, thousands of Jews lost their only source of income and turned to Qahal for support. Their living conditions in the Pale began to dramatically worsen.

During the reign of Tsar Nicolas I, known by the Jews as &quot;Haman the Second&quot;, hundreds of new anti-Jewish measures were enacted. The 1827 decree by Nicolas – while lifting the traditional double taxation on Jews in lieu of army service – made Jews subject to general military recruitment laws that required Jewish communities to provide 7 recruits per each 1000 &quot;souls&quot; every 4 years. Unlike the general population that had to provide recruits between the ages of 18 and 35, Jews had to provide recruits between the ages of 12 and 25, at the qahal&#x27;s discretion. Thus between 1827 and 1857 over 30,000 children were placed in the so-called Cantonist schools, where they were pressured to convert. &quot;Many children were smuggled to Poland, where the conscription of Jews did not take effect until 1844.&quot;
===Pale of Settlement===
The &quot;Pale of Settlement&quot; (, , , , , ) was the term given to a region of Imperial Russia in which permanent residency by Jews was allowed and beyond which Jewish permanent residency was generally prohibited. It extended from the eastern &quot;pale&quot;, or demarcation line, to the western Russian border with the Kingdom of Prussia (later the German Empire) and with Austria-Hungary.
The archaic English term &quot;pale&quot; is derived from the Latin word , a stake, extended to mean the area enclosed by a fence or boundary.

With its large Catholic and Jewish populations, the Pale was acquired by the Russian Empire (which was a majority Russian Orthodox) in a series of military conquests and diplomatic maneuvers between 1791 and 1835, and lasted until the fall of the Russian Empire in 1917. It comprised about 20% of the territory of European Russia and mostly corresponded to historical borders of the former Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth; it covered much of present-day Lithuania, Belarus, Poland, Moldova, Ukraine, and parts of western Russia.

From 1791 to 1835, and until 1917, there were differing reconfigurations of the boundaries of the Pale, such that certain areas were variously open or shut to Jewish residency, such as the Caucasus. At times, Jews were forbidden to live in agricultural communities, or certain cities, as in Kyiv, Sevastopol and Yalta, excluded from residency at a number of cities within the Pale. Settlers from outside the pale were forced to move to small towns, thus fostering the rise of the &quot;shtetls&quot;.

Although the Jews were accorded slightly more rights with the Emancipation reform of 1861 by Alexander II, they were still restricted to the Pale of Settlement and subject to restrictions on ownership and profession. The existing status quo was shattered with the assassination of Alexander in 1881 – an act falsely blamed upon the Jews.

===Pogroms in the Russian Empire===

The assassination prompted a large-scale wave of anti-Jewish riots, called &quot;pogroms&quot; (;) throughout 1881–1884. In the 1881 outbreak, pogroms were primarily limited to Russia, although in a riot in Warsaw two Jews were killed, 24 others were wounded, women were raped and over two million rubles worth of property was destroyed. The new czar, Alexander III, blamed the Jews for the riots and issued a series of harsh restrictions on Jewish movements. Pogroms continued until 1884, with at least tacit government approval. They proved a turning point in the history of the Jews in partitioned Poland and throughout the world. In 1884, 36 Jewish Zionist delegates met in Katowice, forming the Hovevei Zion movement. The pogroms prompted a great wave of Jewish emigration to the United States.

An even bloodier wave of pogroms broke out from 1903 to 1906, at least some of them believed to have been organized by the Tsarist Russian secret police, the &quot;Okhrana&quot;. They included the Białystok pogrom of 1906 in the Grodno Governorate of Russian Poland, in which at least 75 Jews were murdered by marauding soldiers and many more Jews were wounded. According to Jewish survivors, ethnic Poles did not participate in the pogrom and instead sheltered Jewish families.

===Haskalah and Halakha===
The Jewish Enlightenment, &quot;Haskalah&quot;, began to take hold in Poland during the 19th century, stressing secular ideas and values. Champions of &quot;Haskalah&quot;, the &quot;Maskilim&quot;, pushed for assimilation and integration into Russian culture. At the same time, there was another school of Jewish thought that emphasized traditional study and a Jewish response to the ethical problems of antisemitism and persecution, one form of which was the Musar movement. Polish Jews generally were less influenced by &quot;Haskalah&quot;, rather focusing on a strong continuation of their religious lives based on Halakha (&quot;rabbis&#x27;s law&quot;) following primarily Orthodox Judaism, Hasidic Judaism, and also adapting to the new Religious Zionism of the Mizrachi movement later in the 19th century.

===Politics in Polish territory===

By the late 19th century, &quot;Haskalah&quot; and the debates it caused created a growing number of political movements within the Jewish community itself, covering a wide range of views and vying for votes in local and regional elections. Zionism became very popular with the advent of the &quot;Poale Zion&quot; socialist party as well as the religious Polish Mizrahi, and the increasingly popular General Zionists. Jews also took up socialism, forming the Bund labor union which supported assimilation and the rights of labor. The Folkspartei (People&#x27;s Party) advocated, for its part, cultural autonomy and resistance to assimilation. In 1912, &quot;Agudat Israel&quot;, a religious party, came into existence.

Many Jews took part in the Polish insurrections, particularly against Russia (since the Tsars discriminated heavily against the Jews). The Kościuszko Insurrection (1794), November Insurrection (1830–31), January Insurrection (1863) and Revolutionary Movement of 1905 all saw significant Jewish involvement in the cause of Polish independence.

During the Second Polish Republic period, there were several prominent Jewish politicians in the Polish Sejm, such as Apolinary Hartglas and Yitzhak Gruenbaum. Many Jewish political parties were active, representing a wide ideological spectrum, from the Zionists, to the socialists to the anti-Zionists. One of the largest of these parties was the Bund, which was strongest in Warsaw and Lodz.

In addition to the socialists, Zionist parties were also popular, in particular, the Marxist Poale Zion and the orthodox religious Polish Mizrahi. The General Zionist party became the most prominent Jewish party in the interwar period and in the 1919 elections to the first Polish Sejm since the partitions, gained 50% of the Jewish vote.

In 1914, the German Zionist Max Bodenheimer founded the short-lived German Committee for Freeing of Russian Jews, with the goal of establishing a buffer state (&quot;Pufferstaat&quot;) within the Jewish Pale of Settlement, composed of the former Polish provinces annexed by Russia, being &quot;de facto&quot; protectorate of the German Empire that would free Jews in the region from Russian oppression. The plan, known as the League of East European States, soon proved unpopular with both German officials and Bodenheimer&#x27;s colleagues, and was dead by the following year.

==Interbellum (1918–39)==

===Polish Jews and the struggle for Poland&#x27;s independence===

While most Polish Jews were neutral to the idea of a Polish state, many played a significant role in the fight for Poland&#x27;s independence during World War I; around 650 Jews joined the &quot;Legiony Polskie&quot; formed by Józef Piłsudski, more than all other minorities combined. Prominent Jews were among the members of KTSSN, the nucleus of the interim government of re-emerging sovereign Poland including Herman Feldstein, Henryk Eile, &quot;Porucznik&quot; Samuel Herschthal, Dr. Zygmunt Leser, Henryk Orlean, Wiktor Chajes and others. The donations poured in including 50,000 Austrian kronen from the Jews of Lwów and the 1,500 cans of food donated by the Blumenfeld factory among similar others. A Jewish organization during the war that was opposed to Polish aspirations was the Komitee für den Osten (Kfdo)(Committee for the East) founded by German Jewish activists, which promoted the idea of Jews in the east becoming &quot;spearhead of German expansionism&quot; serving as &quot;Germany&#x27;s reliable vassals&quot; against other ethnic groups in the region and serving as &quot;living wall against Poles separatists aims&quot;.

In the aftermath of the Great War localized conflicts engulfed Eastern Europe between 1917 and 1919. Many attacks were launched against Jews during the Russian Civil War, the Polish–Ukrainian War, and the Polish–Soviet War ending with the Treaty of Riga. Just after the end of World War I, the West became alarmed by reports about alleged massive pogroms in Poland against Jews. Pressure for government action reached the point where U.S. President Woodrow Wilson sent an official commission to investigate the matter. The commission, led by Henry Morgenthau, Sr., concluded in its Morgenthau Report that allegations of pogroms were exaggerated. It identified eight incidents in the years 1918–1919 out of 37 mostly empty claims for damages, and estimated the number of victims at 280. Four of these were attributed to the actions of deserters and undisciplined individual soldiers; none was blamed on official government policy. Among the incidents, during the battle for Pińsk a commander of Polish infantry regiment accused a group of Jewish men of plotting against the Poles and ordered the execution of thirty-five Jewish men and youth. The Morgenthau Report found the charge to be &quot;devoid of foundation&quot; even though their meeting was illegal to the extent of being treasonable. In the Lwów (Lviv) pogrom, which occurred in 1918 during the Polish–Ukrainian War of independence a day after the Poles captured Lviv from the Sich Riflemen – the report concluded – 64 Jews had been killed (other accounts put the number at 72).
In Warsaw, soldiers of Blue Army assaulted Jews in the streets, but were punished by military authorities. Many other events in Poland were later found to have been exaggerated, especially by contemporary newspapers such as &quot;The New York Times&quot;, although serious abuses against the Jews, including pogroms, continued elsewhere, especially in Ukraine.

The historians Anna Cichopek-Gajraj and Glenn Dynner state that 130 pogroms of Jews occurred on Polish territories from 1918 to 1921, resulting in as many as 300 deaths, with many attacks conceived as reprisals against supposed Jewish economic power and their supposed “Judeo-Bolshevism” The atrocities committed by the young Polish army and its allies in 1919 during their Kiev operation against the Bolsheviks had a profound impact on the foreign perception of the re-emerging Polish state. Concerns over the fate of Poland&#x27;s Jews led the Western powers to pressure Polish President Paderewski to sign the Minority Protection Treaty (the Little Treaty of Versailles), protecting the rights of minorities in new Poland including Jews and Germans. This in turn resulted in Poland&#x27;s 1921 March Constitution granting Jews the same legal rights as other citizens and guaranteed them religious tolerance and freedom of religious holidays.

=== Population ===
The number of Jews immigrating to Poland from Ukraine and Soviet Russia during the interwar period grew rapidly. Jewish population in the area of former Congress of Poland increased sevenfold between 1816 and 1921, from around 213,000 to roughly 1,500,000. According to the Polish national census of 1921, there were 2,845,364 Jews living in the Second Polish Republic. According to the national census of 1931, there were 3,113,933 Jews living in Poland. By late 1938 that number had grown to approximately 3,310,000. The average rate of permanent settlement was about 30,000 per annum. At the same time, every year around 100,000 Jews were passing through Poland in unofficial emigration overseas Between the end of the Polish–Soviet War and late 1938, the Jewish population of the Republic had grown by over 464,000. According to the 1931 census one city had over 350,000 Jewish inhabitants (Warsaw), one city had over 200,000 Jewish inhabitants (Lodz), one city had around 100,000 Jewish inhabitants (Lvov) and two cities had over 50,000 Jewish inhabitants each (Cracow and Vilno). In total these five cities had 766,272 Jews which was almost 25% of the total Jewish population of Poland. In cities and towns larger than 25,000 inhabitants there lived nearly 44% of Poland&#x27;s Jews.

The table below shows the Jewish population of Poland&#x27;s cities and towns with over 25,000 inhabitants according to the 1931 census:
===Jewish and Polish culture===
The newly independent Second Polish Republic had a large and vibrant Jewish minority. By the time World War II began, Poland had the largest concentration of Jews in Europe although many Polish Jews had a separate culture and ethnic identity from Catholic Poles. Some authors have stated that only about 10% of Polish Jews during the interwar period could be considered &quot;assimilated&quot; while more than 80% could be readily recognized as Jews.

According to the 1931 National Census there were 3,130,581 Polish Jews measured by the declaration of their religion. Estimating the population increase and the emigration from Poland between 1931 and 1939, there were probably 3,474,000 Jews in Poland as of 1 September 1939 (approximately 10% of the total population) primarily centered in large and smaller cities: 77% lived in cities and 23% in the villages. They made up about 50%, and in some cases even 70% of the population of smaller towns, especially in Eastern Poland. Prior to World War II, the Jewish population of Łódź numbered about 233,000, roughly one-third of the city&#x27;s population. The city of Lwów (now in Ukraine) had the third-largest Jewish population in Poland, numbering 110,000 in 1939 (42%). Wilno (now in Lithuania) had a Jewish community of nearly 100,000, about 45% of the city&#x27;s total. In 1938, Kraków&#x27;s Jewish population numbered over 60,000, or about 25% of the city&#x27;s total population. In 1939 there were 375,000 Jews in Warsaw or one-third of the city&#x27;s population. Only New York City had more Jewish residents than Warsaw.

Jewish youth and religious groups, diverse political parties and Zionist organizations, newspapers and theatre flourished. Jews owned land and real estate, participated in retail and manufacturing and in the export industry. Their religious beliefs spanned the range from Orthodox Hasidic Judaism to Liberal Judaism.

The Polish language, rather than Yiddish, was increasingly used by the young Warsaw Jews who did not have a problem in identifying themselves fully as Jews, Varsovians and Poles. Jews such as Bruno Schulz were entering the mainstream of Polish society, though many thought of themselves as a separate nationality within Poland. Most children were enrolled in Jewish religious schools, which used to limit their ability to speak Polish. As a result, according to the 1931 census, 79% of the Jews declared Yiddish as their first language, and only 12% listed Polish, with the remaining 9% being Hebrew. In contrast, the overwhelming majority of German-born Jews of this period spoke German as their first language. During the school year of 1937–1938 there were 226 elementary schools and twelve high schools as well as fourteen vocational schools with either Yiddish or Hebrew as the instructional language. Jewish political parties, both the Socialist General Jewish Labour Bund (The Bund), as well as parties of the Zionist right and left wing and religious conservative movements, were represented in the &quot;Sejm&quot; (the Polish Parliament) as well as in the regional councils.
The Jewish cultural scene was particularly vibrant in pre–World War II Poland, with numerous Jewish publications and more than one hundred periodicals. Yiddish authors, most notably Isaac Bashevis Singer, went on to achieve international acclaim as classic Jewish writers; Singer won the 1978 Nobel Prize in Literature. His brother Israel Joshua Singer was also a writer. Other Jewish authors of the period, such as Bruno Schulz, Julian Tuwim, Marian Hemar, Emanuel Schlechter and Bolesław Leśmian, as well as Konrad Tom and Jerzy Jurandot, were less well known internationally, but made important contributions to Polish literature. Some Polish writers had Jewish roots e.g. Jan Brzechwa (a favorite poet of Polish children). Singer Jan Kiepura, born of a Jewish mother and Polish father, was one of the most popular artists of that era, and pre-war songs of Jewish composers, including Henryk Wars, Jerzy Petersburski, Artur Gold, Henryk Gold, Zygmunt Białostocki, Szymon Kataszek and Jakub Kagan, are still widely known in Poland today. Painters became known as well for their depictions of Jewish life. Among them were Maurycy Gottlieb, Artur Markowicz, and Maurycy Trębacz, with younger artists like Chaim Goldberg coming up in the ranks.

Many Jews were film producers and directors, e.g. Michał Waszyński (&quot;The Dybbuk)&quot;, Aleksander Ford (&quot;Children Must Laugh&quot;).

Scientist Leopold Infeld, mathematician Stanisław Ulam, Alfred Tarski, and professor Adam Ulam contributed to the world of science. Other Polish Jews who gained international recognition are Moses Schorr, Ludwik Zamenhof (the creator of Esperanto), Georges Charpak, Samuel Eilenberg, Emanuel Ringelblum, and Artur Rubinstein, just to name a few from the long list. The term &quot;genocide&quot; was coined by Rafał Lemkin (1900–1959), a Polish–Jewish legal scholar. Leonid Hurwicz was awarded the 2007 Nobel Prize in Economics. The YIVO (Jidiszer Wissenszaftlecher Institute) Scientific Institute was based in Wilno before transferring to New York during the war. In Warsaw, important centers of Judaic scholarship, such the Main Judaic Library and the Institute of Judaic Studies were located, along with numerous Talmudic Schools (Jeszybots), religious centers and synagogues, many of which were of high architectural quality. Yiddish theatre also flourished; Poland had fifteen Yiddish theatres and theatrical groups. Warsaw was home to the most important Yiddish theater troupe of the time, the Vilna Troupe, which staged the first performance of &quot;The Dybbuk&quot; in 1920 at the Elyseum Theatre. Some future Israeli leaders studied at University of Warsaw, including Menachem Begin and Yitzhak Shamir.

There also were several Jewish sports clubs, with some of them, such as Hasmonea Lwów and Jutrzenka Kraków, winning promotion to the Polish First Football League. A Polish–Jewish footballer, Józef Klotz, scored the first ever goal for the Poland national football team. Another athlete, Alojzy Ehrlich, won several medals in the table-tennis tournaments. Many of these clubs belonged to the Maccabi World Union.

===Between antisemitism and support for Zionism and Jewish state in Palestine===
In contrast to the prevailing trends in Europe at the time, in interwar Poland an increasing percentage of Jews were pushed to live a life separate from the non-Jewish majority. The antisemitic rejection of Jews, whether for religious or racial reasons, caused estrangement and growing tensions between Jews and Poles. It is significant in this regard that in 1921, 74.2% of Polish Jews spoke Yiddish or Hebrew as their native language; by 1931, the number had risen to 87%.
Besides the persistent effects of the Great Depression, the strengthening of antisemitism in Polish society was also a consequence of the influence of Nazi Germany. Following the German-Polish non-aggression pact of 1934, the antisemitic tropes of Nazi propaganda had become more common in Polish politics, where they were echoed by the National Democratic movement. One of its founders and chief ideologue Roman Dmowski was obsessed with an international conspiracy of freemasons and Jews, and in his works linked Marxism with Judaism. The position of the Catholic Church had also become increasingly hostile to the Jews, who in the 1920s and 1930s were increasingly seen as agents of evil, that is, of Bolshevism. Economic instability was mirrored by anti-Jewish sentiment in the press; discrimination, exclusion, and violence at the universities; and the appearance of &quot;anti-Jewish squads&quot; associated with some of the right-wing political parties. These developments contributed to a greater support among the Jewish community for Zionist and socialist ideas.

In 1925, Polish Zionist members of the Sejm capitalized on governmental support for Zionism by negotiating an agreement with the government known as the Ugoda. The Ugoda was an agreement between the Polish prime minister Władysław Grabski and Zionist leaders of Et Liwnot, including Leon Reich. The agreement granted certain cultural and religious rights to Jews in exchange for Jewish support for Polish nationalist interests; however, the Galician Zionists had little to show for their compromise because the Polish government later refused to honor many aspects of the agreement. During the 1930s, Revisionist Zionists viewed the Polish government as an ally and promoted cooperation between Polish Zionists and Polish nationalists, despite the antisemitism of the Polish government.

Matters improved for a time under the rule of Józef Piłsudski (1926–1935). Piłsudski countered Endecja&#x27;s Polonization with the &#x27;state assimilation&#x27; policy: citizens were judged by their loyalty to the state, not by their nationality. The years 1926–1935 were favourably viewed by many Polish Jews, whose situation improved especially under the cabinet of Pilsudski&#x27;s appointee Kazimierz Bartel. However, a combination of various factors, including the Great Depression, meant that the situation of Jewish Poles was never very satisfactory, and it deteriorated again after Piłsudski&#x27;s death in May 1935, which many Jews regarded as a tragedy. The Jewish industries were negatively affected by the development of mass production and the advent of department stores offering ready-made products. The traditional sources of livelihood for the estimated 300,000 Jewish family-run businesses in the country began to vanish, contributing to a growing trend toward isolationism and internal self-sufficiency. The difficult situation in the private sector led to enrolment growth in higher education. In 1923 the Jewish students constituted 62.9% of all students of stomatology, 34% of medical sciences, 29.2% of philosophy, 24.9% of chemistry and 22.1% of law (26% by 1929) at all Polish universities. It is speculated that such disproportionate numbers were the probable cause of a backlash.

The interwar Polish government provided military training to the Zionist Betar paramilitary movement, whose members admired the Polish nationalist camp and imitated some of its aspects. Uniformed members of Betar marched and performed at Polish public ceremonies alongside Polish scouts and military, with their weapons training provided by Polish institutions and Polish military officers; Menachem Begin, one of its leaders, called for its members to defend Poland in case of war, and the organisation raised both Polish and Zionist flags.

With the influence of the &quot;Endecja&quot; (National Democracy) party growing, antisemitism gathered new momentum in Poland and was most felt in smaller towns and in spheres in which Jews came into direct contact with Poles, such as in Polish schools or on the sports field. Further academic harassment, such as the introduction of ghetto benches, which forced Jewish students to sit in sections of the lecture halls reserved exclusively for them, anti-Jewish riots, and semi-official or unofficial quotas (&quot;Numerus clausus&quot;) introduced in 1937 in some universities, halved the number of Jews in Polish universities between independence (1918) and the late 1930s. The restrictions were so inclusive that – while the Jews made up 20.4% of the student body in 1928 – by 1937 their share was down to only 7.5%, out of the total population of 9.75% Jews in the country according to 1931 census.

While the average per capita income of Polish Jews in 1929 was 40% above the national average – which was very low compared to England or Germany – they were a very heterogeneous community, some poor, some wealthy. Many Jews worked as shoemakers and tailors, as well as in the liberal professions; doctors (56% of all doctors in Poland), teachers (43%), journalists (22%) and lawyers (33%). In 1929, about a third of artisans and home workers and a majority of shopkeepers were Jewish.

Although many Jews were educated, they were almost completely excluded from government jobs; as a result, the proportion of unemployed Jewish salary earners was approximately four times as great in 1929 as the proportion of unemployed non-Jewish salary earners, a situation compounded by the fact that almost no Jews were on government support. In 1937 the Catholic trade unions of Polish doctors and lawyers restricted their new members to Christian Poles. In a similar manner, the Jewish trade unions excluded non-Jewish professionals from their ranks after 1918. The bulk of Jewish workers were organized in the Jewish trade unions under the influence of the Jewish socialists who split in 1923 to join the Communist Party of Poland and the Second International.

Anti-Jewish sentiment in Poland had reached its zenith in the years leading to the Second World War. Between 1935 and 1937 seventy-nine Jews were killed and 500 injured in anti-Jewish incidents. National policy was such that the Jews who largely worked at home and in small shops were excluded from welfare benefits. In the provincial capital of Łuck Jews constituted 48.5% of the diverse multiethnic population of 35,550 Poles, Ukrainians, Belarusians and others. Łuck had the largest Jewish community in the voivodeship. In the capital of Brześć in 1936 Jews constituted 41.3% of general population and some 80.3% of private enterprises were owned by Jews. The 32% of Jewish inhabitants of Radom enjoyed considerable prominence also, with 90% of small businesses in the city owned and operated by the Jews including tinsmiths, locksmiths, jewellers, tailors, hat makers, hairdressers, carpenters, house painters and wallpaper installers, shoemakers, as well as most of the artisan bakers and clock repairers. In Lubartów, 53.6% of the town&#x27;s population were Jewish also along with most of its economy. In a town of Luboml, 3,807 Jews lived among its 4,169 inhabitants, constituting the essence of its social and political life.
The national boycott of Jewish businesses and advocacy for their confiscation was promoted by the National Democracy party and Prime Minister Felicjan Sławoj-Składkowski, declared an &quot;economic war against Jews&quot;, while introducing the term &quot;Christian shop&quot;. As a result a boycott of Jewish businesses grew intensively. A national movement to prevent the Jews from kosher slaughter of animals, with animal rights as the stated motivation, was also organized. Violence was also frequently aimed at Jewish stores, and many of them were looted. At the same time, persistent economic boycotts and harassment, including property-destroying riots, combined with the effects of the Great Depression that had been very severe on agricultural countries like Poland, reduced the standard of living of Poles and Polish Jews alike to the extent that by the end of the 1930s, a substantial portion of Polish Jews lived in grinding poverty. As a result, on the eve of the Second World War, the Jewish community in Poland was large and vibrant internally, yet (with the exception of a few professionals) also substantially poorer and less integrated than the Jews in most of Western Europe.

The main strain of antisemitism in Poland during this time was motivated by Catholic religious beliefs and centuries-old myths such as the blood libel. This religious-based antisemitism was sometimes joined with an ultra-nationalistic stereotype of Jews as disloyal to the Polish nation. On the eve of World War II, many typical Polish Christians believed that there were far too many Jews in the country, and the Polish government became increasingly concerned with the &quot;Jewish question&quot;. According to the British Embassy in Warsaw, in 1936 emigration was the only solution to the Jewish question that found wide support in all Polish political parties. The Polish government condemned wanton violence against the Jewish minority, fearing international repercussions, but shared the view that the Jewish minority hindered Poland&#x27;s development; in January 1937 Foreign Minister Józef Beck declared that Poland could house 500,000 Jews, and hoped that over the next 30 years 80,000–100,000 Jews a year would leave Poland.

As the Polish government sought to lower the numbers of the Jewish population in Poland through mass emigration, it embraced close and good contact with Ze&#x27;ev Jabotinsky, the founder of Revisionist Zionism, and pursued a policy of supporting the creation of a Jewish state in Palestine. The Polish government hoped Palestine would provide an outlet for its Jewish population and lobbied for creation of a Jewish state in the League of Nations and other international venues, proposing increased emigration quotas and opposing the Partition Plan of Palestine on behalf of Zionist activists. As Jabotinsky envisioned in his &quot;Evacuation Plan&quot; the settlement of 1.5 million East European Jews within 10 years in Palestine, including 750,000 Polish Jews, he and Beck shared a common goal. Ultimately this proved impossible and illusory, as it lacked both general Jewish and international support. In 1937 Polish Minister of Foreign Affairs Józef Beck declared in the League of Nations his support for the creation of a Jewish state and for an international conference to enable Jewish emigration. The common goals of the Polish state and of the Zionist movement, of increased Jewish population flow to Palestine, resulted in their overt and covert cooperation. Poland helped by organizing passports and facilitating illegal immigration, and supplied the Haganah with weapons. Poland also provided extensive support to the Irgun (the military branch of the Revisionist Zionist movement) in the form of military training and weapons. According to Irgun activists, the Polish state supplied the organisation with 25,000 rifles, additional material and weapons, and by summer 1939 Irgun&#x27;s Warsaw warehouses held 5,000 rifles and 1,000 machine guns. The training and support by Poland would allow the organisation to mobilise 30,000-40,000 men.

In 1938, the Polish government revoked Polish citizenship from tens-of-thousands Polish Jews who had lived outside the country for an extended period of time. It was feared that many Polish Jews living in Germany and Austria would want to return &quot;en masse&quot; to Poland to escape anti-Jewish measures. Their property was claimed by the Polish state.

By the time of the German invasion in 1939, antisemitism was escalating, and hostility towards Jews was a mainstay of the right-wing political forces post-Piłsudski regime and also the Catholic Church. Discrimination and violence against Jews had rendered the Polish Jewish population increasingly destitute. Despite the impending threat to the Polish Republic from Nazi Germany, there was little effort seen in the way of reconciliation with Poland&#x27;s Jewish population. In July 1939 the pro-government &quot;Gazeta Polska&quot; wrote, &quot;The fact that our relations with the Reich are worsening does not in the least deactivate our program in the Jewish question—there is not and cannot be any common ground between our internal Jewish problem and Poland&#x27;s relations with the Hitlerite Reich.&quot; Escalating hostility towards Polish Jews and an official Polish government desire to remove Jews from Poland continued until the German invasion of Poland.

==World War II and the destruction of Polish Jewry (1939–45)==
===Polish September Campaign===
The number of Jews in Poland on 1 September 1939, amounted to about 3,474,000 people. One hundred thirty thousand soldiers of Jewish descent, including Boruch Steinberg, Chief Rabbi of the Polish Military, served in the Polish Army at the outbreak of the Second World War, thus being among the first to launch armed resistance against Nazi Germany. During the September Campaign some 20,000 Jewish civilians and 32,216 Jewish soldiers were killed, while 61,000 were taken prisoner by the Germans; the majority did not survive. The soldiers and non-commissioned officers who were released ultimately found themselves in the Nazi ghettos and labor camps and suffered the same fate as other Jewish civilians in the ensuing Holocaust in Poland.
In 1939, Jews constituted 30% of Warsaw&#x27;s population. With the coming of the war, Jewish and Polish citizens of Warsaw jointly defended the city, putting their differences aside. Polish Jews later served in almost all Polish formations during the entire World War II, many were killed or wounded and very many were decorated for their combat skills and exceptional service. Jews fought with the Polish Armed Forces in the West, in the Soviet-formed Polish People&#x27;s Army as well as in several underground organizations and as part of Polish partisan units or Jewish partisan formations.

===Territories annexed by the USSR (1939–1941)===
The Soviet Union signed the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact with Nazi Germany on 23 August 1939 containing a protocol about partition of Poland. The German army attacked Poland on 1 September 1939. The Soviet Union followed suit by invading eastern Poland on 17 September 1939. The days between the retreat of the Polish army and the entry of the Red Army, September 18–21, witnessed a pogrom in Grodno, in which 25 Jews were killed (the Soviets later put some of the pogromists on trial).

Within weeks, 61.2% of Polish Jews found themselves under the German occupation, while 38.8% were trapped in the Polish areas annexed by the Soviet Union. Jews under German occupation were immediately maltreated, beaten, publicly executed, and even burnt alive in the synagogue. As a result 350,000 Polish Jews fled from the German-occupied area to the Soviet area. Upon annexing the region, the Soviet government recognized as Soviet citizens Jews (and other non-Poles) who were permanent residents of the area, while offering refugees the choice of either taking on Soviet citizenship or returning to their former homes.

The Soviet annexation was accompanied by the widespread arrests of government officials, police, military personnel, border guards, teachers, priests, judges etc., followed by the NKVD prisoner massacres and massive deportation of 320,000 Polish nationals to the Soviet interior and the Gulag slave labor camps where, as a result of the inhuman conditions, about half of them died before the end of war.

Jewish refugees under the Soviet occupation had little knowledge about what was going on under the Germans since the Soviet media did not report on the goings-on in territories occupied by their Nazi ally. Many people from Western Poland registered for repatriation back to the German zone, including wealthier Jews, as well as some political and social activists from the interwar period.

Synagogues and churches were not yet closed but heavily taxed. The Soviet ruble of little value was immediately equalized to the much higher Polish zloty and by the end of 1939, zloty was abolished. Most economic activity became subject to central planning and the NKVD restrictions. Since the Jewish communities tended to rely more on commerce and small-scale businesses, the confiscations of property affected them to a greater degree than the general populace. The Soviet rule resulted in near collapse of the local economy, characterized by insufficient wages and general shortage of goods and materials. The Jews, like other inhabitants of the region, saw a fall in their living standards.

Under the Soviet policy, ethnic Poles were dismissed and denied access to positions in the civil service. Former senior officials and notable members of the Polish community were arrested and exiled together with their families. At the same time the Soviet authorities encouraged young Jewish communists to fill in the newly emptied government and civil service jobs.
While most eastern Poles consolidated themselves around the anti-Soviet sentiments,&lt;ref name=&quot;B/C/S&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; a portion of the Jewish population, along with the ethnic Belarusian and Ukrainian activists had welcomed invading Soviet forces as their protectors. The general feeling among the Polish Jews was a sense of temporary relief in having escaped the Nazi occupation in the first weeks of war. The Polish poet and former communist Aleksander Wat has stated that Jews were more inclined to cooperate with the Soviets. Following Jan Karski&#x27;s report written in 1940, historian Norman Davies claimed that among the informers and collaborators, the percentage of Jews was striking; likewise, General Władysław Sikorski estimated that 30% of them identified with the communists whilst engaging in provocations; they prepared lists of Polish &quot;class enemies&quot;. Other historians have indicated that the level of Jewish collaboration could well have been less than suggested. Historian Martin Dean has written that &quot;few local Jews obtained positions of power under Soviet rule.&quot;

The issue of Jewish collaboration with the Soviet occupation remains controversial. Some scholars note that while not pro-Communist, many Jews saw the Soviets as the lesser threat compared to the German Nazis. They stress that stories of Jews welcoming the Soviets on the streets, vividly remembered by many Poles from the eastern part of the country are impressionistic and not reliable indicators of the level of Jewish support for the Soviets. Additionally, it has been noted that some ethnic Poles were as prominent as Jews in filling civil and police positions in the occupation administration, and that Jews, both civilians and in the Polish military, suffered equally at the hands of the Soviet occupiers. Whatever initial enthusiasm for the Soviet occupation Jews might have felt was soon dissipated upon feeling the impact of the suppression of Jewish societal modes of life by the occupiers. The tensions between ethnic Poles and Jews as a result of this period has, according to some historians, taken a toll on relations between Poles and Jews throughout the war, creating until this day, an impasse to Polish–Jewish rapprochement.

A number of younger Jews, often through the pro-Marxist Bund or some Zionist groups, were sympathetic to Communism and Soviet Russia, both of which had been enemies of the Polish Second Republic. As a result of these factors they found it easy after 1939 to participate in the Soviet occupation administration in Eastern Poland, and briefly occupied prominent positions in industry, schools, local government, police and other Soviet-installed institutions. The concept of &quot;Judeo-communism&quot; was reinforced during the period of the Soviet occupation (see ).

There were also Jews who assisted Poles during the Soviet occupation. Among the thousands of Polish officers killed by the Soviet NKVD in the Katyń massacre there were 500–600 Jews. From 1939 to 1941 between 100,000 and 300,000 Polish Jews were deported from Soviet-occupied Polish territory into the Soviet Union. Some of them, especially Polish Communists (e.g. Jakub Berman), moved voluntarily; however, most of them were forcibly deported or imprisoned in a &quot;Gulag&quot;. Small numbers of Polish Jews (about 6,000) were able to leave the Soviet Union in 1942 with the Władysław Anders army, among them the future Prime Minister of Israel Menachem Begin. During the Polish army&#x27;s II Corps&#x27; stay in the British Mandate of Palestine, 67% (2,972) of the Jewish soldiers deserted to settle in Palestine, and many joined the &quot;Irgun&quot;. General Anders decided not to prosecute the deserters and emphasized that the Jewish soldiers who remained in the Force fought bravely. The Cemetery of Polish soldiers who died during the Battle of Monte Cassino includes headstones bearing a Star of David. A number of Jewish soldiers died also when liberating Bologna.

===The Holocaust===

Poland&#x27;s Jewish community suffered the most in the Holocaust. Some six million Polish citizens perished in the war – half of those (three million Polish Jews, all but some 300,000 of the Jewish population) being killed at the German extermination camps at Auschwitz, Treblinka, Majdanek, Belzec, Sobibór, and Chełmno or starved to death in the ghettos.

Poland was where the German program of extermination of Jews, the &quot;Final Solution&quot;, was implemented, since this was where most of Europe&#x27;s Jews (excluding the Soviet Union&#x27;s) lived.

In 1939 several hundred synagogues were blown up or burned by the Germans, who sometimes forced the Jews to do it themselves. In many cases, the Germans turned the synagogues into factories, places of entertainment, swimming pools, or prisons. By war&#x27;s end, almost all the synagogues in Poland had been destroyed. Rabbis were forced to dance and sing in public with their beards shorn off. Some rabbis were set on fire or hanged.
The Germans ordered that all Jews be registered, and the word &quot;Jude&quot; was stamped in their identity cards. Numerous restrictions and prohibitions targeting Jews were introduced and brutally enforced. For example, Jews were forbidden to walk on the sidewalks, use public transport, or enter places of leisure, sports arenas, theaters, museums and libraries. On the street, Jews had to lift their hat to passing Germans. By the end of 1941 all Jews in German-occupied Poland, except the children, had to wear an identifying badge with a blue Star of David. Rabbis were humiliated in &quot;spectacles organised by the German soldiers and police&quot; who used their rifle butts &quot;to make these men dance in their praying shawls.&quot; The Germans &quot;disappointed that Poles refused to collaborate&quot;, made little attempts to set up a collaborationist government in Poland, nevertheless, German tabloids printed in Polish routinely ran antisemitic articles that urged local people to adopt an attitude of indifference towards the Jews.
Following Operation Barbarossa, many Jews in what was then Eastern Poland fell victim to Nazi death squads called &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot;, which massacred Jews, especially in 1941. Some of these German-inspired massacres were carried out with help from, or active participation of Poles themselves: for example, the Jedwabne pogrom, in which between 300 (Institute of National Remembrance&#x27;s Final Findings) and 1,600 Jews (Jan T. Gross) were tortured and beaten to death by members of the local population. The full extent of Polish participation in the massacres of the Polish Jewish community remains a controversial subject, in part due to Jewish leaders&#x27; refusal to allow the remains of the Jewish victims to be exhumed and their cause of death to be properly established. The Polish Institute for National Remembrance identified twenty-two other towns that had pogroms similar to Jedwabne. The reasons for these massacres are still debated, but they included antisemitism, resentment over alleged cooperation with the Soviet invaders in the Polish–Soviet War and during the 1939 invasion of the Kresy regions, greed for the possessions of the Jews, and of course coercion by the Nazis to participate in such massacres.

Some Jewish historians have written of the negative attitudes of some Poles towards persecuted Jews during the Holocaust. While members of Catholic clergy risked their lives to assist Jews, their efforts were sometimes made in the face of antisemitic attitudes from the church hierarchy. Anti-Jewish attitudes also existed in the London-based Polish Government in Exile, although on 18 December 1942 the President in exile Władysław Raczkiewicz wrote a dramatic letter to Pope Pius XII, begging him for a public defense of both murdered Poles and Jews. In spite of the introduction of death penalty extending to the entire families of rescuers, the number of Polish Righteous among the Nations testifies to the fact that Poles were willing to take risks in order to save Jews.

Holocaust survivors&#x27; views of Polish behavior during the War span a wide range, depending on their personal experiences. Some are very negative, based on the view of Christian Poles as passive witnesses who failed to act and aid the Jews as they were being persecuted or liquidated by the Nazis. Poles, who were also victims of Nazi crimes, were often afraid for their own and their family&#x27;s lives and this fear prevented many of them from giving aid and assistance, even if some of them felt sympathy for the Jews. Emanuel Ringelblum, a Polish–Jewish historian of the Warsaw Ghetto, wrote critically of the indifferent and sometimes joyful responses in Warsaw to the destruction of Polish Jews in the Ghetto. However, Gunnar S. Paulsson stated that Polish citizens of Warsaw managed to support and hide the same percentage of Jews as did the citizens of cities in Western European countries. Paulsson&#x27;s research shows that at least as far as Warsaw is concerned, the number of Poles aiding Jews far outnumbered those who sold out their Jewish neighbors to the Nazis. During the Nazi occupation of Warsaw 70,000–90,000 Polish gentiles aided Jews, while 3,000–4,000 were szmalcowniks, or blackmailers who collaborated with the Nazis in persecuting the Jews.

===Ghettos and death camps===
The German Nazis established six extermination camps throughout occupied Poland by 1942. All of these – at Chełmno (Kulmhof), Bełżec, Sobibór, Treblinka, Majdanek and Auschwitz (Oświęcim) – were located near the rail network so that the victims could be easily transported. The system of the camps was expanded over the course of the German occupation of Poland and their purposes were diversified; some served as transit camps, some as forced labor camps and the majority as death camps. While in the death camps, the victims were usually killed shortly after arrival, in the other camps able-bodied Jews were worked and beaten to death. The operation of concentration camps depended on Kapos, the collaborator-prisoners. Some of them were Jewish themselves, and their prosecution after the war created an ethical dilemma.
Between October 1939 and July 1942 a system of ghettos was imposed for the confinement of Jews. The Warsaw Ghetto was the largest in all of World War II, with 380,000 people crammed into an area of . The Łódź Ghetto was the second largest, holding about 160,000 prisoners. Other large Jewish ghettos in leading Polish cities included Białystok Ghetto in Białystok, Częstochowa Ghetto, Kielce Ghetto, Kraków Ghetto in Kraków, Lublin Ghetto, Lwów Ghetto in present-day Lviv, Stanisławów Ghetto also in present-day Ukraine, Brześć Ghetto in present-day Belarus, and Radom Ghetto among others. Ghettos were also established in hundreds of smaller settlements and villages around the country. The overcrowding, dirt, lice, lethal epidemics such as typhoid and hunger all resulted in countless deaths.

During the occupation of Poland, the Germans used various laws to separate ethnic Poles from Jewish ones. In the ghettos, the population was separated by putting the Poles into the &quot;Aryan Side&quot; and the Polish Jews into the &quot;Jewish Side&quot;. Any Pole found giving any help to a Jewish Pole was subject to the death penalty. Another law implemented by the Germans was that Poles were forbidden from buying from Jewish shops, and if they did they were subject to execution. Many Jews tried to escape from the ghettos in the hope of finding a place to hide outside of it, or of joining the partisan units. When this proved difficult escapees often returned to the ghetto on their own. If caught, Germans would murder the escapees and leave their bodies in plain view as a warning to others. Despite these terror tactics, attempts at escape from ghettos continued until their liquidation.

Since the Nazi terror reigned throughout the Aryan districts, the chances of remaining successfully hidden depended on a fluent knowledge of the language and on having close ties with the community. Many Poles were not willing to hide Jews who might have escaped the ghettos or who might have been in hiding due to fear for their own lives and that of their families.

While the German policy towards Jews was ruthless and criminal, their policy towards Christian Poles who helped Jews was very much the same. The Germans would often murder non-Jewish Poles for small misdemeanors. Execution for help rendered to Jews, even the most basic kinds, was automatic. In any apartment block or area where Jews were found to be harboured, everybody in the house would be immediately shot by the Germans. For this thousands of non-Jewish Poles were executed.
Hiding in a Christian society to which the Jews were only partially assimilated was a daunting task. They needed to quickly acquire not only a new identity, but a new body of knowledge. Many Jews spoke Polish with a distinct Yiddish or Hebrew accent, used a different nonverbal language, different gestures and facial expressions. People with physical characteristics such as dark curly hair and brown eyes were particularly vulnerable.

Some individuals blackmailed Jews and non-Jewish Poles hiding them, and took advantage of their desperation by collecting money, or worse, turning them over to the Germans for a reward. The Gestapo provided a standard prize to those who informed on Jews hidden on the &#x27;Aryan&#x27; side, consisting of cash, liquor, sugar, and cigarettes. Jews were robbed and handed over to the Germans by &quot;szmalcowniks&quot; (the &#x27;shmalts&#x27; people: from &quot;shmalts&quot; or &quot;szmalec&quot;, Yiddish and Polish for &#x27;grease&#x27;). In extreme cases, the Jews informed on other Jews to alleviate hunger with the awarded prize. The extortionists were condemned by the Polish Underground State. The fight against informers was organized by the Armia Krajowa (the Underground State&#x27;s military arm), with the death sentence being meted out on a scale unknown in the occupied countries of Western Europe.
To discourage Poles from giving shelter to Jews, the Germans often searched houses and introduced ruthless penalties. Poland was the only occupied country during World War II where the Nazis formally imposed the death penalty for anybody found sheltering and helping Jews. The penalty applied not only to the person who did the helping, but also extended to his or her family, neighbors and sometimes to entire villages. In this way Germans applied the principle of collective responsibility whose purpose was to encourage neighbors to inform on each other in order to avoid punishment. The nature of these policies was widely known and visibly publicized by the Nazis who sought to terrorize the Polish population.

Food rations for the Poles were small (669 kcal per day in 1941) compared to other occupied nations throughout Europe and black market prices of necessary goods were high, factors which made it difficult to hide people and almost impossible to hide entire families, especially in the cities. Despite these draconian measures imposed by the Nazis, Poland has the highest number of Righteous Among The Nations awards at the Yad Vashem Museum (6,339).

The Polish Government in Exile was the first (in November 1942) to reveal the existence of Nazi-run concentration camps and the systematic extermination of the Jews by the Nazis, through its courier Jan Karski and through the activities of Witold Pilecki, a member of &quot;Armia Krajowa&quot; who was the only person to volunteer for imprisonment in Auschwitz and who organized a resistance movement inside the camp itself. One of the Jewish members of the National Council of the Polish government in exile, Szmul Zygielbojm, committed suicide to protest the indifference of the Allied governments in the face of the Holocaust in Poland. The Polish government in exile was also the only government to set up an organization (Żegota) specifically aimed at helping the Jews in Poland.

====The Warsaw Ghetto and its uprising====

The Warsaw Ghetto and its 1943 Uprising represents what is likely the most known episode of the wartime history of the Polish Jews. The ghetto was established by the German Governor-General Hans Frank on 16 October 1940. Initially, almost 140,000 Jews were moved into the ghetto from all parts of Warsaw. At the same time, approximately 110,000 Poles had been forcibly evicted from the area. The Germans selected Adam Czerniakow to take charge of the Jewish Council called Judenrat made up of 24 Jewish men ordered to organize Jewish labor battalions as well as Jewish Ghetto Police which would be responsible for maintaining order within the Ghetto walls. A number of Jewish policemen were corrupt and immoral. Soon the Nazis demanded even more from the Judenrat and the demands were much crueler. Death was the punishment for the slightest indication of noncompliance by the Judenrat. Sometimes the Judenrat refused to collaborate in which case its members were consequently executed and replaced by the new group of people. Adam Czerniakow who was the head of the Warsaw Judenrat committed suicide when he was forced to collect daily lists of Jews to be deported to the Treblinka extermination camp at the onset of Grossaktion Warsaw.

The population of the ghetto reached 380,000 people by the end of 1940, about 30% of the population of Warsaw. However, the size of the Ghetto was only about 2.4% of the size of the city. The Germans closed off the Ghetto from the outside world, building a wall around it by 16 November 1940. During the next year and a half, Jews from smaller cities and villages were brought into the Warsaw Ghetto, while diseases (especially typhoid) and starvation kept the inhabitants at about the same number. Average food rations in 1941 for Jews in Warsaw were limited to 253 kcal, and 669 kcal for Poles, as opposed to 2,613 kcal for Germans. On 22 July 1942, the mass deportation of the Warsaw Ghetto inhabitants began. During the next fifty-two days (until 12 September 1942) about 300,000 people were transported by freight train to the Treblinka extermination camp. The Jewish Ghetto Police were ordered to escort the ghetto inhabitants to the Umschlagplatz train station. They were spared from the deportations until September 1942 in return for their cooperation, but afterwards shared their fate with families and relatives. On 18 January 1943, a group of Ghetto militants led by the right-leaning ŻZW, including some members of the left-leaning ŻOB, rose up in a first Warsaw uprising. Both organizations resisted, with arms, German attempts for additional deportations to Auschwitz and Treblinka. The final destruction of the Warsaw Ghetto came four months later after the crushing of one of the most heroic and tragic battles of the war, the 1943 Warsaw Ghetto Uprising.


The Uprising was led by ŻOB (&quot;Jewish Combat Organization&quot;) and the ŻZW. The ŻZW (&quot;Jewish Military Union&quot;) was the better supplied in arms. The ŻOB had more than 750 fighters, but lacked weapons; they had only 9 rifles, 59 pistols and several grenades. A developed network of bunkers and fortifications were formed. The Jewish fighters also received support from the Polish Underground (Armia Krajowa). The German forces, which included 2,842 Nazi soldiers and 7,000 security personnel, were not capable of crushing the Jewish resistance in open street combat and after several days, decided to switch strategy by setting buildings on fire in which the Jewish fighters hid. The commander of the ŻOB, Mordechai Anielewicz, died fighting on 8 May 1943 at the organization&#x27;s command centre on 18 Mila Street.
It took the Germans twenty-seven days to put down the uprising, after some very heavy fighting. The German general Jürgen Stroop in his report stated that his troops had killed 6,065 Jewish fighters during the battle. After the uprising was already over, Heinrich Himmler had the Great Synagogue on Tłomackie Square (outside the ghetto) destroyed as a celebration of German victory and a symbol that the Jewish Ghetto in Warsaw was no longer.

A group of fighters escaped from the ghetto through the sewers and reached the Lomianki forest. About 50 ghetto fighters were saved by the Polish &quot;People&#x27;s Guard&quot; and later formed their own partisan group, named after Anielewicz. Even after the end of the uprising there were still several hundreds of Jews who continued living in the ruined ghetto. Many of them survived thanks to the contacts they managed to establish with Poles outside the ghetto. The Uprising inspired Jews throughout Poland. Many Jewish leaders who survived the liquidation continued underground work outside the ghetto. They hid other Jews, forged necessary documents and were active in the Polish underground in other parts of Warsaw and the surrounding area.
Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, was followed by other Ghetto uprisings in many smaller towns and cities across German-occupied Poland. Many Jews were found alive in the ruins of the former Warsaw Ghetto during the 1944 general Warsaw Uprising when the Poles themselves rose up against the Germans. Some of the survivors of 1943 Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, still held in camps at or near Warsaw, were freed during 1944 Warsaw Uprising, led by the Polish resistance movement Armia Krajowa, and immediately joined Polish fighters. Only a few of them survived. The Polish commander of one Jewish unit, Waclaw Micuta, described them as some of the best fighters, always at the front line. It is estimated that over 2,000 Polish Jews, some as well known as Marek Edelman or Icchak Cukierman, and several dozen Greek, Hungarian or even German Jews freed by Armia Krajowa from Gesiowka concentration camp in Warsaw, men and women, took part in combat against Nazis during 1944 Warsaw Uprising. Some 166,000 people lost their lives in the 1944 Warsaw Uprising, including perhaps as many as 17,000 Polish Jews who had either fought with the AK or had been discovered in hiding (&quot;see:&quot; Krzysztof Kamil Baczyński and Stanisław Aronson). Warsaw was razed to the ground by the Germans and more than 150,000 Poles were sent to labor or concentration camps. On 17 January 1945, the Soviet Army entered a destroyed and nearly uninhabited Warsaw. Some 300 Jews were found hiding in the ruins in the Polish part of the city (&quot;see:&quot; Władysław Szpilman).
The fate of the Warsaw Ghetto was similar to that of the other ghettos in which Jews were concentrated. With the decision of Nazi Germany to begin the Final Solution, the destruction of the Jews of Europe, Aktion Reinhard began in 1942, with the opening of the extermination camps of Bełżec, Sobibór, and Treblinka, followed by Auschwitz-Birkenau where people were killed in gas chambers and mass executions (death wall). Many died from hunger, starvation, disease, torture or by pseudo-medical experiments. The mass deportation of Jews from ghettos to these camps, such as happened at the Warsaw Ghetto, soon followed, and more than 1.7 million Jews were killed at the Aktion Reinhard camps by October 1943 alone.

====The Białystok Ghetto and its uprising====
In August 1941, the Germans ordered the establishment of a ghetto in Białystok. About 50,000 Jews from the city and the surrounding region were confined in a small area of Białystok. The ghetto had two sections, divided by the Biala River. Most Jews in the Białystok ghetto worked in forced-labor projects, primarily in large textile factories located within the ghetto boundaries. The Germans also sometimes used Jews in forced-labor projects outside the ghetto.

In February 1943, approximately 10,000 Białystok Jews were deported to the Treblinka extermination camp. During the deportations, hundreds of Jews, mainly those deemed too weak or sick to travel, were killed.

In August 1943, the Germans mounted an operation to destroy the Białystok ghetto. German forces and local police auxiliaries surrounded the ghetto and began to round up Jews systematically for deportation to the Treblinka extermination camp. Approximately 7,600 Jews were held in a central transit camp in the city before deportation to Treblinka. Those deemed fit to work were sent to the Majdanek camp. In Majdanek, after another screening for ability to work, they were transported to the Poniatowa, Blizyn, or Auschwitz camps. Those deemed too weak to work were murdered at Majdanek. More than 1,000 Jewish children were sent first to the Theresienstadt ghetto in Bohemia, and then to Auschwitz-Birkenau, where they were killed.

On 15 August 1943, the Białystok Ghetto Uprising began, and several hundred Polish Jews and members of the Anti-Fascist Military Organisation () started an armed struggle against the German troops who were carrying out the planned liquidation and deportation of the ghetto to the Treblinka extermination camp. The guerrillas were armed with only one machine gun, several dozen pistols, Molotov cocktails and bottles filled with acid. The fighting in isolated pockets of resistance lasted for several days, but the defence was broken almost instantly. As with the earlier Warsaw Ghetto Uprising of April 1943, the Białystok uprising had no chances for military success, but it was the second-largest ghetto uprising, after the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising. Several dozen guerrillas managed to break through to the forests surrounding Białystok where they joined the partisan units of Armia Krajowa and other organisations and survived the war.

==Communist rule: 1945–1989==
===Number of Holocaust survivors===
The estimates of Polish Jews before the war vary from slightly under 3 million to almost 3.5 million (the last nationwide census was conducted in 1931).

The number of Polish Jews who survived the Holocaust is difficult to ascertain. The majority of Polish Jewish survivors were individuals who were able to find refuge in the territories of Soviet Union that were not overrun by Germans and thus safe from the Holocaust. It is estimated that between 250,000 and 800,000 Polish Jews survived the war, out of which between 50,000 and 100,000 were survivors from occupied Poland, and the remainder, survivors who made it abroad (mostly to the Soviet Union).

Following the Soviet annexation of over half of Poland at the onset of World War II, all Polish nationals including Jews were declared by Moscow to have become Soviet nationals regardless of birth. Also, all Polish Jews who perished in the Holocaust east of the Curzon Line were included with the Soviet war dead. For decades to come, the Soviet authorities refused to accept the fact that thousands of Jews who remained in the USSR opted consciously and unambiguously for Polish nationality. At the end of 1944, the number of Polish Jews in the Soviet and the Soviet-controlled territories has been estimated at 250,000–300,000 people. Jews who escaped to eastern Poland from areas occupied by Germany in 1939 were numbering at around 198,000. Over 150,000 of them were repatriated or expelled back to new communist Poland along with the Jewish men conscripted to the Red Army from Kresy in 1940–1941. Their families were murdered in the Holocaust. Some of the soldiers married women with the Soviet citizenship, others agreed to paper marriages. Those who survived the Holocaust in Poland included Jews who were saved by the Poles (most families with children), and those who joined the Polish or Soviet resistance movement. Some 20,000–40,000 Jews were repatriated from Germany and other countries. At its postwar peak, up to 240,000 returning Jews might have resided in Poland mostly in Warsaw, Łódź, Kraków, Wrocław and Lower Silesia, e.g., Dzierżoniów (where there was a significant Jewish community initially consisting of local concentration camp survivors), Legnica, and Bielawa.

===The Jewish community in post-war Poland===
Following World War II Poland became a satellite state of the Soviet Union, with its eastern regions annexed to the Union, and its western borders expanded to include formerly German territories east of the Oder and Neisse rivers. This forced millions to relocate (see also Territorial changes of Poland immediately after World War II). Jewish survivors returning to their homes in Poland found it practically impossible to reconstruct their pre-war lives. Due to the border shifts, some Polish Jews found that their homes were now in the Soviet Union; in other cases, the returning survivors were German Jews whose homes were now under Polish jurisdiction. Jewish communities and Jewish life as it had existed was gone, and Jews who somehow survived the Holocaust often discovered that their homes had been looted or destroyed.

====Anti-Jewish violence and discrimination====

Some returning Jews were met with antisemitic bias in Polish employment and education administrations. Post-war labor certificates contained markings distinguishing Jews from non-Jews. The Jewish community in Szczecin reported a lengthy report of complaints regarding job discrimination. Although Jewish schools were created in the few towns containing a relatively large Jewish population, many Jewish children were enrolled in Polish state schools. Some state schools, as in the town of Otwock, forbade Jewish children to enroll. In the state schools that did allow Jewish children, there were numerous accounts of beatings and persecution targeting these children.

The anti-Jewish violence in Poland refers to a series of violent incidents in Poland that immediately followed the end of World War II in Europe. It occurred amid a period of violence and anarchy across the country, caused by lawlessness and anti-communist resistance against the Soviet-backed communist takeover of Poland.
 The exact number of Jewish victims is a subject of debate with 327 documented cases, and range, estimated by different writers, from 400 to 2,000. Jews constituted between 2 and 3% of the total number of victims of postwar violence in the country, including the Polish Jews who managed to escape the Holocaust on territories of Poland annexed by the Soviet Union, and returned after the border changes imposed by the Allies at the Yalta Conference. The incidents ranged from individual attacks to pogroms.

The best-known case is the Kielce pogrom of 4 July 1946, in which thirty-seven Jews and two Poles were murdered. Following the investigation, the local police commander was found guilty of inaction. Nine alleged participants of the pogrom were sentenced to death; three were given lengthy prison sentences. The debate in Poland continues about the involvement of regular troops in the killings, and possible Soviet influences.

In a number of other instances, returning Jews still met with threats, violence, and murder from their Polish neighbors, occasionally in a deliberate and organized manner. People of the community frequently had knowledge of these murders and turned a blind eye or held no sympathy for the victims. Jewish communities responded to this violence by reporting the violence to the Ministry of Public Administration, but were granted little assistance. As many as 1500 Jewish heirs were often murdered when attempting to reclaim property.

Several causes led to the anti-Jewish violence of 1944–1947. One cause was traditional Christian anti-semitism; the pogrom in Cracow (11 August 1945) and in Kielce followed accusations of ritual murder. Another cause was the gentile Polish hostility to the Communist takeover. Even though very few Jews lived in postwar Poland, many Poles believed they dominated the Communist authorities, a belief expressed in the term (Judeo-Communist), a popular anti-Jewish stereotype. Yet another reason for Polish violence towards Jews stemmed from the fear that survivors would recover their property.

==== Jewish property ====
After the war ended, Poland&#x27;s Communist government enacted a broad program of nationalization and land reform, taking over large numbers of properties, both Polish- and Jewish-owned. As part of the reform the Polish People&#x27;s Republic enacted legislation on &quot;abandoned property&quot;, placing severe limitations on inheritance that were not present in prewar inheritance law, for example limiting restitution to the original owners or their immediate heirs. According to Dariusz Stola, the 1945 and 1946 laws governing restitution were enacted with the intention of restricting Jewish restitution claims as one of their main goals. The 1946 law carried a deadline of 31 December 1947 (later extended to 31 December 1948), after which unclaimed property devolved to the Polish state; many survivors residing in the USSR or in displaced-persons camps were repatriated only after the deadline had passed. All other properties that had been confiscated by the Nazi regime were deemed &quot;abandoned&quot;; however, as Yechiel Weizman notes, the fact most of Poland&#x27;s Jewry had died, in conjunction with the fact that only Jewish property was officially confiscated by the Nazis, suggest &quot;abandoned property&quot; was equivalent to &quot;Jewish property&quot;. According to Łukasz Krzyżanowski, the state actively sought to gain control over a large number of &quot;abandoned&quot; properties. According to Krzyżanowski, this declaration of &quot;abandoned&quot; property can be seen as the last stage of the expropriation process that began during the German wartime occupation; by approving the status-quo shaped by the German occupation authorities, the Polish authorities became &quot;the beneficiary of the murder of millions of its Jewish citizens, who were deprived of all their property before death&quot;. A 1945 memorandum by the Joint states that &quot;the new economic tendency of the Polish government... is against, or at least makes difficulties in, getting back the Jewish property robbed by the German authorities.&quot; Later laws, while more generous, remained mainly on paper, with an &quot;uneven&quot; implementation.

Many of the properties that were previously owned or by Jews were taken over by others during the war. Attempting to reclaim an occupied property often put the claimant at a risk of physical harm and even death. Many who proceeded with the process were only granted possession, not ownership, of their properties; and completing the restitution process, given that most properties were already occupied, required additional, lengthy processes. The majority of Jewish claimants could not afford the restitution process without financial help, due to the filing costs, legal fees, and inheritance tax. While it is hard to determine the total number of successful reclamations, Michael Meng estimates that it was extremely small.

In general, restitution was easier for larger organizations or well connected individuals, and the process was also abused by criminal gangs.

&quot;Movable&quot; property such as housewares, that was either given by Jews for safekeeping or taken during the war, was rarely returned willfully; oftentimes the only resort for a returnee looking for reappropriation was the courts. Most such property was probably never returned. According to Jan Gross, &quot;there was no social norm mandating the return of Jewish property, no detectable social pressure defining such behavior as the right thing to do, no informal social control mechanism imposing censure for doing otherwise.&quot;

Facing violence and a difficult and expensive legal process, many returnees eventually decided to leave the country rather than attempt reclamation.

Following the fall of the Soviet Union, a law was passed that allowed the Catholic Church to reclaim its properties, which it did with great success. According to Stephen Denburg, &quot;unlike the restitution of Church property, the idea of returning property to former Jewish owners has been met with a decided lack of enthusiasm from both the general Polish population as well as the government&quot;.

Decades later, reclaiming pre-war property would lead to a number of controversies, and the matter is still debated by media and scholars as of late 2010s. Dariusz Stola notes that the issues of property in Poland are incredibly complex, and need to take into consideration unprecedented losses of both Jewish and Polish population and massive destruction caused by Nazi Germany, as well as the expansion of Soviet Union and communism into Polish territories after the war, which dictated the property laws for the next 50 years. Poland remains &quot;the only EU country and the only former Eastern European communist state not to have enacted [a restitution] law,&quot; but rather &quot;a patchwork of laws and court decisions promulgated from 1945–present.&quot; As stated by Dariusz Stola, director of the POLIN Museum, &quot;the question of restitution is in many ways connected to the question of Polish–Jewish relations, their history and remembrance, but particularly to the attitude of the Poles to the Holocaust.&quot;

====Emigration to Palestine and Israel====

For a variety of reasons, the vast majority of returning Jewish survivors left Poland soon after the war ended. Many left for the West because they did not want to live under a Communist regime. Some left because of the persecution they faced in postwar Poland, and because they did not want to live where their family members had been murdered, and instead have arranged to live with relatives or friends in different western democracies. Others wanted to go to British Mandate of Palestine soon to be the new state of Israel, especially after General Marian Spychalski signed a decree allowing Jews to leave Poland without visas or exit permits. In 1946–1947 Poland was the only Eastern Bloc country to allow free Jewish aliyah to Israel, without visas or exit permits. Britain demanded Poland to halt the exodus, but their pressure was largely unsuccessful.

Between 1945 and 1948, 100,000–120,000 Jews left Poland. Their departure was largely organized by the Zionist activists including Adolf Berman and Icchak Cukierman, under the umbrella of a semi-clandestine &quot;Berihah&quot; (&quot;Flight&quot;) organization. &quot;Berihah&quot; was also responsible for the organized Aliyah emigration of Jews from Romania, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and Poland, totaling 250,000 survivors. In 1947, a military training camp for young Jewish volunteers to Hagana was established in Bolków, Poland. The camp trained 7,000 soldiers who then traveled to Palestine to fight for Israel. The boot-camp existed until the end of 1948.

A second wave of Jewish emigration (50,000) took place during the liberalization of the Communist regime between 1957 and 1959. After 1967&#x27;s Six-Day War, in which the Soviet Union supported the Arab side, the Polish communist party adopted an anti-Jewish course of action which in the years 1968–1969 provoked the last mass migration of Jews from Poland.

The Bund took part in the post-war elections of 1947 on a common ticket with the (non-communist) Polish Socialist Party (PPS) and gained its first and only parliamentary seat in its Polish history, plus several seats in municipal councils. Under pressure from Soviet-installed communist authorities, the Bund&#x27;s leaders &#x27;voluntarily&#x27; disbanded the party in 1948–1949 against the opposition of many activists. Stalinist Poland was basically governed by the Soviet NKVD which was against the renewal of Jewish religious and cultural life. In the years 1948–49, all remaining Jewish schools were nationalized by the communists and Yiddish was replaced with Polish as a language of teaching.

====Rebuilding Jewish communities====
For those Polish Jews who remained, the rebuilding of Jewish life in Poland was carried out between October 1944 and 1950 by the Central Committee of Polish Jews (&quot;Centralny Komitet Żydów Polskich&quot;, CKŻP) which provided legal, educational, social care, cultural, and propaganda services. A countrywide Jewish Religious Community, led by Dawid Kahane, who served as chief rabbi of the Polish Armed Forces, functioned between 1945 and 1948 until it was absorbed by the CKŻP. Eleven independent political Jewish parties, of which eight were legal, existed until their dissolution during 1949–50. Hospitals and schools were opened in Poland by the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee and ORT to provide service to Jewish communities. Some Jewish cultural institutions were established including the Yiddish State Theater founded in 1950 and directed by Ida Kamińska, the Jewish Historical Institute, an academic institution specializing in the research of the history and culture of the Jews in Poland, and the Yiddish newspaper &quot;Folks-Shtime&quot; (&quot;People&#x27;s Voice&quot;). Following liberalization after Joseph Stalin&#x27;s death, in this 1958–59 period, 50,000 Jews emigrated to Israel.

Some Polish Communists of Jewish descent actively participated in the establishment of the communist regime in the People&#x27;s Republic of Poland between 1944 and 1956. Hand-picked by Joseph Stalin, prominent Jews held posts in the Politburo of the Polish United Workers&#x27; Party including Jakub Berman, head of state security apparatus &quot;Urząd Bezpieczeństwa&quot; (UB), and Hilary Minc responsible for establishing a Communist-style economy. Together with hardliner Bolesław Bierut, Berman and Minc formed a triumvirate of the Stalinist leaders in postwar Poland. After 1956, during the process of de-Stalinisation in the People&#x27;s Republic under Władysław Gomułka, some Jewish officials from &quot;Urząd Bezpieczeństwa&quot; including Roman Romkowski, Jacek Różański, and Anatol Fejgin, were prosecuted and sentenced to prison terms for &quot;power abuses&quot; including the torture of Polish anti-fascists including Witold Pilecki among others. Yet another Jewish official, Józef Światło, after escaping to the West in 1953, exposed through Radio Free Europe the interrogation methods used the UB which led to its restructuring in 1954. Solomon Morel a member of the Ministry of Public Security of Poland and commandant of the Stalinist era Zgoda labour camp, fled Poland for Israel in 1992 to escape prosecution. Helena Wolińska-Brus, a former Stalinist prosecutor who emigrated to England in the late 1960s, fought being extradited to Poland on charges related to the execution of a Second World War resistance hero Emil Fieldorf. Wolińska-Brus died in London in 2008.

====The March 1968 events and their aftermath====
In 1967, following the Six-Day War between Israel and the Arab states, Poland&#x27;s Communist government, following the Soviet lead, broke off diplomatic relations with Israel and launched an antisemitic campaign under the guise of &quot;anti-Zionism&quot;. However, the campaign did not resonate well with the Polish public, as most Poles saw similarities between Israel&#x27;s fight for survival and Poland&#x27;s past struggles for independence. Many Poles also felt pride in the success of the Israeli military, which was dominated by Polish Jews. The slogan &quot;our Jews beat the Soviet Arabs&quot; (Nasi Żydzi pobili sowieckich Arabów) became popular in Poland.

The vast majority of the 40,000 Jews in Poland by the late 1960s were completely assimilated into the broader society. However, this did not prevent them from becoming victims of a campaign, centrally organized by the Polish Communist Party, with Soviet backing, which equated Jewish origins with &quot;Zionism&quot; and disloyalty to a Socialist Poland.

In March 1968 student-led demonstrations in Warsaw (&quot;see Polish 1968 political crisis&quot;) gave Gomułka&#x27;s government an excuse to try and channel public anti-government sentiment into another avenue. Thus his security chief, Mieczysław Moczar, used the situation as a pretext to launch an antisemitic press campaign (although the expression &quot;Zionist&quot; was officially used). The state-sponsored &quot;anti-Zionist&quot; campaign resulted in the removal of Jews from the Polish United Workers&#x27; Party and from teaching positions in schools and universities. In 1967–1971 under economic, political and secret police pressure, over 14,000 Polish Jews chose to leave Poland and relinquish their Polish citizenship. Officially, it was said that they chose to go to Israel. However, only about 4,000 actually went there; most settled throughout Europe and in the United States. The leaders of the Communist party tried to stifle the ongoing protests and unrest by scapegoating the Jews. At the same time there was an ongoing power struggle within the party itself and the antisemitic campaign was used by one faction against another. The so-called &quot;Partisan&quot; faction blamed the Jews who had held office during the Stalinist period for the excesses that had occurred, but the result was that most of the remaining Polish Jews, regardless of their background or political affiliation, were targeted by the communist authorities.

There were several outcomes of the &quot;March 1968 events&quot;. The campaign damaged Poland&#x27;s reputation abroad, particularly in the U.S. Many Polish intellectuals, however, were disgusted at the promotion of official antisemitism and opposed the campaign. Some of the people who emigrated to the West at this time founded organizations that encouraged anti-Communist opposition inside Poland.

First attempts to improve Polish–Israeli relations began in the mid-1970s. Poland was the first of the Eastern Bloc countries to restore diplomatic relations with Israel after these have been broken off right after the Six-Day&#x27;s War. In 1986 partial diplomatic relations with Israel were restored, and full relations were restored in 1990 as soon as communism fell.

During the late 1970s some Jewish activists were engaged in the anti-Communist opposition groups. Most prominent among them, Adam Michnik (founder of &quot;Gazeta Wyborcza&quot;) was one of the founders of the Workers&#x27; Defence Committee (KOR). By the time of the fall of Communism in Poland in 1989, only 5,000–10,000 Jews remained in the country, many of them preferring to conceal their Jewish origin.

==Since 1989==

With the fall of communism in Poland, Jewish cultural, social, and religious life has been undergoing a revival. Many historical issues, especially related to World War II and the 1944–89 period, suppressed by Communist censorship, have been re-evaluated and publicly discussed (like the Jedwabne pogrom, the Koniuchy massacre, the Kielce pogrom, the Auschwitz cross, and Polish-Jewish wartime relations in general).

Jewish religious life has been revived with the help of the Ronald Lauder Foundation and the Taube Foundation for Jewish Life &amp; Culture. There are two rabbis serving the Polish Jewish community, several Jewish schools and associated summer camps as well as several periodical and book series sponsored by the above foundations. Jewish studies programs are offered at major universities, such as Warsaw University and the Jagiellonian University. The Union of Jewish Religious Communities in Poland was founded in 1993. Its purpose is the promotion and organization of Jewish religious and cultural activities in Polish communities.

A large number of cities with synagogues include Warsaw, Kraków, Zamość, Tykocin, Rzeszów, Kielce, or Góra Kalwaria although not many of them are still active in their original religious role. Stara Synagoga (&quot;Old Synagogue&quot;) in Kraków, which hosts a Jewish museum, was built in the early 15th century and is the oldest synagogue in Poland. Before the war, the Yeshiva Chachmei in Lublin was Europe&#x27;s largest. In 2007 it was renovated, dedicated and reopened thanks to the efforts and endowments by Polish Jewry. Warsaw has an active synagogue, Beit Warszawa, affiliated with the Liberal-Progressive stream of Judaism.

There are also several Jewish publications although most of them are in Polish. These include &quot;Midrasz&quot;, &quot;Dos Jidische Wort&quot; (which is bilingual), as well as a youth journal &quot;Jidele&quot; and &quot;Sztendlach&quot; for young children. Active institutions include the Jewish Historical Institute, the E.R. Kaminska State Yiddish Theater in Warsaw, and the Jewish Cultural Center. The Judaica Foundation in Kraków has sponsored a wide range of cultural and educational programs on Jewish themes for a predominantly Polish audience. With funds from the city of Warsaw and the Polish government ($26 million total) a Museum of the History of Polish Jews is being built in Warsaw. The building was designed by the Finnish architect Rainer Mahlamäki.

Former extermination camps of Auschwitz-Birkenau, Majdanek and Treblinka are open to visitors. At Auschwitz the Oświęcim State Museum currently houses exhibitions on Nazi crimes with a special section (Block Number 27) specifically focused on Jewish victims and martyrs. At Treblinka there is a monument built out of many shards of broken stone, as well as a mausoleum dedicated to those who perished there. A small mound of human ashes commemorates the 350,000 victims of the Majdanek camp who were killed there by the Nazis. Jewish Cemetery, Łódź is one of the largest Jewish burial grounds in Europe, and preserved historic sites include those located in Góra Kalwaria and Leżajsk (Elimelech&#x27;s of Lizhensk ohel).

The Great Synagogue in Oświęcim was excavated after testimony by a Holocaust survivor suggested that many Jewish relics and ritual objects had been buried there, just before Nazis took over the town. Candelabras, chandeliers, a menorah and a ner tamid were found and can now be seen at the Auschwitz Jewish Center.

The Warsaw Ghetto Memorial was unveiled on 19 April 1948—the fifth anniversary of the outbreak of the Warsaw ghetto Uprising. It was constructed out of bronze and granite that the Nazis used for a monument honoring German victory over Poland and it was designed by Nathan Rapoport. The Memorial is located where the Warsaw Ghetto used to be, at the site of one command bunker of the Jewish Combat Organization.

A memorial to the victims of the Kielce Pogrom of 1946, where a mob murdered more than 40 Jews who returned to the city after the Holocaust, was unveiled in 2006. The funds for the memorial came from the city itself and from the U.S. Commission for the Preservation of America&#x27;s Heritage Abroad.

Polish authors and scholars have published many works about the history of Jews in Poland. Notable among them are the Polish Academy of Sciences&#x27;s Holocaust studies journal as well as other publications from the Institute of National Remembrance. Recent scholarship has primarily focused on three topics: post-war anti-Semitism; emigration and the creation of the State of Israel, and the restitution of property.
There have been a number of Holocaust remembrance activities in Poland in recent years. The United States Department of State documents that:
In September 2000, dignitaries from Poland, Israel, the United States, and other countries (including Prince Hassan of Jordan) gathered in the city of Oświęcim (Auschwitz) to commemorate the opening of the refurbished Chevra Lomdei Mishnayot synagogue and the Auschwitz Jewish Center. The synagogue, the sole synagogue in Oświęcim to survive World War II and an adjacent Jewish cultural and educational center, provide visitors a place to pray and to learn about the active pre-World War II Jewish community that existed in Oświęcim. The synagogue was the first communal property in the country to be returned to the Jewish community under the 1997 law allowing for restitution of Jewish communal property.
The March of the Living is an annual event in April held since 1988 to commemorate the victims of the Holocaust. It takes place from Auschwitz to Birkenau and is attended by many people from Israel, Poland and other countries. The marchers honor Holocaust Remembrance Day as well as Israel Independence Day.

An annual festival of Jewish culture, which is one of the biggest festivals of Jewish culture in the world, takes place in Kraków.

In 2006, Poland&#x27;s Jewish population was estimated to be approximately 20,000; most living in Warsaw, Wrocław, Kraków, and Bielsko-Biała, though there are no census figures that would give an exact number. According to the Polish Moses Schorr Centre and other Polish sources, however, this may represent an undercount of the actual number of Jews living in Poland, since many are not religious. There are also people with Jewish roots who do not possess adequate documentation to confirm it, due to various historical and family complications.

Poland is currently easing the way for Jews who left Poland during the Communist organized massive expulsion of 1968 to re-obtain their citizenship. Some 15,000 Polish Jews were deprived of their citizenship in the 1968 Polish political crisis. On 17 June 2009 the future Museum of the History of Polish Jews in Warsaw launched a bilingual Polish-English website called &quot;The Virtual Shtetl&quot;, providing information about Jewish life in Poland.

In 2013, POLIN Museum of the History of Polish Jews opened. It is one of the world&#x27;s largest Jewish museums. As of 2019 another museum, the Warsaw Ghetto Museum, is under construction and is intended to open in 2023.

==Numbers of Jews in Poland since 1920==


However, most sources other than YIVO give a larger number of Jews living in contemporary Poland. In the 2011 Polish census, 7,353 Polish citizens declared their nationality as &quot;Jewish,&quot; a big increase from just 1,055 during the previous 2002 census. In the 2021 Polish census in total 17,156 people declared their ethnicity as Jewish, once again a big increase from the previous census. The voivodeships with the largest number of Jews are Masovian, Lesser Poland and Silesian. There are likely more people of Jewish ancestry living in Poland but who do not actively identify as Jewish. According to the Moses Schorr Centre, there are 100,000 Jews living in Poland who don&#x27;t actively practice Judaism and do not list &quot;Jewish&quot; as their nationality. The Jewish Renewal in Poland organization estimates that there are 200,000 &quot;potential Jews&quot; in Poland. The American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee and Jewish Agency for Israel estimate that there are between 25,000 and 100,000 Jews living in Poland, a similar number to that estimated by Jonathan Ornstein, head of the Jewish Community Center in Kraków (between 20,000 and 100,000).
==See also==

* History of the Jews in Poland before the 18th century
* History of the Jews in 18th-century Poland
* History of the Jews in 19th-century Poland
* History of the Jews in 20th-century Poland
* Timeline of Jewish-Polish history
* Galician Jews
* Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain
* History of the Jews in Austria
* History of the Jews in Germany
* History of the Jews in Russia
* Israel–Poland relations
* Jewish ethnic divisions
* &quot;Jewish Roots in Poland&quot;
* List of Polish rabbis
==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* Marek Jan Chodakiewicz, &quot;After the Holocaust&quot;, East European Monographs, 2003, .
* Marek Jan Chodakiewicz, &quot;Between Nazis and Soviets: Occupation Politics in Poland, 1939–1947&quot;, Lexington Books, 2004, .
* William W. Hagen, &quot;Before the &#x27;Final Solution&#x27;: Toward a Comparative Analysis of Political Anti-Semitism in Interwar Germany and Poland&quot;, &quot;The Journal of Modern History&quot;, Vol. 68, No. 2 (Jun. 1996), 351–381.
* 
* Antony Polonsky and Joanna B. Michlic. &quot;The Neighbors Respond: The Controversy over the Jedwabne Massacre in Poland&quot;, Princeton University Press, 2003 . (The introduction is online)
* Iwo Cyprian Pogonowski, &quot;Jews in Poland. A Documentary History&quot;, Hippocrene Books, Inc., 1998, .
* David Vital, &quot;A People Apart: A Political History of the Jews in Europe 1789–1939&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2001.
* M. J. Rosman, &quot;The Lord&#x27;s Jews: Magnate-Jewish Relations in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth During the Eighteenth Century&quot;, Harvard University Press, 1990, 
* Edward Fram, &quot;Ideals Face Reality: Jewish Life and Culture in Poland 1550–1655&quot;, HUC Press, 1996, 
* Magda Teter, &quot;Jews and Heretics in Premodern Poland: A Beleaguered Church in the Post-Reformation Era&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 2006, 
* Laurence Weinbaum, &quot;The De-Assimilation of the Jewish Remnant in Poland&quot;, in: Ethnos-Nation: eine europäische Zeitschrift, 1999, pp. 8–25
* New York: Funk and Wagnalls. Considerable amount of paragraphs lacking inline citations originate from the Chapter: &quot;Russia&quot; in this source. The encyclopedia was published when sovereign Poland did not exist following the century of Partitions by neighbouring empires. .

==Further reading==
* Cichopek-Gajraj, A. (2021). Agency and Displacement of Ethnic Polish and Jewish Families after World War II. &quot;Polish American Studies&quot;, 78(1), 60–82. 
* Dynner, Glenn. &quot;Men of Silk: The Hasidic Conquest of Polish Jewish Society&quot; NY: Oxford University Press, 2006.
* Korycki, Kate. &quot;Weaponizing the Past: Collective Memory and Jews, Poles, and Communists in Twenty-First Century Poland&quot; (Berghahn Books, 2023) online book review 
* Krajewski, Stanisław. &quot;Poland and the Jews: Reflections of a Polish Polish Jew&quot;, Kraków: Austeria P, 2005.
* Nikžentaitis, Alvydas, Stefan Schreiner, Darius Staliūnas (editors). &quot;The Vanished World of Lithuanian Jews&quot;. Rodopi, 2004, 
* Polonsky, Antony. &quot;The Jews in Poland and Russia, Volume 1: 1350–1881&quot; (Littman Library of Jewish Civilization, 2009) 
* Polonsky, Antony. &quot;The Jews in Poland and Russia, Volume 2: 1881–1914&quot; (Littman Library of Jewish Civilization, 2009) 
* Polonsky, Antony. &quot;The Jews in Poland and Russia, Volume 3: 1914–2008&quot; (Littman Library of Jewish Civilization, 2011) 
* Prokop-Janiec, E. (2019). Jewish Intellectuals, National Suffering, Contemporary Poland. &quot;The Polish Review&quot;, &quot;64&quot;(2), 24–36. 
* Ury, Scott. &quot;Barricades and Banners: The Revolution of 1905 and the Transformation of Warsaw Jewry&quot;, Stanford University Press, 2012. 
* A Marriage of Convenience: The New Zionist Organization and the Polish Government 1936–1939 Laurence Weinbaum, East European Monographs; dist. Columbia University Press, 1993

==External links==
===Maps===
* The Cossack Uprising and its Aftermath in Poland , Jewish Communities in Poland and Lithuania under the Council of the Four Lands , The Spread of Hasidic Judaism , Jewish Revolts against the Nazis in Poland (All maps from Judaism: History, Belief, and Practice)

===History of Polish Jews===
* Museum of the History of Polish Jews
** Virtual Shtetl
* The Polish Jews Home Page
* Virtual Jewish History Tour of Poland
* Judaism in the Baltic: Vilna as the Spiritual Center of Eastern Europe
* The Jews in Poland. Saving from oblivion – Teaching for the future
* Historical Sites of Jewish Warsaw
* Polish–Jewish Relations section of the Polish Embassy in Washington
* Joanna Rohozinska, , Central Europe Review, 28 January 2000.
* Jewish organisations in Poland before the Second World War
* Foundation for the Preservation of Jewish Heritage in Poland
* Foundation for Documentation of Jewish Cemeteries in Poland

===World War II and the Holocaust===
* Chronicles of the Vilna Ghetto: wartime photographs &amp; documents vilnaghetto.com
* Warsaw Ghetto Uprising from the US Holocaust Museum. From the same source see:
** Non-Jewish Polish Victims of the Holocaust
** Bibliography of Polish Jewish Relations during the War
* Chronology of German Anti-Jewish Measures during World War II in Poland
* The Catholic Zionist Who Helped Steer Israeli Independence through the UN
* Poland&#x27;s Jews:A light flickers on, &quot;The Economist&quot;, 20 December 2005</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="4" end="33" title="History of the Jews in Poland" label="history of the Jews in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="82" end="88" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="134" end="147" title="Ashkenazi Jew" label="Ashkenazi Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q548478" start="208" end="222" title="Jewish culture" label="Jewish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q183225" start="264" end="283" title="toleration" label="religious tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q778305" start="288" end="303" title="Qahal" label="social autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="326" end="346" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="375" end="387" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="416" end="425" title="genocide" label="genocidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="472" end="484" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="544" end="571" title="German occupation of Poland" label="German occupation of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="606" end="615" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q974251" start="627" end="654" title="fall of communism in Poland" label="fall of communism in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121076" start="729" end="752" title="Jewish Culture Festival" label="Jewish Culture Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="838" end="844" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q429069" start="852" end="888" title="Museum of the History of Polish Jews" label="Museum of the History of Polish Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q577867" start="916" end="933" title="Kingdom of Poland (1025–1385)" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="971" end="1001" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q963303" start="1002" end="1017" title="Union of Lublin" label="created in 1569"/>
<link wikidata="Q56697547" start="1104" end="1123" title="Heaven for the nobles, Purgatory for the townspeople, Hell for the peasants, and Paradise for the Jews" label="paradisus iudaeorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1131" end="1136" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363340" start="1147" end="1155" title="Paradise" label="Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="1540" end="1562" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1567" end="1575" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="1576" end="1595" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="1681" end="1701" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="1745" end="1760" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q247735" start="1856" end="1882" title="Anti-Jewish pogroms in the Russian Empire" label="antisemitic Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1895" end="1910" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="1915" end="1933" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="1955" end="1968" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519948" start="2012" end="2036" title="aftermath of World War I" label="aftermath of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="2167" end="2179" title="Antisemitism" label="Antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="2317" end="2332" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="2419" end="2428" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q252054" start="2501" end="2508" title="Haganah" label="Haganah"/>
<link wikidata="Q713120" start="2510" end="2515" title="Betar" label="Betar"/>
<link wikidata="Q207913" start="2521" end="2526" title="Irgun" label="Irgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="2641" end="2653" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2662" end="2674" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="2680" end="2703" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="2950" end="2972" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–45)" label="German-occupied Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474378" start="3078" end="3130" title="Rescue of Jews by Poles during the Holocaust" label="actively risking death in order to save Jewish lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q707547" start="3268" end="3283" title="Jedwabne pogrom" label="Jedwabne pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3285" end="3298" title="Collaboration in German-occupied Poland#The Holocaust" label="Collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4504312" start="3593" end="3625" title="Central Committee of Polish Jews" label="Central Committee of Polish Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="3691" end="3715" title="Polish People’s Republic" label="Polish People’s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="3732" end="3747" title="State of Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="3755" end="3763" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774216" start="3837" end="3866" title="Anti-Jewish violence in Poland, 1944–1946" label="post-war anti-Jewish violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="4000" end="4012" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="4042" end="4048" title="aliyah" label="aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405494" start="4164" end="4197" title="1968 Polish political crisis" label="&amp;quot;anti-Zionist&amp;quot; campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q974251" start="4209" end="4237" title="fall of Communism in Poland" label="fall of the Communist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="4378" end="4389" title="citizenship" label="citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="4740" end="4748" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="4796" end="4800" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764" start="4805" end="4812" title="Bukhara" label="Bukhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q677126" start="4841" end="4851" title="Radhanites" label="Radhanites"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="4861" end="4868" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="4916" end="4923" title="Moors" label="Moorish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12812" start="4932" end="4939" title="Tortosa" label="Tortosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="4951" end="4961" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q504531" start="4989" end="5006" title="Ibrahim ibn Yaqub" label="Ibrahim ibn Yaqub"/>
<link wikidata="Q53435" start="5077" end="5086" title="Mieszko I of Poland" label="Mieszko I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="5175" end="5181" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="5205" end="5222" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q51432" start="5380" end="5387" title="Gniezno" label="Gniezno"/>
<link wikidata="Q577867" start="5421" end="5435" title="Kingdom of Poland (1025–1385)" label="Polish kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="5443" end="5456" title="Piast dynasty" label="Piast dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="5540" end="5546" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q393084" start="5626" end="5641" title="Yehuda ben Meir" label="Jehuda ha-Kohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208473" start="5657" end="5665" title="Przemyśl" label="Przemyśl"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="5684" end="5691" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="5696" end="5710" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865989" start="5746" end="5761" title="medieval Poland" label="medieval Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="5936" end="5950" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="5989" end="6002" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q53441" start="6018" end="6030" title="Boleslaus III of Poland" label="Bolesław III"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="6155" end="6164" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="6186" end="6190" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="6262" end="6282" title="commerce" label="commercial interests"/>
<link wikidata="Q54013" start="6353" end="6364" title="Mieszko III of Poland" label="Mieszko III"/>
<link wikidata="Q848960" start="6439" end="6444" title="Bracteates" label="coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="6481" end="6497" title="Hebrew alphabet" label="Hebraic markings"/>
<link wikidata="Q53456" start="6587" end="6603" title="Casimir the Just" label="Casimir the Just"/>
<link wikidata="Q280053" start="6605" end="6624" title="Bolesław I the Tall" label="Bolesław I the Tall"/>
<link wikidata="Q54052" start="6629" end="6656" title="Władysław III Spindleshanks" label="Władysław III Spindleshanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q618532" start="6856" end="6864" title="landlord" label="landlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="6889" end="6897" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q163725" start="7084" end="7100" title="Magdeburg rights" label="Magdeburg rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q104725" start="7452" end="7457" title="Płock" label="Płock"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7598" end="7619" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452949" start="7944" end="7962" title="Bolesław the Pious" label="Bolesław the Pious"/>
<link wikidata="Q52842" start="7966" end="7972" title="Kalisz" label="Kalisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q211371" start="7984" end="7996" title="Great Poland" label="Great Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915090" start="8143" end="8160" title="Statute of Kalisz" label="Statute of Kalisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q53447" start="8304" end="8320" title="Henryk IV Probus" label="Henryk IV Probus"/>
<link wikidata="Q573444" start="8344" end="8364" title="Henry III, Duke of Głogów" label="Henryk III of Głogów"/>
<link wikidata="Q571475" start="8383" end="8399" title="Henry V, Duke of Legnica" label="Henryk V the Fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q646226" start="8427" end="8449" title="Bolesław III the Generous" label="Bolko III the Generous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061047" start="8574" end="8585" title="blood libel" label="blood libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q53457" start="9482" end="9503" title="Casimir III of Poland" label="Casimir III the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112193" start="9576" end="9592" title="Wiślicki Statute" label="Wiślicki Statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="9720" end="9724" title="Lviv" label="Lvov"/>
<link wikidata="Q193177" start="9733" end="9743" title="Sandomierz" label="Sandomierz"/>
<link wikidata="Q93706" start="9756" end="9765" title="Kazimierz" label="Kazimierz"/>
<link wikidata="Q770181" start="9846" end="9853" title="Esterka" label="Esterka"/>
<link wikidata="Q994271" start="9859" end="9866" title="Opoczno" label="Opoczno"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="10036" end="10040" title="serf" label="serf"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="10064" end="10080" title="penalty of death" label="penalty of death"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="10158" end="10167" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="10168" end="10175" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="10230" end="10236" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q39614" start="10237" end="10247" title="cemeteries" label="cemeteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="10424" end="10435" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061047" start="10456" end="10467" title="Blood libel against Jews" label="blood libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="10559" end="10565" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="10634" end="10648" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q54049" start="10844" end="10865" title="Władysław II Jagiełło" label="Władysław II Jagiełło"/>
<link wikidata="Q53449" start="10869" end="10876" title="Jadwiga of Poland" label="Jadwiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q53998" start="10890" end="10908" title="Louis I of Hungary" label="Louis I of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q825902" start="10924" end="10957" title="Polish–Lithuanian Union" label="united with the kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421205" start="10998" end="11013" title="Lithuanian Jews" label="Lithuanian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11315" end="11333" title="Jan Hus#Council of Constance" label="Synod of Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061047" start="11414" end="11425" title="blood libel" label="blood libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="11565" end="11571" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="11653" end="11664" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q52842" start="11738" end="11744" title="Kalisz" label="Kalisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="11746" end="11752" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q815903" start="11757" end="11764" title="Bochnia" label="Bochnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550" start="12317" end="12321" title="Lutsk" label="Łuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q158821" start="12334" end="12343" title="Drohobych" label="Drohobycz"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="12354" end="12358" title="Lviv" label="Lviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q997359" start="12370" end="12378" title="Zhydachiv" label="Zydaczow"/>
<link wikidata="Q924103" start="12389" end="12399" title="Hrubieszów" label="Hrubieszów"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="13030" end="13037" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="13063" end="13070" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="13081" end="13088" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q310359" start="13130" end="13148" title="John of Capistrano" label="John of Capistrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q53459" start="13439" end="13459" title="Casimir IV Jagiellon" label="Casimir IV Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428444" start="13519" end="13538" title="Statute of Nieszawa" label="Statute of Nieszawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q53451" start="14093" end="14106" title="John I Albert" label="John I Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q53450" start="14123" end="14142" title="Alexander Jagiellon" label="Alexander Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639920" start="14323" end="14346" title="Grand Duke of Lithuania" label="Grand Duke of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424558" start="14361" end="14391" title="Expulsion of Jews from Spain" label="1492 example of Spanish rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061030" start="14805" end="14834" title="Alhambra Decree" label="Jews were expelled from Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q527934" start="14860" end="14867" title="Jews in Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q469544" start="14869" end="14876" title="Hungarian Jews" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="14881" end="14888" title="Jews in Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q178111" start="14996" end="15011" title="History of the Jews in Spain" label="Jews from Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q54056" start="15303" end="15322" title="Sigismund I the Old" label="Sigismund I the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069013" start="15563" end="15569" title="Arendator" label="arenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779488" start="15594" end="15630" title="Nobility_privileges_in_Poland" label="protected privileges of the szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q54058" start="15782" end="15803" title="Sigismund II Augustus" label="Sigismund II Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q778305" start="15980" end="15985" title="Qahal" label="Qahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="16206" end="16211" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="16224" end="16237" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265699" start="16242" end="16256" title="Romaniote Jews" label="Romaniote Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="16282" end="16296" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="16314" end="16326" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309935" start="16331" end="16343" title="Persian Jews" label="Persian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423836" start="16489" end="16501" title="Jacob Pollak" label="Jacob Pollak"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="17015" end="17028" title="Ashkenazi Jew" label="Ashkenazi Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q154773" start="17045" end="17053" title="yeshiva" label="yeshivot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949189" start="17104" end="17118" title="Moses Isserles" label="Moses Isserles"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="17143" end="17149" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q154773" start="17190" end="17197" title="yeshiva" label="yeshiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="17201" end="17207" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="17254" end="17267" title="halakha" label="legal scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="17298" end="17306" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="17383" end="17393" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618" start="17421" end="17436" title="Remuh Synagogue" label="Remuh Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q54058" start="17605" end="17626" title="Sigismund II Augustus" label="Sigismund II Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q194355" start="17649" end="17666" title="Jagiellon dynasty" label="Jagiellon dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="17676" end="17684" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="17698" end="17704" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q57078973" start="17947" end="17962" title="Gershon Hundert" label="Gershon Hundert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431729" start="18392" end="18413" title="Council of Four Lands" label="Council of Four Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q56697547" start="18448" end="18465" title="Paradisus Judaeorum" label="rueful pasquinade"/>
<link wikidata="Q166185" start="18741" end="18761" title="Warsaw Confederation" label="Warsaw Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="18942" end="18948" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q37333" start="18950" end="18956" title="Lublin" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="18958" end="18964" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="18966" end="18973" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="18978" end="18982" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="18987" end="18991" title="Lwów" label="Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19173" end="19210" title="Privilegium de non tolerandis Judaeis" label="Privilegium de non tolerandis Judaeis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19215" end="19256" title="Privilegium de non tolerandis Christianis" label="Privilegium de non tolerandis Christianis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16878951" start="19438" end="19450" title="private town" label="private town"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416557" start="19502" end="19524" title="Royal city in Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="royal towns and cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q845668" start="19607" end="19621" title="Union of Brest" label="Union of Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147883" start="19771" end="19779" title="Ruthenia" label="Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q641479" start="20222" end="20242" title="Khmelnytsky Uprising" label="Khmelnytsky Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="20257" end="20265" title="Cossacks" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113735" start="20273" end="20289" title="Zaporozhian Host" label="Zaporozhian Host"/>
<link wikidata="Q203808" start="20296" end="20314" title="Bohdan Khmelnytsky" label="Bohdan Khmelnytsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045287" start="20650" end="20667" title="Slavery in the Ottoman Empire" label="&amp;quot;jasyr&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="20686" end="20700" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q210601" start="21018" end="21031" title="House of Vasa" label="House of Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="21090" end="21104" title="Swedish Empire" label="Swedish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q631163" start="21137" end="21147" title="Deluge (history)" label="the Deluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q160440" start="21287" end="21301" title="Crimean Khanate" label="Crimean Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="21306" end="21314" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q52936" start="21358" end="21377" title="Charles X of Sweden" label="Charles X of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11794882" start="21525" end="21547" title="Siege of Kraków (1657)" label="Siege of Kraków (1657)"/>
<link wikidata="Q561031" start="21669" end="21686" title="Stefan Czarniecki" label="Stefan Czarniecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="21875" end="21885" title="Infectious disease" label="pestilence"/>
<link wikidata="Q52842" start="21925" end="21931" title="Kalisz" label="Kalisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="21941" end="21947" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q158004" start="21949" end="21957" title="Piotrków Trybunalski" label="Piotrków"/>
<link wikidata="Q37333" start="21962" end="21968" title="Lublin" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="23091" end="23121" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659789" start="23212" end="23225" title="Koliivshchyna" label="Koliivshchyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q842604" start="23242" end="23260" title="Right-bank Ukraine" label="Right-bank Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="23273" end="23280" title="Dnieper" label="Dnieper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530" start="23284" end="23292" title="Volhynia" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569666" start="23381" end="23389" title="haydamak" label="haydamak"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="23432" end="23452" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="23798" end="23804" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="23813" end="23827" title="transliteration" label="transliterated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069971" start="24074" end="24077" title="Jah" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q54056" start="24327" end="24346" title="Sigismund I the Old" label="Sigismund I the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="24353" end="24366" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q913414" start="24447" end="24465" title="David HaLevi Segal" label="David HaLevi Segal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154773" start="24647" end="24655" title="Yeshiva" label="Yeshivot"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="24782" end="24790" title="gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212071" start="24822" end="24829" title="rector (academia)" label="rectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="25010" end="25015" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q37333" start="25113" end="25119" title="Lublin" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="25206" end="25226" title="Talmud" label="Talmudic scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="25754" end="25764" title="Halakha" label="Jewish law"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="26041" end="26048" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423836" start="26082" end="26094" title="Jacob Pollak" label="Jacob Pollak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814170" start="26117" end="26123" title="Pilpul" label="Pilpul"/>
<link wikidata="Q93487" start="26161" end="26175" title="Shalom Shachna" label="Shalom Shachna"/>
<link wikidata="Q37333" start="26294" end="26300" title="Lublin" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949189" start="26522" end="26536" title="Moses Isserles" label="Moses Isserles"/>
<link wikidata="Q822206" start="26663" end="26677" title="Shulkhan Arukh" label="Shulkhan Arukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83960" start="26758" end="26771" title="Solomon Luria" label="Solomon Luria"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="27037" end="27045" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="27098" end="27107" title="Rabbinic Judaism" label="Rabbinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q982189" start="27130" end="27144" title="Mordecai Jaffe" label="Mordecai Jaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691747" start="27149" end="27160" title="Yoel Sirkis" label="Yoel Sirkis"/>
<link wikidata="Q299215" start="28261" end="28273" title="Sabbatai Zevi" label="Sabbatianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q708525" start="28291" end="28299" title="Jacob Frank" label="Frankism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="28318" end="28327" title="mysticism" label="mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q319062" start="28417" end="28430" title="Baal Shem Tov" label="Baal Shem Tov"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="28516" end="28530" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="28618" end="28625" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="28641" end="28649" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="28665" end="28673" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="28780" end="28794" title="Haredi Judaism" label="Haredi Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591905" start="28860" end="28877" title="List of Hasidic dynasties" label="Hasidic dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q737685" start="28897" end="28903" title="Chabad" label="Chabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778120" start="28905" end="28915" title="Aleksander (Hasidic dynasty)" label="Aleksander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915711" start="28917" end="28922" title="Bobov (Hasidic dynasty)" label="Bobov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509726" start="28924" end="28927" title="Ger (Hasidic dynasty)" label="Ger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909593" start="28929" end="28937" title="Nadvorna (Hasidic dynasty)" label="Nadvorna"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="29020" end="29027" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54019" start="29179" end="29213" title="Stanisław August Poniatowski" label="Stanislaus II Augustus Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="29250" end="29269" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q874784" start="29386" end="29406" title="Confederation of Bar" label="Confederation of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="29622" end="29629" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="29635" end="29642" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="29693" end="29712" title="First Partition of Poland" label="annexations of 1772"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562345" start="30254" end="30280" title="Komisja Edukacji Narodowej" label="Komisja Edukacji Narodowej"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070965" start="30510" end="30518" title="kanclerz" label="kanclerz"/>
<link wikidata="Q890182" start="30525" end="30541" title="Andrzej Zamoyski" label="Andrzej Zamoyski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="31183" end="31200" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="31394" end="31413" title="Partitions of Poland" label="partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q818982" start="31474" end="31490" title="Berek Joselewicz" label="Berek Joselewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q849176" start="31509" end="31528" title="Kościuszko Uprising" label="Kościuszko Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="31995" end="32010" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q685455" start="32458" end="32472" title="Polish Legions in World War I" label="Polish Legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="32870" end="32882" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine II"/>
<link wikidata="Q569868" start="32934" end="32952" title="Pale of Settlement" label="Pale of Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="33352" end="33373" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="33735" end="33751" title="brewing industry" label="brewing industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q778305" start="34005" end="34010" title="Qahal" label="Qahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q569868" start="34051" end="34059" title="Pale of Settlement" label="the Pale"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="34111" end="34125" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Tsar Nicolas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q650680" start="34154" end="34159" title="Haman (Bible)" label="Haman"/>
<link wikidata="Q778305" start="34652" end="34657" title="qahal" label="qahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728097" start="34754" end="34763" title="Cantonist" label="Cantonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q569868" start="34960" end="34978" title="Pale of Settlement" label="Pale of Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="35032" end="35047" title="Russian Empire" label="Imperial Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="35080" end="35084" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="35274" end="35292" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="35304" end="35317" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="35328" end="35343" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="35407" end="35412" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="35603" end="35619" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="35879" end="35909" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="35942" end="35951" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="35953" end="35960" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="35962" end="35968" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="35970" end="35977" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="35979" end="35986" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="36009" end="36015" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="36207" end="36215" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="36309" end="36313" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="36315" end="36325" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q128499" start="36330" end="36335" title="Yalta" label="Yalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q609042" start="36504" end="36510" title="shtetl" label="shtetl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192212" start="36582" end="36609" title="Emancipation reform of 1861" label="Emancipation reform of 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="36613" end="36625" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q569868" start="36661" end="36679" title="Pale of Settlement" label="Pale of Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q201610" start="36750" end="36760" title="status quo" label="status quo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36784" end="36810" title="Alexander II of Russia#Assassination" label="assassination of Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="36977" end="36983" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q41044" start="37194" end="37200" title="Russian ruble" label="rubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q120180" start="37248" end="37261" title="Alexander III of Russia" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q977282" start="37485" end="37503" title="partitioned Poland" label="partitioned Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="37549" end="37556" title="Zionism" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407161" start="37567" end="37582" title="Katowice Conference" label="met in Katowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071744" start="37596" end="37608" title="Hovevei Zion" label="Hovevei Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q138503" start="37861" end="37868" title="Okhrana" label="Okhrana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4082818" start="37894" end="37910" title="Białystok pogrom" label="Białystok pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294422" start="37926" end="37944" title="Grodno Governorate" label="Grodno Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q472670" start="38236" end="38244" title="Haskalah" label="Haskalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q472670" start="38387" end="38395" title="Haskalah" label="Maskilim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955480" start="38665" end="38679" title="Musar movement" label="Musar movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="38824" end="38831" title="Halakha" label="Halakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="38884" end="38900" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="38902" end="38917" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577041" start="38948" end="38965" title="Religious Zionism" label="Religious Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938856" start="38973" end="38981" title="Mizrachi (Religious Zionism)" label="Mizrachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471943" start="39353" end="39363" title="Poale Zion" label="Poale Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173144" start="39411" end="39425" title="Polish Mizrahi" label="Polish Mizrahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887828" start="39456" end="39472" title="General Zionists" label="General Zionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="39492" end="39501" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q647460" start="39515" end="39519" title="General Jewish Labour Bund in Lithuania, Poland and Russia" label="Bund"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="39520" end="39531" title="labor union" label="labor union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915476" start="39569" end="39584" title="rights of labor" label="rights of labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075060" start="39590" end="39601" title="Folkspartei" label="Folkspartei"/>
<link wikidata="Q398134" start="39714" end="39727" title="Agudat Israel" label="Agudat Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q849176" start="39915" end="39938" title="Kościuszko Insurrection" label="Kościuszko Insurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q462964" start="39947" end="39968" title="November Insurrection" label="November Insurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q473670" start="39980" end="40000" title="January Insurrection" label="January Insurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="40012" end="40042" title="Russian Revolution of 1905" label="Revolutionary Movement of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="40131" end="40153" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780229" start="40238" end="40256" title="Apolinary Hartglas" label="Apolinary Hartglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661879" start="40261" end="40278" title="Yitzhak Gruenbaum" label="Yitzhak Gruenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471943" start="40608" end="40618" title="Poale Zion" label="Poale Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887828" start="40666" end="40681" title="General Zionists" label="General Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q928538" start="40783" end="40800" title="Polish legislative election, 1919" label="first Polish Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q75292" start="40883" end="40898" title="Max Bodenheimer" label="Max Bodenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551065" start="40923" end="40967" title="German Committee for Freeing of Russian Jews" label="German Committee for Freeing of Russian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="41094" end="41135" title="Partitions of Poland" label="former Polish provinces annexed by Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="41164" end="41176" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="41184" end="41197" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509039" start="41281" end="41311" title="League of East European States" label="League of East European States"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="41677" end="41688" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q685455" start="41723" end="41738" title="Polish Legions in World War I" label="Legiony Polskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="41755" end="41770" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Józef Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698946" start="41854" end="41859" title="KTSSN" label="KTSSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645068" start="41880" end="41898" title="Supreme National Committee" label="interim government"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840736" start="41978" end="41987" title="Porucznik" label="Porucznik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329625" start="42114" end="42128" title="Austrian krone" label="Austrian krone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42348" end="42370" title="Committee for the East" label="Committee for the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="42827" end="42844" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q842774" start="42850" end="42870" title="Polish–Ukrainian War" label="Polish–Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="42880" end="42897" title="Polish–Soviet War" label="Polish–Soviet War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076469" start="42914" end="42928" title="Treaty of Riga" label="Treaty of Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="43124" end="43138" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47946" start="43217" end="43238" title="Henry Morgenthau, Sr." label="Henry Morgenthau, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6912048" start="43257" end="43274" title="Morgenthau Report" label="Morgenthau Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068312" start="43637" end="43653" title="Pinsk massacre" label="battle for Pińsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658487" start="43976" end="43994" title="Lwów pogrom (1918)" label="Lwów (Lviv) pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q842774" start="44030" end="44050" title="Polish–Ukrainian War" label="Polish–Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q14645946" start="44112" end="44125" title="Sich Riflemen" label="Sich Riflemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="44217" end="44223" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q882462" start="44237" end="44246" title="Blue Army (Poland)" label="Blue Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="44444" end="44462" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="44566" end="44573" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600516" start="44950" end="44987" title="Kiev offensive (1920)" label="Kiev operation against the Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q191957" start="45166" end="45176" title="Ignacy Paderewski" label="Paderewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919093" start="45221" end="45248" title="Little Treaty of Versailles" label="Little Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="45694" end="45712" title="Congress of Poland" label="Congress of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="46263" end="46280" title="Polish–Soviet War" label="Polish–Soviet War"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="47023" end="47045" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="47099" end="47111" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210017" start="47470" end="47490" title="1931 Polish census" label="1931 National Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="48030" end="48034" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="48120" end="48124" title="Lwów" label="Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="48133" end="48140" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="48226" end="48231" title="Wilno" label="Wilno"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="48240" end="48249" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="48338" end="48344" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="48477" end="48483" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="48868" end="48883" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="48887" end="48902" title="Reform Judaism" label="Liberal Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="48938" end="48945" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q148886" start="49097" end="49109" title="Bruno Schulz" label="Bruno Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="49763" end="49770" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="49774" end="49780" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="49847" end="49856" title="Socialist" label="Socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531969" start="49857" end="49883" title="General Jewish Labour Bund in Poland" label="General Jewish Labour Bund"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="50018" end="50022" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q75612" start="50272" end="50293" title="Isaac Bashevis Singer" label="Isaac Bashevis Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="50383" end="50408" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q557691" start="50422" end="50442" title="Israel Joshua Singer" label="Israel Joshua Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q148886" start="50506" end="50518" title="Bruno Schulz" label="Bruno Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q376278" start="50520" end="50532" title="Julian Tuwim" label="Julian Tuwim"/>
<link wikidata="Q367234" start="50534" end="50546" title="Marian Hemar" label="Marian Hemar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369137" start="50548" end="50566" title="Emanuel Schlechter" label="Emanuel Schlechter"/>
<link wikidata="Q891324" start="50571" end="50587" title="Bolesław Leśmian" label="Bolesław Leśmian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447210" start="50600" end="50610" title="Konrad Tom" label="Konrad Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177547" start="50615" end="50629" title="Jerzy Jurandot" label="Jerzy Jurandot"/>
<link wikidata="Q508990" start="50766" end="50778" title="Jan Brzechwa" label="Jan Brzechwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q713265" start="50824" end="50835" title="Jan Kiepura" label="Jan Kiepura"/>
<link wikidata="Q323368" start="50978" end="50989" title="Henryk Wars" label="Henryk Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368401" start="50991" end="51009" title="Jerzy Petersburski" label="Jerzy Petersburski"/>
<link wikidata="Q714381" start="51011" end="51021" title="Artur Gold" label="Artur Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288148" start="51023" end="51034" title="Henryk Gold" label="Henryk Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075788" start="51036" end="51055" title="Zygmunt Białostocki" label="Zygmunt Białostocki"/>
<link wikidata="Q9352658" start="51057" end="51072" title="Szymon Kataszek" label="Szymon Kataszek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16561038" start="51077" end="51088" title="Jakub Kagan" label="Jakub Kagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q443136" start="51213" end="51229" title="Maurycy Gottlieb" label="Maurycy Gottlieb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801639" start="51231" end="51246" title="Artur Markowicz" label="Artur Markowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771798" start="51252" end="51267" title="Maurycy Trębacz" label="Maurycy Trębacz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5067810" start="51295" end="51309" title="Chaim Goldberg" label="Chaim Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q762114" start="51385" end="51401" title="Michał Waszyński" label="Michał Waszyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q934109" start="51409" end="51420" title="The Dybbuk (film)" label="The Dybbuk)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257887" start="51428" end="51443" title="Aleksander Ford" label="Aleksander Ford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51451" end="51470" title="Children Must Laugh" label="Children Must Laugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q465488" start="51490" end="51504" title="Leopold Infeld" label="Leopold Infeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q234357" start="51520" end="51534" title="Stanisław Ulam" label="Stanisław Ulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q207534" start="51536" end="51549" title="Alfred Tarski" label="Alfred Tarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504609" start="51565" end="51574" title="Adam Ulam" label="Adam Ulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388246" start="51671" end="51683" title="Moses Schorr" label="Moses Schorr"/>
<link wikidata="Q11758" start="51685" end="51700" title="Ludwik Zamenhof" label="Ludwik Zamenhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q143" start="51717" end="51726" title="Esperanto" label="Esperanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q153178" start="51729" end="51744" title="Georges Charpak" label="Georges Charpak"/>
<link wikidata="Q535833" start="51746" end="51762" title="Samuel Eilenberg" label="Samuel Eilenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q707554" start="51764" end="51782" title="Emanuel Ringelblum" label="Emanuel Ringelblum"/>
<link wikidata="Q183182" start="51788" end="51804" title="Artur Rubinstein" label="Artur Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="51860" end="51868" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q505586" start="51889" end="51901" title="Rafał Lemkin" label="Rafał Lemkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q157262" start="51946" end="51960" title="Leonid Hurwicz" label="Leonid Hurwicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="51982" end="52006" title="Nobel Prize in Economics" label="Nobel Prize in Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q259337" start="52012" end="52016" title="YIVO" label="YIVO"/>
<link wikidata="Q959068" start="52205" end="52224" title="Main Judaic Library" label="Main Judaic Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q494383" start="52409" end="52424" title="Yiddish theatre" label="Yiddish theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q584882" start="52579" end="52591" title="Vilna Troupe" label="Vilna Troupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915504" start="52637" end="52647" title="The Dybbuk" label="The Dybbuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q144488" start="52725" end="52745" title="University of Warsaw" label="University of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q130873" start="52757" end="52771" title="Menachem Begin" label="Menachem Begin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184351" start="52776" end="52790" title="Yitzhak Shamir" label="Yitzhak Shamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588533" start="52865" end="52878" title="Hasmonea Lwów" label="Hasmonea Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q198547" start="52883" end="52899" title="Jutrzenka Kraków" label="Jutrzenka Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q44763" start="52926" end="52954" title="Ekstraklasa" label="Polish First Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q211197" start="52984" end="52995" title="Józef Klotz" label="Józef Klotz"/>
<link wikidata="Q166196" start="53032" end="53061" title="Poland national football team" label="Poland national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q358950" start="53080" end="53094" title="Alojzy Ehrlich" label="Alojzy Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882557" start="53184" end="53203" title="Maccabi World Union" label="Maccabi World Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="53350" end="53365" title="interwar Poland" label="interwar Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="53680" end="53687" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="53691" end="53697" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="53800" end="53816" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="53913" end="53925" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q126413" start="53941" end="53974" title="German–Polish declaration of non-aggression" label="German-Polish non-aggression pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q210355" start="54099" end="54118" title="National Democracy (Poland)" label="National Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161590" start="54169" end="54182" title="Roman Dmowski" label="Roman Dmowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="54277" end="54284" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="54290" end="54297" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152005" start="54319" end="54334" title="Catholic Church in Poland" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q472940" start="54466" end="54476" title="Bolshevism" label="Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="54875" end="54879" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q470954" start="55057" end="55074" title="Władysław Grabski" label="Władysław Grabski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818906" start="55119" end="55129" title="Leon Reich" label="Leon Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210053" start="55234" end="55252" title="Polish nationalism" label="Polish nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q592710" start="55437" end="55457" title="Revisionist Zionism" label="Revisionist Zionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="55670" end="55685" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Józef Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q210355" start="55719" end="55726" title="Endecja" label="Endecja"/>
<link wikidata="Q639715" start="55734" end="55746" title="Polonization" label="Polonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q622307" start="56021" end="56037" title="Kazimierz Bartel" label="Kazimierz Bartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="56096" end="56112" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673891" start="56806" end="56817" title="stomatology" label="stomatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="57039" end="57047" title="interwar" label="interwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="57100" end="57107" title="Zionist" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q713120" start="57108" end="57113" title="Betar" label="Betar"/>
<link wikidata="Q713120" start="57242" end="57247" title="Betar" label="Betar"/>
<link wikidata="Q130873" start="57426" end="57440" title="Menachem Begin" label="Menachem Begin"/>
<link wikidata="Q210355" start="57625" end="57643" title="National Democracy (Poland)" label="National Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385543" start="57913" end="57927" title="ghetto benches" label="ghetto benches"/>
<link wikidata="Q304974" start="58094" end="58109" title="Numerus clausus" label="Numerus clausus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210017" start="58469" end="58480" title="Polish census of 1931" label="1931 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="59336" end="59347" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="59411" end="59420" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531969" start="59632" end="59649" title="General Jewish Labour Bund in Poland" label="Jewish socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q605468" start="59680" end="59705" title="Communist Party of Poland" label="Communist Party of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188592" start="59714" end="59734" title="Second International" label="Second International"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="59820" end="59836" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550" start="60083" end="60087" title="Łuck" label="Łuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q140147" start="60278" end="60284" title="Brześć" label="Brześć"/>
<link wikidata="Q104740" start="60429" end="60434" title="Radom" label="Radom"/>
<link wikidata="Q283885" start="60751" end="60759" title="Lubartów" label="Lubartów"/>
<link wikidata="Q210355" start="61070" end="61088" title="National Democracy (Poland)" label="National Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403120" start="61114" end="61141" title="Felicjan Sławoj Składkowski" label="Felicjan Sławoj-Składkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636589" start="61625" end="61630" title="list of riots" label="riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="61665" end="61681" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="61759" end="61777" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061047" start="62306" end="62317" title="blood libel" label="blood libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q389389" start="63060" end="63070" title="Józef Beck" label="Józef Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q319896" start="63357" end="63378" title="Ze&amp;#x27;ev Jabotinsky" label="Ze&amp;#x27;ev Jabotinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q592710" start="63395" end="63414" title="Revisionist Zionism" label="Revisionist Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="63634" end="63651" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q389389" start="64154" end="64164" title="Józef Beck" label="Józef Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="64181" end="64198" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q252054" start="64568" end="64575" title="Haganah" label="Haganah"/>
<link wikidata="Q207913" start="64636" end="64641" title="Irgun" label="Irgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529091" start="65932" end="65945" title="Gazeta Polska (1929–1939)" label="Gazeta Polska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501423" start="66635" end="66651" title="Baruch Steinberg" label="Boruch Steinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210012" start="66703" end="66714" title="Polish army order of battle in 1939" label="Polish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="66843" end="66861" title="Invasion of Poland" label="September Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="66955" end="66963" title="POW" label="prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583015" start="67106" end="67118" title="Ghettos in Nazi-occupied Europe" label="Nazi ghettos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587808" start="67203" end="67222" title="Holocaust in Poland" label="Holocaust in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q182240" start="67356" end="67373" title="Siege of Warsaw (1939)" label="defended the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q119879" start="67624" end="67655" title="Polish Armed Forces in the West" label="Polish Armed Forces in the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143263" start="67678" end="67703" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363019" start="67767" end="67788" title="Polish resistance movement in World War II" label="Polish partisan units"/>
<link wikidata="Q707503" start="67792" end="67818" title="Jewish Military Union" label="Jewish partisan formations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="67875" end="67887" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="67899" end="67922" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="67928" end="67940" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q181376" start="68259" end="68265" title="Grodno" label="Grodno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168846" start="68406" end="68433" title="Territories of Poland annexed by the Soviet Union" label="under the German occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168846" start="68467" end="68507" title="Polish areas annexed by the Soviet Union" label="Polish areas annexed by the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305266" start="68982" end="68999" title="Soviet invasion of Poland" label="Soviet annexation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655890" start="69158" end="69181" title="NKVD prisoner massacres" label="NKVD prisoner massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434499" start="69265" end="69288" title="List of Gulag camps" label="Gulag slave labor camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="69756" end="69771" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q774029" start="71294" end="71308" title="Aleksander Wat" label="Aleksander Wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q212523" start="71390" end="71400" title="Jan Karski" label="Jan Karski"/>
<link wikidata="Q376303" start="71442" end="71455" title="Norman Davies" label="Norman Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q153132" start="71563" end="71581" title="Władysław Sikorski" label="Władysław Sikorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411476" start="72280" end="72307" title="Kresy" label="eastern part of the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="73207" end="73216" title="Communism" label="Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="73274" end="73296" title="Polish Second Republic" label="Polish Second Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="73800" end="73804" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q134301" start="73812" end="73826" title="Katyń massacre" label="Katyń massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168846" start="73929" end="73961" title="Territories of Poland annexed by the Soviet Union" label="Soviet-occupied Polish territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="73971" end="73983" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="74017" end="74027" title="Communism" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679661" start="74034" end="74046" title="Jakub Berman" label="Jakub Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q85125" start="74095" end="74126" title="Population transfer in the Soviet Union" label="forcibly deported or imprisoned"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="74138" end="74143" title="Gulag" label="Gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q165544" start="74247" end="74263" title="Władysław Anders" label="Władysław Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q208487" start="74292" end="74316" title="Prime Minister of Israel" label="Prime Minister of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q130873" start="74317" end="74331" title="Menachem Begin" label="Menachem Begin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8923598" start="74363" end="74371" title="II Corps (Poland)" label="II Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="74390" end="74418" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="British Mandate of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207913" start="74514" end="74519" title="Irgun" label="Irgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q764169" start="74667" end="74694" title="Monte Cassino Polish war cemetery" label="Cemetery of Polish soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q335288" start="74715" end="74738" title="Battle of Monte Cassino" label="Battle of Monte Cassino"/>
<link wikidata="Q161396" start="74769" end="74782" title="Star of David" label="Star of David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="74838" end="74845" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="74921" end="74934" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="75100" end="75106" title="Nazism" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="75107" end="75125" title="extermination camp" label="extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="75130" end="75139" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q152010" start="75141" end="75150" title="Treblinka extermination camp" label="Treblinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q160135" start="75152" end="75160" title="Majdanek" label="Majdanek"/>
<link wikidata="Q160143" start="75162" end="75168" title="Belzec extermination camp" label="Belzec"/>
<link wikidata="Q152658" start="75170" end="75177" title="Sobibór extermination camp" label="Sobibór"/>
<link wikidata="Q160152" start="75183" end="75190" title="Chełmno extermination camp" label="Chełmno"/>
<link wikidata="Q853930" start="75194" end="75210" title="starvation" label="starved to death"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="75218" end="75225" title="ghettos" label="ghettos"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="75402" end="75414" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="75455" end="75464" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="75750" end="75755" title="Rabbi" label="Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449648" start="76776" end="76784" title="tabloid (newspaper format)" label="tabloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="76927" end="76947" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438715" start="77011" end="77022" title="death squad" label="death squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q152543" start="77037" end="77051" title="Einsatzgruppen" label="Einsatzgruppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q707547" start="77236" end="77251" title="Jedwabne pogrom" label="Jedwabne pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q705173" start="77275" end="77308" title="Institute of National Remembrance" label="Institute of National Remembrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q534080" start="77348" end="77360" title="Jan T. Gross" label="Jan T. Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="77796" end="77802" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="77894" end="77906" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411476" start="78030" end="78035" title="Kresy" label="Kresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55840" start="78578" end="78599" title="Władysław Raczkiewicz" label="Władysław Raczkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722429" start="78814" end="78848" title="Polish Righteous among the Nations" label="Polish Righteous among the Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q12409870" start="78933" end="78952" title="Holocaust survivors" label="Holocaust survivors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983405" start="79266" end="79277" title="Nazi crimes" label="Nazi crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q707554" start="79459" end="79477" title="Emanuel Ringelblum" label="Emanuel Ringelblum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619114" start="79662" end="79680" title="Gunnar S. Paulsson" label="Gunnar S. Paulsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="79891" end="79897" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q439044" start="80118" end="80129" title="szmalcownik" label="szmalcownik"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="80269" end="80287" title="extermination camp" label="extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="80300" end="80315" title="German occupied Poland" label="occupied Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q160152" start="80343" end="80360" title="Chelmno extermination camp" label="Chełmno (Kulmhof)"/>
<link wikidata="Q160143" start="80362" end="80368" title="Belzec extermination camp" label="Bełżec"/>
<link wikidata="Q152658" start="80370" end="80377" title="Sobibor extermination camp" label="Sobibór"/>
<link wikidata="Q152010" start="80379" end="80388" title="Treblinka" label="Treblinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q160135" start="80390" end="80398" title="Majdanek" label="Majdanek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="80403" end="80412" title="Auschwitz" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="80673" end="80691" title="forced labor in Germany during World War II" label="forced labor camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q702997" start="80924" end="80929" title="Kapo (concentration camp)" label="Kapos"/>
<link wikidata="Q154607" start="81160" end="81173" title="Warsaw Ghetto" label="Warsaw Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q327895" start="81264" end="81275" title="Łódź Ghetto" label="Łódź Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q702654" start="81394" end="81410" title="Białystok Ghetto" label="Białystok Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q761" start="81414" end="81423" title="Białystok" label="Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q475685" start="81425" end="81443" title="Częstochowa Ghetto" label="Częstochowa Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521671" start="81445" end="81458" title="Kielce Ghetto" label="Kielce Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q309472" start="81460" end="81473" title="Kraków Ghetto" label="Kraków Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="81477" end="81483" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q670358" start="81485" end="81498" title="Lublin Ghetto" label="Lublin Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q707561" start="81500" end="81511" title="Lwów Ghetto" label="Lwów Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="81527" end="81531" title="Lviv" label="Lviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q18612374" start="81533" end="81551" title="Stanisławów Ghetto" label="Stanisławów Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669831" start="81581" end="81594" title="Brześć Ghetto" label="Brześć Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q480474" start="81623" end="81635" title="Radom Ghetto" label="Radom Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="81803" end="81810" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474378" start="84076" end="84113" title="Rescue of Jews by Poles during the Holocaust" label="Jews and non-Jewish Poles hiding them"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="84237" end="84244" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q439044" start="84447" end="84458" title="szmalcownik" label="szmalcownik"/>
<link wikidata="Q116080" start="84726" end="84750" title="Polish Underground State" label="Polish Underground State"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="84801" end="84814" title="Armia Krajowa" label="Armia Krajowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="85149" end="85154" title="Nazism" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="85176" end="85189" title="death penalty" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="85803" end="85815" title="black market" label="black market"/>
<link wikidata="Q112197" start="86061" end="86088" title="Righteous Among The Nations" label="Righteous Among The Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q156591" start="86103" end="86113" title="Yad Vashem" label="Yad Vashem"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="86135" end="86161" title="Polish Government in Exile" label="Polish Government in Exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q212523" start="86330" end="86340" title="Jan Karski" label="Jan Karski"/>
<link wikidata="Q315691" start="86371" end="86385" title="Witold Pilecki" label="Witold Pilecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q573928" start="86641" end="86657" title="Szmul Zygielbojm" label="Szmul Zygielbojm"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="86712" end="86718" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="86746" end="86759" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q393064" start="86858" end="86864" title="Żegota" label="Żegota"/>
<link wikidata="Q154607" start="86965" end="86978" title="Warsaw Ghetto" label="Warsaw Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q160161" start="86987" end="87000" title="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising" label="1943 Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q156111" start="87134" end="87150" title="General Gouvernment" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q60087" start="87151" end="87161" title="Hans Frank" label="Hans Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q16516912" start="87374" end="87389" title="Adam Czerniakow" label="Adam Czerniakow"/>
<link wikidata="Q833941" start="87434" end="87442" title="Judenrat" label="Judenrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q707517" start="87523" end="87543" title="Jewish Ghetto Police" label="Jewish Ghetto Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q152010" start="88134" end="88162" title="Treblinka extermination camp" label="Treblinka extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q965477" start="88179" end="88197" title="Grossaktion Warsaw (1942)" label="Grossaktion Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="88628" end="88635" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q965477" start="88852" end="88872" title="Grossaktion Warsaw (1942)" label="the mass deportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q707517" start="89066" end="89086" title="Jewish Ghetto Police" label="Jewish Ghetto Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q633284" start="89140" end="89153" title="Umschlagplatz (Warsaw Ghetto)" label="Umschlagplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q707503" start="89397" end="89400" title="Żydowski Związek Wojskowy" label="ŻZW"/>
<link wikidata="Q266706" start="89445" end="89448" title="Żydowska Organizacja Bojowa" label="ŻOB"/>
<link wikidata="Q160161" start="89749" end="89771" title="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising" label="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="90181" end="90194" title="Armia Krajowa" label="Armia Krajowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q327892" start="90494" end="90514" title="Mordechai Anielewicz" label="Mordechai Anielewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q76992" start="90720" end="90733" title="Jürgen Stroop" label="Jürgen Stroop"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="90860" end="90876" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q116080" start="91729" end="91747" title="Polish underground" label="Polish underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521878" start="91845" end="91860" title="Ghetto uprising" label="Ghetto uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="92018" end="92033" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q138796" start="92240" end="92259" title="resistance movement" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="92260" end="92273" title="Armia Krajowa" label="Armia Krajowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958898" start="92385" end="92398" title="Waclaw Micuta" label="Waclaw Micuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q160817" start="92538" end="92551" title="Marek Edelman" label="Marek Edelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509373" start="92555" end="92571" title="Icchak Cukierman" label="Icchak Cukierman"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="92637" end="92650" title="Armia Krajowa" label="Armia Krajowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q116761" start="92656" end="92664" title="Gesiowka" label="Gesiowka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="92756" end="92771" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="92918" end="92920" title="Armia Krajowa" label="AK"/>
<link wikidata="Q558722" start="92972" end="92997" title="Krzysztof Kamil Baczyński" label="Krzysztof Kamil Baczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q9341541" start="93002" end="93019" title="Stanisław Aronson" label="Stanisław Aronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43456" start="93163" end="93174" title="Soviet Army" label="Soviet Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q157176" start="93320" end="93338" title="Władysław Szpilman" label="Władysław Szpilman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="93466" end="93478" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q127013" start="93492" end="93506" title="Final Solution" label="Final Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q158044" start="93547" end="93562" title="Aktion Reinhard" label="Aktion Reinhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="94162" end="94168" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491828" start="94330" end="94341" title="Biała River (Supraśl basin)" label="Biala River"/>
<link wikidata="Q152010" start="94643" end="94671" title="Treblinka extermination camp" label="Treblinka extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q160135" start="95168" end="95176" title="Majdanek" label="Majdanek"/>
<link wikidata="Q15111616" start="95421" end="95435" title="Theresienstadt concentration camp" label="Theresienstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="95446" end="95453" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="95467" end="95485" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz-Birkenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628423" start="95535" end="95560" title="Białystok Ghetto Uprising" label="Białystok Ghetto Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620467" start="95619" end="95653" title="Anti-Fascist Military Organisation" label="Anti-Fascist Military Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q152010" start="95792" end="95820" title="Treblinka extermination camp" label="Treblinka extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="95862" end="95873" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q167096" start="95898" end="95914" title="Molotov cocktail" label="Molotov cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q160161" start="96083" end="96105" title="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising" label="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521878" start="96211" end="96226" title="ghetto uprising" label="ghetto uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q160161" start="96238" end="96260" title="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising" label="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="96389" end="96402" title="Armia Krajowa" label="Armia Krajowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210017" start="96618" end="96666" title="Polish census of 1931" label="the last nationwide census was conducted in 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411476" start="97830" end="97844" title="Kresy" label="eastern Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q138796" start="98379" end="98398" title="resistance movement" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="98564" end="98570" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="98572" end="98576" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="98586" end="98593" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353353" start="98598" end="98611" title="Lower Silesia" label="Lower Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q778251" start="98619" end="98630" title="Dzierżoniów" label="Dzierżoniów"/>
<link wikidata="Q106274" start="98740" end="98747" title="Legnica" label="Legnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q857331" start="98753" end="98760" title="Bielawa" label="Bielawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="98848" end="98883" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="satellite state of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168846" start="98894" end="98909" title="Territories of Poland annexed by the Soviet Union" label="eastern regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607319" start="98976" end="99003" title="Recovered Territories" label="formerly German territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="99016" end="99020" title="Oder" label="Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602" start="99025" end="99031" title="Neisse" label="Neisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293310" start="99083" end="99143" title="Territorial changes of Poland immediately after World War II" label="Territorial changes of Poland immediately after World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="99407" end="99418" title="German Jews" label="German Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="100435" end="100441" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="100472" end="100501" title="end of World War II in Europe" label="end of World War II in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152591" start="100599" end="100624" title="Anti-communist resistance in Poland (1944–46)" label="anti-communist resistance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="100637" end="100679" title="History of Poland (1945–1989)#Consolidation of communist power" label="Soviet-backed communist takeover of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="100982" end="100991" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168846" start="100995" end="101044" title="territories of Poland annexed by the Soviet Union" label="territories of Poland annexed by the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293310" start="101069" end="101083" title="Territorial changes of Poland immediately after World War II" label="border changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="101113" end="101129" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="101179" end="101185" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q236163" start="101216" end="101229" title="Kielce pogrom" label="Kielce pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934774" start="101341" end="101347" title="Milicja Obywatelska" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814824" start="102268" end="102284" title="Kraków pogrom" label="pogrom in Cracow"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="102986" end="103015" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223028" start="103257" end="103270" title="Dariusz Stola" label="Dariusz Stola"/>
<link wikidata="Q837556" start="103611" end="103634" title="Displaced persons" label="displaced-persons camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702533" start="104632" end="104637" title="American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee" label="Joint"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="105608" end="105620" title="Michael Meng" label="Michael Meng"/>
<link wikidata="Q534080" start="106102" end="106111" title="Jan Gross" label="Jan Gross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="106659" end="106674" title="Stephen Denburg" label="Stephen Denburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223028" start="107679" end="107692" title="Dariusz Stola" label="Dariusz Stola"/>
<link wikidata="Q429069" start="107710" end="107722" title="POLIN Museum" label="POLIN Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="108437" end="108465" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="British Mandate of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="108494" end="108500" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q706178" start="108527" end="108544" title="Marian Spychalski" label="Marian Spychalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="108655" end="108667" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="108697" end="108703" title="aliyah" label="aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="108938" end="108945" title="Zionism" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q175395" start="108966" end="108978" title="Adolf Berman" label="Adolf Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509373" start="108983" end="108999" title="Icchak Cukierman" label="Icchak Cukierman"/>
<link wikidata="Q691651" start="109048" end="109055" title="Berihah" label="Berihah"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="109156" end="109162" title="Aliyah" label="Aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="109187" end="109194" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="109196" end="109203" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="109205" end="109219" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="109221" end="109231" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252054" start="109338" end="109344" title="Hagana" label="Hagana"/>
<link wikidata="Q774352" start="109364" end="109370" title="Bolków" label="Bolków"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="109656" end="109667" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054954" start="109906" end="109923" title="Polish legislative election, 1947" label="elections of 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q210431" start="109968" end="109990" title="Polish Socialist Party" label="Polish Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="110348" end="110352" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4504312" start="110741" end="110773" title="Central Committee of Polish Jews" label="Central Committee of Polish Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009979" start="110959" end="110971" title="Dawid Kahane" label="Dawid Kahane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501412" start="110987" end="110998" title="chief rabbi" label="chief rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="111006" end="111025" title="Polish Armed Forces#After 1945" label="Polish Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q494383" start="111426" end="111447" title="Yiddish theater" label="Yiddish State Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q284087" start="111480" end="111492" title="Ida Kamińska" label="Ida Kamińska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574347" start="111498" end="111525" title="Jewish Historical Institute" label="Jewish Historical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="111747" end="111760" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="111948" end="111980" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210131" start="112067" end="112117" title="Politburo of the Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Politburo of the Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679661" start="112128" end="112140" title="Jakub Berman" label="Jakub Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432024" start="112181" end="112201" title="Urząd Bezpieczeństwa" label="Urząd Bezpieczeństwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618140" start="112218" end="112229" title="Hilary Minc" label="Hilary Minc"/>
<link wikidata="Q55832" start="112310" end="112325" title="Bolesław Bierut" label="Bolesław Bierut"/>
<link wikidata="Q277560" start="112442" end="112458" title="de-Stalinisation" label="de-Stalinisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="112466" end="112488" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159603" start="112495" end="112512" title="Władysław Gomułka" label="Władysław Gomułka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362160" start="112584" end="112599" title="Roman Romkowski" label="Roman Romkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6320653" start="112601" end="112615" title="Jacek Różański" label="Jacek Różański"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752054" start="112621" end="112634" title="Anatol Fejgin" label="Anatol Fejgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q315691" start="112767" end="112781" title="Witold Pilecki" label="Witold Pilecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q929107" start="112825" end="112838" title="Józef Światło" label="Józef Światło"/>
<link wikidata="Q485500" start="112892" end="112909" title="Radio Free Europe" label="Radio Free Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q542855" start="112988" end="113001" title="Solomon Morel" label="Solomon Morel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432024" start="113018" end="113055" title="Ministry of Public Security of Poland" label="Ministry of Public Security of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926242" start="113092" end="113109" title="Zgoda labour camp" label="Zgoda labour camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376030" start="113165" end="113185" title="Helena Wolińska-Brus" label="Helena Wolińska-Brus"/>
<link wikidata="Q689612" start="113369" end="113382" title="Emil Fieldorf" label="Emil Fieldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="113496" end="113507" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="113516" end="113522" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="113531" end="113535" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405494" start="114563" end="114591" title="Polish 1968 political crisis" label="Polish 1968 political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356183" start="114738" end="114755" title="Mieczysław Moczar" label="Mieczysław Moczar"/>
<link wikidata="Q537303" start="114991" end="115024" title="Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="115364" end="115370" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="115382" end="115395" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405494" start="115998" end="116015" title="March 1968 events" label="March 1968 events"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="116462" end="116474" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060809" start="116606" end="116646" title="Israel–Poland relations" label="partial diplomatic relations with Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q163714" start="116856" end="116868" title="Adam Michnik" label="Adam Michnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q741296" start="116887" end="116902" title="Gazeta Wyborcza" label="Gazeta Wyborcza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779995" start="116941" end="116972" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Defence Committee" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Defence Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q471815" start="117466" end="117483" title="Koniuchy massacre" label="Koniuchy massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q236163" start="117489" end="117502" title="Kielce pogrom" label="Kielce pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939553" start="117508" end="117523" title="Auschwitz cross" label="Auschwitz cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q699565" start="117635" end="117659" title="Ronald Lauder Foundation" label="Ronald Lauder Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688644" start="117668" end="117714" title="Taube Foundation for Jewish Life &amp;amp; Culture" label="Taube Foundation for Jewish Life &amp;amp; Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q144488" start="117974" end="117991" title="Warsaw University" label="Warsaw University"/>
<link wikidata="Q189441" start="118000" end="118023" title="Jagiellonian University" label="Jagiellonian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q132237468" start="118029" end="118076" title="Union of Jewish Religious Communities in Poland" label="Union of Jewish Religious Communities in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q145972" start="118277" end="118283" title="Zamość" label="Zamość"/>
<link wikidata="Q941451" start="118285" end="118292" title="Tykocin" label="Tykocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q598" start="118294" end="118301" title="Rzeszów" label="Rzeszów"/>
<link wikidata="Q102317" start="118303" end="118309" title="Kielce" label="Kielce"/>
<link wikidata="Q985642" start="118314" end="118327" title="Góra Kalwaria" label="Góra Kalwaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881464" start="118772" end="118785" title="Beit Warszawa Synagogue" label="Beit Warszawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176829" start="118947" end="118954" title="Midrasz" label="Midrasz"/>
<link wikidata="Q119084" start="119255" end="119273" title="Judaica Foundation" label="Judaica Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q429069" start="119485" end="119521" title="Museum of the History of Polish Jews" label="Museum of the History of Polish Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q115094" start="120145" end="120166" title="Jewish Cemetery, Łódź" label="Jewish Cemetery, Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q614145" start="120294" end="120301" title="Leżajsk" label="Leżajsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329488" start="120303" end="120331" title="Elimelech of Lizhensk" label="Elimelech&amp;#x27;s of Lizhensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337718" start="120332" end="120336" title="ohel (grave)" label="ohel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342" start="120363" end="120371" title="Oświęcim" label="Oświęcim"/>
<link wikidata="Q578982" start="120582" end="120591" title="Ner Tamid" label="ner tamid"/>
<link wikidata="Q429007" start="120660" end="120682" title="Warsaw Ghetto Memorial" label="Warsaw Ghetto Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q959010" start="120921" end="120936" title="Nathan Rapoport" label="Nathan Rapoport"/>
<link wikidata="Q266706" start="121039" end="121065" title="Jewish Combat Organization" label="Jewish Combat Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863137" start="121297" end="121367" title="U.S. Commission for the Preservation of America&amp;#x27;s Heritage Abroad" label="U.S. Commission for the Preservation of America&amp;#x27;s Heritage Abroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q651690" start="121488" end="121514" title="Polish Academy of Sciences" label="Polish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568255" start="121522" end="121539" title="Holocaust studies" label="Holocaust studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q705173" start="121587" end="121620" title="Institute of National Remembrance" label="Institute of National Remembrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="121881" end="121914" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q689964" start="122033" end="122056" title="Prince Hassan of Jordan" label="Prince Hassan of Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q571919" start="122149" end="122182" title="Chevra Lomdei Mishnayot synagogue" label="Chevra Lomdei Mishnayot synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186556" start="122191" end="122214" title="Auschwitz Jewish Center" label="Auschwitz Jewish Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q526953" start="122642" end="122661" title="March of the Living" label="March of the Living"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="122784" end="122792" title="Auschwitz II" label="Birkenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q309530" start="122884" end="122909" title="Holocaust Remembrance Day" label="Holocaust Remembrance Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q952721" start="122921" end="122944" title="Israel Independence Day" label="Israel Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121076" start="122957" end="122983" title="Jewish Culture Festival in Kraków" label="festival of Jewish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="123185" end="123192" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="123194" end="123200" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q106583" start="123206" end="123219" title="Bielsko-Biała" label="Bielsko-Biała"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915935" start="123313" end="123332" title="Moses Schorr Centre" label="Moses Schorr Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405494" start="123843" end="123871" title="1968 Polish political crisis" label="1968 Polish political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q429069" start="123900" end="123936" title="Museum of the History of Polish Jews" label="Museum of the History of Polish Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q429069" start="124091" end="124133" title="POLIN Museum of the History of Polish Jews" label="POLIN Museum of the History of Polish Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q55337700" start="124227" end="124247" title="Warsaw Ghetto Museum" label="Warsaw Ghetto Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q259337" start="124381" end="124385" title="YIVO" label="YIVO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915935" start="124963" end="124982" title="Moses Schorr Centre" label="Moses Schorr Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702533" start="125239" end="125283" title="American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee" label="American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q41189" start="125288" end="125312" title="Jewish Agency for Israel" label="Jewish Agency for Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q124646925" start="125456" end="125479" title="Jewish Community Center" label="Jewish Community Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="125483" end="125489" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865047" start="125536" end="125589" title="History of the Jews in Poland before the 18th century" label="History of the Jews in Poland before the 18th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869602" start="125592" end="125634" title="History of the Jews in 18th-century Poland" label="History of the Jews in 18th-century Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869606" start="125637" end="125679" title="History of the Jews in 19th-century Poland" label="History of the Jews in 19th-century Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869609" start="125682" end="125724" title="History of the Jews in 20th-century Poland" label="History of the Jews in 20th-century Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q252148" start="125727" end="125760" title="Timeline of Jewish-Polish history" label="Timeline of Jewish-Polish history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467513" start="125763" end="125776" title="Galician Jews" label="Galician Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508898" start="125779" end="125816" title="Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain" label="Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q527934" start="125819" end="125849" title="History of the Jews in Austria" label="History of the Jews in Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="125852" end="125882" title="History of the Jews in Germany" label="History of the Jews in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031644" start="125885" end="125914" title="History of the Jews in Russia" label="History of the Jews in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060809" start="125917" end="125940" title="Israel–Poland relations" label="Israel–Poland relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509271" start="125943" end="125966" title="Jewish ethnic divisions" label="Jewish ethnic divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q27924648" start="125975" end="125997" title="Jewish Roots in Poland" label="Jewish Roots in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594419" start="126006" end="126027" title="List of Polish rabbis" label="List of Polish rabbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q444433" start="126072" end="126094" title="Marek Jan Chodakiewicz" label="Marek Jan Chodakiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q444433" start="126165" end="126187" title="Marek Jan Chodakiewicz" label="Marek Jan Chodakiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019789" start="126297" end="126313" title="William W. Hagen" label="William W. Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918516" start="126461" end="126490" title="The Journal of Modern History" label="The Journal of Modern History"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777243" start="126540" end="126555" title="Antony Polonsky" label="Antony Polonsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205764" start="126560" end="126577" title="Joanna B. Michlic" label="Joanna B. Michlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6100947" start="126734" end="126756" title="Iwo Cyprian Pogonowski" label="Iwo Cyprian Pogonowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995475" start="126809" end="126825" title="Hippocrene Books" label="Hippocrene Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132119" start="127630" end="127646" title="Attribution (copyright)" label="inline citations"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="127787" end="127812" title="Partitions of Poland" label="the century of Partitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q61739695" start="128026" end="128039" title="Dynner, Glenn" label="Dynner, Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q510166" start="128324" end="128344" title="Stanisław Krajewski" label="Krajewski, Stanisław"/>
<link wikidata="Q449611" start="128443" end="128464" title="Alvydas Nikžentaitis" label="Nikžentaitis, Alvydas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777243" start="128580" end="128596" title="Antony Polonsky" label="Polonsky, Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="130898" end="130911" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416800" wikidata="Q2259455" url="?curid=416800" title="Leckhampstead, Buckinghamshire">
<text>Leckhampstead is a village and civil parish in the unitary authority area of Buckinghamshire, England. It is near the boundary with Northamptonshire, about north east of Buckingham, and west of Milton Keynes. The village is on the River Leck, a tributary of the River Great Ouse.

==History==
The toponym is derived from the Old English for &quot;homestead where leeks are grown&quot;. In the Domesday Book of 1086 the village was recorded as &quot;Lechamstede&quot;.

In the middle of the 16th century the village was split into two halves, Leckhampstead Magna and Leckhampstead Parva, with the foundation of a manor house in the latter. However within a couple of centuries the two halves were joined up again when the incumbent of Leckhampstead Magna inherited Leckhampstead Parva.

The manor and living of Leckhampstead were given to Martha Lovelace who was the daughter of the Governor of New York. She married Henry Beauclerk and their only son, also called Henry, inherited the manor in 1788. This Henry had already been given the living of the parish church of the Assumption of the Blesséd Virgin Mary.

The church building is Norman, with a tower that was added in the 13th century. It is a Grade I listed building.

==References==
===Works cited===

==Further reading==

==External links==

* North Buckingham Parish</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2259455" start="0" end="13" title="Leckhampstead, Buckinghamshire" label="Leckhampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="31" end="43" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="77" end="92" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23115" start="132" end="148" title="Northamptonshire" label="Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q195955" start="170" end="180" title="Buckingham" label="Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q204234" start="194" end="207" title="Milton Keynes" label="Milton Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15272696" start="231" end="241" title="River Leck" label="River Leck"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="245" end="254" title="tributary" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q19716" start="262" end="278" title="River Great Ouse" label="River Great Ouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="297" end="304" title="Toponymy" label="toponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="325" end="336" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="393" end="406" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="612" end="623" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917712" start="838" end="853" title="Martha Beauclerk" label="Martha Lovelace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347975" start="882" end="902" title="Governor of New York" label="Governor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116872" start="1052" end="1065" title="Church of England parish church" label="parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q162691" start="1073" end="1110" title="Assumption of Mary" label="Assumption of the Blesséd Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q136693" start="1136" end="1142" title="Norman architecture" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1201" end="1224" title="Listed building#Categories of listed building" label="Grade I listed building"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416803" wikidata="Q1755312" url="?curid=416803" title="SOSUS">
<text>Sound Surveillance System (SOSUS) was the original name for a submarine detection system based on passive sonar developed by the United States Navy to track Soviet submarines. The system&#x27;s true nature was classified with the name and acronym SOSUS classified as well. The unclassified name &quot;Project Caesar&quot; was used to cover the installation of the system and a cover story developed regarding the shore stations, identified only as a Naval Facility (NAVFAC), being for oceanographic research. The name changed to Integrated Undersea Surveillance System (IUSS) in 1985, as the fixed bottom arrays were supplemented by the mobile Surveillance Towed Array Sensor System (SURTASS) and other new systems. The commands and personnel were covered by the &quot;oceanographic&quot; term until 1991 when the mission was declassified. As a result, the commands, Oceanographic System Atlantic and Oceanographic System Pacific became Undersea Surveillance Atlantic and Undersea Surveillance Pacific, and personnel were able to wear insignia reflecting the mission.
The original system was capable of oceanic surveillance with the long ranges made possible by exploiting the deep sound channel, or SOFAR channel. An indication of ranges is the first detection, recognition and reporting of a Soviet nuclear submarine coming into the Atlantic through the Greenland-Iceland-United Kingdom (GIUK) gap by an array terminating at NAVFAC Barbados on 6 July 1962. The linear arrays with hydrophones placed on slopes within the sound channel enabled beamforming processing at the shore facilities to form azimuthal beams. When two or more arrays held a contact, triangulation provided approximate positions for air or surface assets to localize.

SOSUS grew out of tasking in 1949 to scientists and engineers to study the problem of antisubmarine warfare. It was implemented as a chain of underwater hydrophone arrays linked by cable, based on commercial telephone technology, to shore stations located around the western Atlantic Ocean from Nova Scotia to Barbados. The first experimental array was a six-element test array laid at Eleuthera in the Bahamas in 1951, followed, after successful experiments with a target submarine, in 1952 by a fully-functional , forty-hydrophone array. At that time the order for stations was increased from six to nine. The then-secret 1960 Navy film &quot;Watch in the Sea&quot; describes the production arrays as being long. In 1954, the order was increased by three more Atlantic stations and an extension into the Pacific, with six stations on the West Coast and one in Hawaii.

In September 1954, Naval Facility Ramey was commissioned in Puerto Rico. Others of the first Atlantic phase followed, and in 1957 the original operational array at Eleuthera got an operational shore facility as the last of the first phase of Atlantic systems. The same year, the Pacific systems began to be installed and activated. Over the next three decades, more systems were added; NAVFAC Keflavik, Iceland in 1966 and NAVFAC Guam in 1968 being examples of expansion beyond the western Atlantic and eastern Pacific. Shore upgrades and new cable technology allowed system consolidation until by 1980 that process had resulted in many closures of the NAVFACs with centralized processing at a new type facility, Naval Ocean Processing Facility (NOPF), that by 1981 saw one for each ocean and mass closing of the NAVFACs.

As the new mobile systems came on line, the original arrays were deactivated and some turned over for scientific research. The surveillance aspect continues with new systems under Commander, Undersea Surveillance.

==History==
SOSUS history began in 1949 when the US Navy approached the Committee for Undersea Warfare, an academic advisory group formed in 1946 under the National Academy of Sciences, to research antisubmarine warfare. As a result, the Navy formed a study group designated &quot;Project Hartwell&quot;, named for the University of Pennsylvania&#x27;s G.P. Hartwell who was the Deputy Chairman of the Committee for Undersea Warfare, under Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) leadership. The Hartwell panel recommended spending of annually to develop systems to counter the Soviet submarine threat consisting primarily of a large fleet of diesel submarines.

That group also recommended a system to monitor low-frequency sound in the SOFAR channel using multiple listening sites equipped with hydrophones and a processing facility that could calculate submarine positions over hundreds of miles.

===Research===
As a result of the Hartwell group&#x27;s recommendations, the Office of Naval Research (ONR) contracted with American Telephone and Telegraph Company (AT&amp;T), with its Bell Laboratories research and Western Electric manufacturing elements, to develop a long range, passive detection system, based on bottom arrays of hydrophones. The system, using equipment termed Low Frequency Analyzer and Recorder and a process termed Low Frequency Analysis and Recording, both with the acronym LOFAR, was to be based on AT&amp;T&#x27;s sound spectrograph, developed for speech analysis and modified to analyze low-frequency underwater sounds. This research and development effort was given the name &quot;Project Jezebel&quot;. The origin of the project name was explained by Robert Frosch to Senator Stennis during a 1968 hearing. It was because of the low frequencies, &quot;about the A below middle C on the piano&quot; (about 100–150 cycles) and &quot;Jezebel&quot; being chosen because &quot;she was of low character.&quot; This refers to A2 on the musical scale, which is technically two A&#x27;s below middle C.

Jezebel and LOFAR branched into the localization of submarines with the AN/SSQ-28 passive omnidirectional Jezebel-LOFAR sonobuoy introduced in 1956 for use by the air antisubmarine forces. That sonobuoy gave the aircraft cued by SOSUS access to the same low frequency and LOFAR capability as SOSUS. Bell Telephone Laboratories time delay correlation was used to fix target position with two or more sonobuoys in a technique named COrrelation Detection And Ranging (CODAR). This, and later specialized, sonobuoys equipped with a small explosive charge could be used in an active mode to detect the echo off the target. The active mode was named by engineers developing the technique &quot;Julie&quot; after a burlesque dancer whose &quot;performance could turn passive buoys active.&quot;

Related research, based at Columbia University&#x27;s Hudson Laboratory, was designated &quot;Project Michael&quot;. Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and Scripps Institution of Oceanography were also tasked to develop an understanding of long-range sound transmission under &quot;Project Michael&quot;. The need to better understand the acoustic environment drove much of the oceanographic research by both the Navy and institutions with Navy funding for oceanography. A major, long-term research program spanning over 25 years, the Long Range Acoustic Propagation Program (LRAPP), made significant progress in such understanding and influenced decisions in SOSUS, significantly the SOSUS expansion into the eastern Atlantic.

===Development and installation===
The hardware technology was largely that of the commercial telephone system and oil exploration. Cable laying was a capability AT&amp;T and other entities had developed for decades for commercial communications cables. The understanding of the ocean acoustic environment made the system possible rather than development of new technology. SOSUS was a case of new understanding of the environment and then application of largely existing technology and even equipment to the problem.

The forty hydrophones spaced on the array provided the aperture for signal processing to form horizontal azimuthal beams of two to five degrees wide, each beam with a LOFAR analyzer and capability to do narrow-band frequency analysis to discriminate signal from ocean noise and to identify specific frequencies associated with rotating machinery. The NAVFAC watch floor had banks of displays using electrostatic paper, similar to that used for echograms in depth finders.

The product of these displays was the LOFARgram which graphically represented acoustic energy and frequency against time. Those were examined by the personnel trained to identify submarine signatures. When two or more arrays held a target the bearings from each array gave an estimated target position by triangulation. The system could provide cuing information on the presence of the submarines and an approximate location for air or surface antisubmarine warfare assets to localize the target. The first Atlantic stations, ranging from Nova Scotia to Barbados, formed a long line semicircle looking into the Western Atlantic basin with geographic separation for contact correlation and triangulation.

===Security===
The combination of research and engineering under &quot;Jezebel&quot; and &quot;Michael&quot; into an actual broad area surveillance system as seen by Project Hartwell&#x27;s Frederick V. Hunt became the Sound Surveillance System with the acronym SOSUS. Both the full name and acronym were classified. There were occasional slips. A contractor for the Office of Naval Research, Fleet Analysis and Support Division published an unclassified report with &quot;SOSUS&quot; in association with the system acronym &quot;SOSS&quot;, defined as &quot;Sound Search Station,&quot; and a capability to display data from sonobuoys side by side on either aircraft or SOSS displays in contact classification as either friendly or unfriendly targets. The unclassified name &quot;Project Caesar&quot; was given to cover development and installation of the resulting system.

A cover story was developed to explain the visible shore installations, the Naval Facilities, and the commands under which they fell. The cover explained that data gathered by oceanographic and acoustic surveys with ships could at times be collected &quot;more expeditiously and more economically by means of shore stations. These are the U. S. Naval Facilities.&quot; The cover extended to the names of the commands and training of personnel with overall commands designated Ocean Systems Atlantic and Ocean Systems Pacific, and terms such as Ocean Technician [OT] and Oceanographic Research Watch Officer given to Naval Facility personnel. Despite being qualified for a warfare specialty and its symbols, the Navy personnel in the small SOSUS community could not do so for the sake of secrecy until the mission became public in 1991. The Ocean System commands, COMOCEANSYSLANT (COSL) and COMOCEANSYSPAC (COSP), then began to reflect their true nature as Undersea Surveillance commands COMUNDERSEASURVLANT (CUSL) and COMUNDERSEASURVPAC (CUSP) under the Integrated Undersea Surveillance System (IUSS) name that had come into effect in 1985 as systems other than fixed emerged.

SOSUS was closely held on a strict need-to-know basis that was close to Sensitive Compartmented Information even though it was classified at the Secret level. Even the Fleet had little knowledge of the system or its function. Contact data reaching the fleet was in a strictly formatted message designated RAINFORM, hiding the source, that the fleet often did not understand without reference to publications to understand the form&#x27;s fields and codes. As a result, people in the fleet often did not know of the system&#x27;s dedicated antisubmarine mission. Even when they knew they often did not know of its actual performance or exact role. This later had implications as the Cold War ended and budgets became an issue. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the system was opened to tactical use and the fleet began to see the contact information in other formats readily understandable by fleet antisubmarine forces. In 1997 the RAINFORM was abandoned and replaced.

For much of the system&#x27;s operation, direct action based on SOSUS contacts was avoided. An example was subject to a box piece in the January 5, 1981 issue of &quot;Newsweek&quot; titled &quot;A Soviet War of Nerves&quot; concerning an incident from August 1978. An alert to Atlantic Fleet, Strategic Air Command (SAC) and the Pentagon came from &quot;underwater listening devices at several secret Navy installations&quot; that two Yankee class nuclear-armed submarines had left their usual patrol areas 1,200 miles out in the Atlantic and were getting dangerously close. That approach raised the threat level to several SAC bases along the coast. Rather than prosecute the contacts and reveal how closely the system could track the submarines, the SAC bases put more bombers on ready alert assuming the Soviets would notice. The submarines did not withdraw so SAC dispersed the bombers to bases as far away as Texas. Though there is no positive proof that action was the cause, the Yankees moved back to their usual areas and had not moved close to the U.S. coast again at the time of the piece.
The original Naval Facilities and later, consolidated, processing centers were high security installations characterized by an outer security fence and gate checkpoint. The terminal buildings within were double fenced with separate entry security. Not all personnel assigned to the facility had access to the operational part of the installations. The early arrangement can be seen in the vertical photograph of Naval Facility Nantucket and later in the photograph of Naval Facility Brawdy below. Equipment in the terminal buildings was installed by specially cleared Western Electric Company personnel.

===Initial installations===
Western Electric and ONR representatives met on 29 October 1950 to draft a contract that was signed as a letter contract on 13 November to build a demonstration system. The contract was managed by Bureau of Ships (BuShips) with then Ensign Joseph P. Kelly, later Captain and termed &quot;Father of SOSUS,&quot; assigned. An experimental six-element hydrophone array was installed on the island of Eleuthera in the Bahamas during 1951. Meanwhile, &quot;Project Jezebel&quot; and &quot;Project Michael&quot; focused on studying long range acoustics in the ocean.

From 2–19 January 1952 the British cable layer installed the first full sized, long, forty transducer element operational array in off Eleuthera in the Bahamas. Successful tests with a target submarine resulted in the order to install a total of nine arrays along the coast of the Western North Atlantic. The 1960 secret, limited distribution Navy film &quot;Watch in the Sea&quot;, contains a segment at about 9:22 minutes into the film concerning the search for a suitable array location and laying the array. It describes the operational arrays as being long. In 1954 ten additional arrays were ordered with three more in the Atlantic, six on the Pacific coast and one in Hawaii.
The cable ships &quot;Neptune&quot; and &quot;Albert J. Myer&quot; were acquired to support &quot;Project Caesar&quot; with later addition of the cable ships &quot;Aeolus&quot; and &quot;Thor&quot;. Other ships were added for acoustic and bathymetric surveys and cable support.

==Operational systems==
SOSUS systems consisted of bottom-mounted hydrophone arrays connected by underwater cables to facilities ashore. The individual arrays were installed primarily on continental slopes and seamounts at the axis of the deep sound channel and normal to the direction in which they were to cover. The combination of location within the ocean and the sensitivity of arrays allowed the system to detect acoustic power of less than a single watt at ranges of several hundred kilometres. SOSUS shore terminal processing stations were designated with the vague, generic name of Naval Facility (NAVFAC). By the 1980s improved communications technology allowed the array data once processed in individual Naval Facilities to be sent to central processing centers (Naval Ocean Processing Facility (NOPF)) for centralized processing of multiple fixed and mobile array information.

The first systems were limited by the commercial telephone cable technology for the application requiring a shore facility within about from the array and thus within that distance from the continental shelf locations suitable for the array. The cable of the time consisted of multi-pair wire connected to the forty hydrophones of the array. New coaxial multiplexed commercial telephone system cable, designated SB, using a single wire for all hydrophones allowed major changes with the prototype installed in 1962 at Eleuthera. The upgrades made possible by the multiplexed coaxial cable were designated Caesar Phase III. Caesar Phase IV was associated with major upgrades in shore processing with Digital Spectrum Analysis (DSA) backfits at the stations replacing original equipment during the late 1960s. In September 1972 a third generation coaxial cable, again based on commercial developments at Bell Labs and designated SD-C, was installed for the system terminating at Naval Facility Centerville Beach, California. The SD-C cable was the basis for a fourth generation of sonar sets with installation of the Lightweight Undersea Components (LUSC) involving new shore equipment in 1984. In June 1994 an entirely new cable system was introduced with fiber optic cable.
Cable technology and signal processing improved and upgrades were made to the original installations. Cable technology made it possible to site arrays further from shore into the ocean basins. New signal processing capabilities allowed for innovations such as the split array in which a single line array was divided into segments, each separately processed, then electronically recombined to form narrower beams for better bearing and cross fixes between arrays. Augmenting these local improvements was the increased central processing in centers that eventually became the Naval Oceanographic Processing Facilities. There the contacts of multiple arrays were correlated with other intelligence sources in order to cue and provide the search area for air and surface antisubmarine assets to localize and prosecute.

The system was considered a strategic, not tactical, system at the time and part of continental defense. In military construction hearings during 1964 before the Senate Committee on Armed Services the request for funding of recreational and other support buildings for the Naval Facility Cape Hatteras the Navy noted it was part of a program supporting continental air and missile defense forces without mention of its role in tracking Soviet missile submarines.

===Chronology===
====1950s====
In 1954 the Fleet Sonar School at Key West established a Sound Search Course for training personnel. The highly classified program was behind the &quot;Green Door&quot; which became a name for the program itself as well as being seen as a term for the secrecy.
In 1954 three full systems to include a NAVFAC terminus were installed with arrays terminating at NAVFACs at Ramey Air Force Base, Puerto Rico in September, Grand Turk in October, and San Salvador in December. Systems terminating at Naval Facility Bermuda, Canadian Forces Station (CFS) Shelburne, Nova Scotia, Nantucket, and Cape May were installed during 1955. Systems terminating at Naval Facility Cape Hatteras and Naval Facility Antigua and two Evaluation Centers, forerunners of NOPFs, were established in New York and Norfolk during 1956. The initial array at Eleuthera got a fully functioning NAVFAC with an additional system for the Atlantic at Barbados and the first of the Pacific systems at San Nicolas Island came in 1957. During 1958 the remainder of the Pacific stations at Naval Facility Point Sur and Centerville Beach in California and Pacific Beach, Washington, and Coos Head near Coos Bay, Oregon were installed.

Six Pacific coast systems had been planned but only five Naval Facilities were constructed. The northernmost system off Vancouver Island was to terminate in Canada but a change in government there precluded a facility in Canada at the time. The sixth array, requiring redesign of the cable and repeater system, was thus terminated at Naval Facility Pacific Beach, making it a dual array facility.
From 1958 to 1960 Project Caesar assets began work installing the Missile Impact Location System (MILS), based on technology and installation methods similar to those for SOSUS, in support of Air Force ICBM tests. The survey and installation focus in that period was on installation of MILS in the Atlantic and Pacific test ranges. Arrays of hydrophones placed around the target area located the missile warhead by means of measuring arrival times of the explosion at the various hydrophones of a SOFAR charge in the test warhead. During that period an atypical SOSUS system was installed in 1959 at Argentia, Newfoundland to provide surveillance for approaches to Hudson Bay. It was a shallow water, curved array with ten eight-element arrays installed on two cables with each cable having the capacity for the usual forty elements.

====1960s====
In 1962 a new system was installed terminating at Naval Facility Adak in the Aleutians. The system terminating at Cape May was rerouted to a new Naval Facility Lewes, Delaware, with upgraded processing, after the NAVFAC Cape May had been destroyed in the &quot;Ash Wednesday&quot; Storm.

NAVFAC Argentia got a 2X20 element array in 1963. A 1965 decision to deploy systems to the Norwegian Sea was followed in 1966 with a system terminating at Keflavik, Iceland with the first 3X16 array system while Western Electric installed data links by land line to OCEANSYSLANT and OCEANSYSPAC. New systems were installed during 1968 at Midway Island and Guam. COMOCEANSYSPAC relocated to Ford Island, Hawaii from Treasure Island, California. The shallow water system at Argentia was deactivated.

In 1965 was acquired as a bathymetric survey ship. The satellite communications ship joined the project in 1967 for acoustic and bathymetric work.

====1970s====
The first NAVFAC decommissioning took place with the isolated duty station at NAVFAC San Salvador, Bahamas shut down on 31 January 1970. The old station is now home of the Gerace Research Center. NAVFAC Barbers Point is commissioned. A system wide modernization began in 1972. Argentia became a joint Canadian Forces and U.S. Navy facility. NAVFAC Ramey becomes NAVFAC Punta Borinquen in 1974. Further NAVFACs shut down in 1976 with NAVFACs Punta Borinquen and Nantucket decommissioned. NAVFAC Barbados was decommissioned in 1979.
In 1974 Naval Facility Brawdy, Wales was established as the terminus of new arrays covering the eastern Atlantic. NAVFAC Brawdy became the first &quot;super NAVFAC&quot; with some four hundred U.S. and U.K. military and civilian personnel assigned. The facility () was adjacent to the Royal Air Force Station Brawdy which had returned to RAF control during February 1974 after closure in 1971.

In 1975 left Naval Research Laboratory service and joined Project Caesar. In April 1974 the ship was reported as already being funded by Naval Electronics Systems Command (NAVELEX), where the project program management resided, and no longer funded as an oceanographic ship. By 1979 it was the most recently built ship of the five project ships that then included cable repair ships &quot;Albert J. Myer&quot; and &quot;Neptune&quot; due for modernization and the larger repair ship &quot;Aeolus&quot; that was uneconomical to repair and marginal as a cable ship. &quot;Kingsport&quot; was still with the project. The Navy was requesting four fully functional cable ships, the modernized &quot;Albert J. Myer&quot; and &quot;Neptune&quot; and two large new ships. The two new ships were to be designed as modern cable ships, fully capable of cable and survey work.

====1980s====
In 1980 consolidation and elimination of expensive individual facilities was made possible by the Wideband Acoustic Data Relay (WADR) first installed at Midway Island in January 1982 so that the two Midway arrays could eventually be remoted directly to NOPF Ford Island. This first generation WADR was used to consolidate array data from the California facilities at San Nicolas Island and Point Sur in 1984. Those were followed by remoting Hawaii&#x27;s Barber&#x27;s Point in 1985, the Pacific Northwest arrays at Pacific Beach and Coos Head in 1987, and Bermuda in the Atlantic in 1992. A second generation WADR allowed the consolidation of the Aleutian station at Adak in 1993, the North Atlantic&#x27;s Argentia in 1995, and those termed &quot;Special Projects&quot; in 1997 and 1998.

The western Atlantic system consolidation was centered on the establishment of the Naval Ocean Processing Facility (NOPF) at Dam Neck, Virginia beginning with closure of NAVFACs Eleuthera and Grand Turk. During 1981 Naval Ocean Processing Facility (NOPF), Ford Island became operational and the decommissioning of NAVFAC Midway with that system&#x27;s data routed to NAVFAC Barbers Point was completed. NAVFAC Lewes, Delaware closed that year. NAVFAC Cape Hatteras closed in 1982 and in 1983 Midway acoustic data was rerouted directly to Naval Ocean Processing Facility, Ford Island.
In 1984 the first SURTASS vessel, arrives at Little Creek, Virginia. , the one new cable ship of the requested two, enters the &quot;Caesar fleet&quot; for operations. Atlantic NAVFAC Antigua and Pacific NAVFACs at San Nicolas Island and Point Sur in California closed. Point Sur acoustic data was routed to NAVFAC Centerville. Consolidation and new systems brought further change in 1985. NAVFAC Barbers Point closes with acoustic data directed to NOPF, Ford Island. The Fixed Distributed System (FDS) test array, a new type of fixed bottom system, terminus was made at NAVFAC Brawdy, Wales. &quot;Stalwart&quot; makes first SURTASS operational patrol and system name is changed from SOSUS to Integrated Undersea Surveillance System (IUSS). Consolidation continued in 1987 with NAVFAC Whidbey Island, Washington, established with NAVFAC Pacific Beach&#x27;s acoustic data routed to that facility. During 1991 NAVFAC Guam, Mariana Islands closed.

====1990s====
USNS &quot;Stalwart&quot; and monohull SURTASS ships were withdrawn with SWATH hull accepted by the Navy during 1992. That year the system got Chief of Naval Operations tasking to report whale detections.

More original NAVFACs closed during 1993 with NAVFACs Centerville Beach, California and Adak, Alaska closing with their acoustic data routed to NAVFAC Whidbey Island. The facility at Whidbey, with multiple systems terminating there became Naval Ocean Processing Facility (NOPF) Whidbey. During 1994 Canadian Forces Shelburne, Nova Scotia closes as does NAVFAC Argentia with HMCS &quot;Trinity&quot; established at Halifax Nova Scotia with operation as Canadian Forces IUSS Centre (CFIC). NAVFAC Bermuda data is routed to Naval Ocean Processing Facility (NOPF) at Dam Neck. The new Advanced Deployable System enters as a part of IUSS and NAVFAC Brawdy, Wales closes with equipment and operation transferred to Joint Maritime Facility St Mawgan during 1995. During 1996 NAVFAC Keflavik Iceland closes and the new Fixed Distributed System Initial Operational Capability is accomplished. In 1997 the Adak system reverts to &quot;wet storage.&quot;

====2000 to 2010====

 is commissioned as the first SURTASS/Low Frequency Active (LFA) surveillance ship in 2000. In 2003 the new Advanced Deployable System (ADS) completes dual array testing. Extensive changes both with shore and sea assets take place over the following years as post Cold War missions change and systems are applied in new ways. Further consolidation takes place such as in 2009 when Joint Maritime Facility, St. Mawgan in the U.K. has data remoted directly to NOPF Dam Neck and is decommissioned. British and US Forces then begin joint, combined operations at NOPF Dam Neck.

===Management and commands===
Project Caesar, from initial bathymetric and acoustical surveys through cable installation and turnover to operations, was managed by Bureau of Ships (BuShips) from 1951 until 1964. All the direct support through contracts with Western Electric, Bell Labs and ship schedules was under this management. In 1964 the project was placed under Industrial Manager, Potomac River Command and then Naval District Washington in 1965. In 1966 the project came under Naval Electronics Systems Command (NAVELEX PME-124) where it remained through the name change in 1986 to Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command (SPAWARSYSCOM PMW 180) and a move from Arlington to San Diego in 1997.

The Navy operational side, taking over when the systems were accepted and turned over for operation, came under Commander, Oceanographic System Atlantic (COMOCEANSYSLANT) in 1954. Commander, Oceanographic System Pacific (COMOCEANSYSPAC) was established for the Pacific systems in 1964. Within the Office of Chief of Naval Operations the Director ASW Programs OP-95 was established in 1964. In 1970 COMOCEANSYSLANT and COMOCEANSYSPAC were designated as major commands by the Chief of Naval Operations.
With the new, mobile systems Towed Array Sensor System (TASS) and the Surveillance Towed Array Sensor System (SURTASS) entering the system, the SOSUS name was changed in 1984 to Integrated Undersea Surveillance System (IUSS) to reflect the change from bottom fixed systems alone. In 1990 officers were authorized to wear IUSS insignia. Finally, with &quot;undersea surveillance&quot; so openly displayed, the mission is declassified in 1991 and the commands reflect that with replacement of the &quot;oceanographic systems&quot; with the accurate &quot;under sea surveillance,&quot; the commands renamed as Commander, Undersea Surveillance Atlantic and Commander, Undersea Surveillance Pacific. In 1994 the Atlantic and Pacific commands were merged into Commander Undersea Surveillance at Dam Neck, Virginia. In 1998 that command was placed under Commander, Submarine Force, U.S. Atlantic Fleet.

The LOFARgram representation of acoustics in black, gray and white with an operator trained and adapted to interpreting that display was the critical link in the system. Experienced operators that could detect subtle differences and with practice could detect faint signatures of targets were vital to detection. It was even found that color blindness could be an advantage. It was soon apparent that the Navy&#x27;s practice of short term tours and transfer out of the system was a problem. Commander Ocean Systems Atlantic launched an effort in 1964 to create a rating peculiar to SOSUS and allow personnel to remain within the community. It took five years for Bureau of Personnel to create the rating of Ocean Technician [OT]. That bureau did not do the same for officers thus forcing those with experience to either leave for new duties or leave the Navy. Some did so and remained in the system as civil service or contractor personnel.

The first women were assigned to NAVFAC Eleuthera when an officer and ten enlisted women were assigned in 1972. Due to the fact that the SOSUS community departed from the usual Navy cultural routine, with repeat assignments within the small community, women were able to serve in a warfare specialty without shipboard duty that was still being denied. That opened a new field for women outside the usual medical, education, or administrative specialties. SOSUS assignment qualified as important as sea duty on a Cold War front line.

===Events===
In 1961 the system proved its effectiveness when it tracked on her first North Atlantic transit to the United Kingdom. The first detection of a Soviet nuclear submarine occurred on 6 July 1962 when NAVFAC Barbados recognized and reported contact #27103, a Soviet nuclear submarine west of Norway coming into the Atlantic through the Greenland-Iceland-United Kingdom (GIUK) gap. 

When sank in 1963, SOSUS helped determine its location. 

In 1968, the first detections of and class Soviet submarines were made, while in 1974 the first was observed. 

Also in 1968, SOSUS played a key role in locating the wreckage of the American nuclear attack submarine , lost near the Azores in May. 

Moreover, SOSUS data from March 1968 facilitated the discovery, and clandestine retrieval six years later, of parts of the Soviet Golf II-class ballistic missile submarine , that foundered that month north of Hawaii.

===Operational issues===
The secrecy of the system meant that it did not have the widespread fleet support of successful tactical systems despite its actual success. It was the primary cuing system that antisubmarine forces used to localize and potentially destroy targets for over forty years, but secrecy largely kept that fact from the fleet. The lack of strong fleet support was a factor when budget cuts after the Cold War fell heavily on the surveillance program.

The system&#x27;s first station came on line before there was any signature library of Soviet submarine acoustic characteristics while submerged. The operators had no information on which to identify a hostile submerged submarine&#x27;s unique signature while snorkeling on the LOFARgram. The signatures available were of surfaced submarines from other sources. It was not until the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962, when the quarantine reduced other shipping noises, that operators recognized unusual signatures that were confirmed to be Soviet snorkeling submarines when aircraft sighted snorkels and sonobuoys confirmed the unusual acoustics as being from that submarine. Even then, others had doubts until 1963–1964 Norwegian data on submarines deploying or returning collected correlated signatures. SOSUS then became the major collector of Soviet submarine signatures and &quot;bootstrapped&quot; itself to becoming the primary signature library for itself and becoming the major intelligence source for all other Navy acoustic sensor systems.

Both undersea surveillance and the operation of U.S. submarines were tightly held secrets within the communities. That secrecy led to misunderstandings and even potential breaches of security. Despite periods of realization both communities fell back into assumptions as a result of secrecy. On the submarine force side, there was a recurrent idea that SOSUS/IUSS could not detect U.S. submarines, despite early SOSUS having tracked USS &quot;George Washington&quot; across the Atlantic. The realization that SOSUS could detect U.S. nuclear submarines led to the Navy&#x27;s quieting program for those submarines and the assumption returned.

The opposite occurred when the surveillance community did not have information on U.S. submarine operations, and assumed they held a Soviet or unknown contact. In 1962 and 1973, U.S. submarines conducting covert operations off of the Soviet submarine base at Petropavlovsk were detected by NAVFAC Adak. In 1962, the detections were published at the secret level by Commander, Alaskan Sea Frontier, and these reports were pushed up the chain of command. Commander, Submarine Force, U.S. Pacific Fleet (COMSUBPAC) recognized the contacts as U.S. submarines engaged in highly classified operations, and immediate changes were ordered for the reporting procedures. In 1973 such contacts were again almost published, but were stopped only when information was identified by a visiting civilian expert who recognized the acoustic signatures as that of a U.S. submarine. When that submarine put into Adak for a medical emergency the detection events were matched to the submarine&#x27;s logs, ending the disbelief the &quot;Soviet&quot; contact was actually a U.S. submarine.

==&quot;Caesar fleet&quot;==
Other ships are mentioned as having &quot;cameo&quot; appearances and the project apparently made use of other Navy survey and civilian cable ships on occasion. The core fleet appears to be those listed below.

Cable ships:
*
*
Other:
*
*

==Espionage==
In 1988, Stephen Joseph Ratkai, a Hungarian-Canadian recruited by Soviet Intelligence, was arrested, charged and convicted in St. John&#x27;s, Newfoundland for attempting to obtain information on the SOSUS site at Naval Station Argentia. John Anthony Walker, a US Navy Chief Warrant Officer and communications specialist, divulged SOSUS operational information to the Soviet Union during the Cold War which compromised its effectiveness.

==Post-Cold War==
By 1998 cable technology and shore processing allowed consolidation of shore stations to a few central processing facilities. Changes in Soviet operations, few hostile nuclear submarines at sea and the ending of the Cold War in the 1990s meant the need to maintain IUSS/SOSUS at full capability decreased. The focus of the US Navy also turned toward a new fixed system, the Fixed Distributed System, and systems deployable on a theater basis such as the Surveillance Towed Array Sensor System and Advanced Deployable System. Although officially declassified in 1991, by that time IUSS and SOSUS had long been an open secret.

===Civilian science applications===
Alternate or dual-use partnerships exist with a number of agencies and institutions. The Applied Physics Laboratory, University of Washington has used the system for Ocean Acoustic Tomography.

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Vents program at its Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory was granted access to the system at the Naval Ocean Processing Facility at Whidbey Island in October 1990 to combine raw analog data from specific hydrophones with NOAA systems for continuous monitoring of the northeast Pacific Ocean for low-level seismic activity and detection of volcanic activity along the northeast Pacific spreading centers.

Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution detected and tracked a lone whale with a unique call over a period of years in the Pacific.

Texas Applied Research Laboratories, and several other organizations have used the system for research.

==Associated systems==
===&quot;Colossus&quot;===
Jezebel research had developed an additional short range, high frequency, upward-looking system using active transducers for direct plotting of ships passing over the array. Colossus was intended to be installed in narrows and straits.

===&quot;Artemis&quot;===
&quot;Artemis&quot; was an experiment with a large active source. It was not a part of the SOSUS development. The system used very large towers and unwieldy components while SOSUS provided more than adequate warning and coverage and thus the system did not come into operation. The word &quot;Artemis&quot; had been used as a code word in the first days before &quot;Jezebel&quot;, &quot;Michael&quot; and &quot;Caesar&quot; as an unclassified name. &quot;Artemis&quot;, goddess of the hunt, stood for those cleared for Frederick V. Hunt and his idea of a passive system like SOSUS in his May 1950 report. That old application of &quot;Artemis&quot; caused some confusion.

== Footnotes ==
==See also==
* Communication with submarines
* Integrated Undersea Surveillance System insignia
* SOFAR channel
* Missile Impact Location System
* Project Artemis
* Gordon Eugene Martin, Navy physicist and executive officer of the prototype SOSUS station

==References==
==External links==
* Past IUSS Sites Index to individual pages with location details, photos and badges of the shore sites.
* CAESAR Fleet
* The Terminal Equipment Building of the Navy Sound Surveillance System (SOSUS) Photos and diagrams of NAVFAC Lewes, 21 quad cable cross section, LOFARGRAM photos
* History of IUSS: Timeline
* SOSUS/IUSS: Monitoring World&#x27;s Oceans
*&quot;SOSUS: The &#x27;Secret Weapon&#x27; of Undersea Surveillance&quot;, &quot;Undersea Warfare&quot;, Winter, 2005, Vol. 7, No. 2, article by Edward C. Whitman
* The Acoustic Monitoring Project
* A Letter from Joe Worzel to Lamont–Doherty Earth Observatory regarding the establishment of Palisades Geophysical Institute, its work, and support of the education and research community
* The SOund SUrveillance System, Federation of American Scientists, Intelligence Resource Program
* Navy article on Sosus
* Japanese LQO-3 SOSUS Arrays.
*
* 1953 &quot;Project Michael&quot; report: Transmission of 30 cps Sound in Deep Water</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1755312" start="0" end="25" title="SOSUS" label="Sound Surveillance System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755312" start="27" end="32" title="SOSUS" label="SOSUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q115372429" start="62" end="88" title="submarine detection system" label="submarine detection system"/>
<link wikidata="Q133220" start="98" end="111" title="passive sonar" label="passive sonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="129" end="147" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q796754" start="157" end="163" title="Soviet Navy" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755312" start="529" end="568" title="SOSUS" label="Integrated Undersea Surveillance System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755312" start="570" end="574" title="SOSUS" label="IUSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647039" start="644" end="682" title="Surveillance Towed Array Sensor System" label="Surveillance Towed Array Sensor System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412075" start="1177" end="1195" title="deep sound channel" label="deep sound channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q922019" start="1356" end="1399" title="GIUK gap" label="Greenland-Iceland-United Kingdom (GIUK) gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890818" start="1427" end="1442" title="United States Naval Facility, Barbados" label="NAVFAC Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q5782992" start="1544" end="1555" title="beamforming" label="beamforming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073579" start="1827" end="1848" title="anti-submarine warfare" label="antisubmarine warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="2036" end="2047" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="2051" end="2059" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141700" start="2127" end="2136" title="Eleuthera" label="Eleuthera"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="2144" end="2151" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2631" end="2651" title="Ramey Air Force Base#U.S. Naval Facility Ramey/Punta Borinquen" label="Naval Facility Ramey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2998" end="3013" title="Naval Air Station Keflavik#Naval Facility (NAVFAC) Keflavik" label="NAVFAC Keflavik"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="3806" end="3834" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="4090" end="4127" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412075" start="4392" end="4405" title="SOFAR channel" label="SOFAR channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q798062" start="4451" end="4461" title="hydrophone" label="hydrophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063818" start="4632" end="4656" title="Office of Naval Research" label="Office of Naval Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="4679" end="4719" title="American Telephone and Telegraph Company" label="American Telephone and Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="4741" end="4758" title="Bell Laboratories" label="Bell Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="4772" end="4788" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q96390993" start="4938" end="4973" title="Low Frequency Analyzer and Recorder (LOFAR)" label="Low Frequency Analyzer and Recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q283195" start="5337" end="5350" title="Robert A. Frosch" label="Robert Frosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699509" start="5354" end="5369" title="John C. Stennis" label="Senator Stennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="6497" end="6523" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404053" start="6587" end="6623" title="Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution" label="Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q604029" start="6628" end="6663" title="Scripps Institution of Oceanography" label="Scripps Institution of Oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7007" end="7046" title="Long Range Acoustic Propagation Program" label="Long Range Acoustic Propagation Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="7421" end="7453" title="Submarine communications cable" label="commercial communications cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="8732" end="8743" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498922" start="9088" end="9105" title="Frederick Vinton Hunt" label="Frederick V. Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451050" start="11023" end="11058" title="Sensitive Compartmented Information" label="Sensitive Compartmented Information"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11096" end="11102" title="Classified information#Secret" label="Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q937064" start="12216" end="12237" title="Strategic Air Command" label="Strategic Air Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499693" start="12358" end="12370" title="Yankee class" label="Yankee class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010549" start="13853" end="13868" title="Bureau of Ships" label="Bureau of Ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141700" start="14053" end="14062" title="Eleuthera" label="Eleuthera"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="14070" end="14077" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292425" start="14193" end="14215" title="Underwater acoustics" label="acoustics in the ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866653" start="14917" end="14936" title="USNS Neptune (ARC-2)" label="&amp;quot;Neptune&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682526" start="14941" end="14967" title="USNS Albert J. Myer" label="&amp;quot;Albert J. Myer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867079" start="15059" end="15077" title="USS Aeolus (ARC-3)" label="&amp;quot;Aeolus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875019" start="15082" end="15098" title="USS Thor" label="&amp;quot;Thor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q798062" start="15246" end="15256" title="hydrophone" label="hydrophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="15277" end="15294" title="Submarine communications cable" label="underwater cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290577" start="15367" end="15384" title="continental slope" label="continental slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q503269" start="15390" end="15398" title="seamount" label="seamount"/>
<link wikidata="Q273176" start="15442" end="15448" title="Normal (geometry)" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="15636" end="15640" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q96395099" start="17048" end="17080" title="Naval Facility Centerville Beach" label="Naval Facility Centerville Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q55624842" start="18435" end="18463" title="Naval Facility Cape Hatteras" label="Naval Facility Cape Hatteras"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458420" start="18669" end="18687" title="Fleet Sonar School" label="Fleet Sonar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473924" start="19075" end="19085" title="Grand Turk Island" label="Grand Turk"/>
<link wikidata="Q845540" start="19102" end="19114" title="San Salvador Island" label="San Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955346" start="19151" end="19173" title="Naval Facility Bermuda" label="Naval Facility Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010849" start="19175" end="19227" title="CFS Shelburne" label="Canadian Forces Station (CFS) Shelburne, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817022" start="19229" end="19238" title="Naval Facility Nantucket" label="Nantucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065437" start="19244" end="19252" title="Cape May" label="Cape May"/>
<link wikidata="Q55624842" start="19304" end="19332" title="Naval Facility Cape Hatteras" label="Naval Facility Cape Hatteras"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19337" end="19359" title="Antigua#U.S. government presence" label="Naval Facility Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q128362" start="19621" end="19639" title="San Nicolas Island" label="San Nicolas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q60767699" start="19707" end="19731" title="Naval Facility Point Sur" label="Naval Facility Point Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060091" start="19736" end="19753" title="Centerville Beach" label="Centerville Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475047" start="19772" end="19797" title="Pacific Beach, Washington" label="Pacific Beach, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q913266" start="19803" end="19812" title="Coos Bay, Oregon" label="Coos Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856573" start="20315" end="20345" title="Missile Impact Location System" label="Missile Impact Location System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017610" start="20849" end="20871" title="NS Argentia" label="Argentia, Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="20914" end="20924" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21148" end="21167" title="Naval Air Facility Adak#Naval Facility (NAVFAC) Adak" label="Naval Facility Adak"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="21175" end="21184" title="Aleutians" label="Aleutians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21243" end="21263" title="Fort Miles#Cold War" label="Naval Facility Lewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804483" start="21353" end="21384" title="Ash Wednesday Storm of 1962" label="&amp;quot;Ash Wednesday&amp;quot; Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q47545" start="21478" end="21491" title="Norwegian Sea" label="Norwegian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q170693" start="21542" end="21559" title="Keflavik, Iceland" label="Keflavik, Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47863" start="21725" end="21738" title="Midway Island" label="Midway Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="21743" end="21747" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485027" start="21777" end="21796" title="Ford Island, Hawaii" label="Ford Island, Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q778565" start="21802" end="21829" title="Treasure Island, California" label="Treasure Island, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146860" start="22220" end="22242" title="University of the Bahamas" label="Gerace Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015575" start="22251" end="22264" title="Barbers Point" label="Barbers Point"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22587" end="22615" title="RAF Brawdy#Naval Facility Brawdy" label="Naval Facility Brawdy, Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275201" start="22864" end="22894" title="RAF Brawdy" label="Royal Air Force Station Brawdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499258" start="22987" end="23012" title="Naval Research Laboratory" label="Naval Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337215" start="25274" end="25296" title="Little Creek, Virginia" label="Little Creek, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q917479" start="26264" end="26274" title="Small-waterplane-area twin hull" label="SWATH hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="26811" end="26830" title="Halifax Nova Scotia" label="Halifax Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27106" end="27139" title="RAF St Mawgan#Cold War" label="Joint Maritime Facility St Mawgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492612" start="28529" end="28568" title="Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command" label="Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29171" end="29196" title="Towed Array Sensor System" label="Towed Array Sensor System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647039" start="29212" end="29250" title="Surveillance Towed Array Sensor System" label="Surveillance Towed Array Sensor System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29931" end="29949" title="Dam Neck, Virginia" label="Dam Neck, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q683570" start="32158" end="32182" title="Ballistic missile submarine" label="nuclear attack submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="32199" end="32205" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068329" start="32346" end="32387" title="Golf-class submarine" label="Golf II-class ballistic missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="32425" end="32431" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q554869" start="33504" end="33512" title="sonobuoy" label="sonobuoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951" start="34854" end="34867" title="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky" label="Petropavlovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150451" start="35048" end="35094" title="Commander, Submarine Force, U.S. Pacific Fleet" label="Commander, Submarine Force, U.S. Pacific Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q23415263" start="35957" end="35978" title="Stephen Joseph Ratkai" label="Stephen Joseph Ratkai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623367" start="36014" end="36033" title="Soviet intelligence" label="Soviet Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082" start="36074" end="36103" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Newfoundland" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017610" start="36162" end="36184" title="Naval Station Argentia" label="Naval Station Argentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071545" start="36186" end="36205" title="John Anthony Walker" label="John Anthony Walker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36217" end="36238" title="Warrant officer (United States)#Navy" label="Chief Warrant Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="36621" end="36629" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477259" start="37017" end="37028" title="open secret" label="open secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="37184" end="37208" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076123" start="37233" end="37258" title="Ocean Acoustic Tomography" label="Ocean Acoustic Tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="37261" end="37308" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404053" start="37725" end="37761" title="Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution" label="Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248990" start="38273" end="38292" title="Project Artemis" label="&amp;quot;Artemis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379628" start="38978" end="39007" title="Communication with submarines" label="Communication with submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043008" start="39010" end="39058" title="Integrated Undersea Surveillance System insignia" label="Integrated Undersea Surveillance System insignia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412075" start="39061" end="39074" title="SOFAR channel" label="SOFAR channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856573" start="39077" end="39107" title="Missile Impact Location System" label="Missile Impact Location System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248990" start="39110" end="39125" title="Project Artemis" label="Project Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16090079" start="39128" end="39148" title="Gordon Eugene Martin" label="Gordon Eugene Martin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416804" wikidata="Q2861996" url="?curid=416804" title="Leckhampstead">
<text>Leckhampstead is the name of more than one place. It is an Anglo-Saxon name, meaning &#x27;homestead where leeks are grown&#x27;.

In the United Kingdom:

*Leckhampstead, Berkshire
*Leckhampstead, Buckinghamshire</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2014746" start="156" end="180" title="Leckhampstead, Berkshire" label="Leckhampstead, Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259455" start="182" end="212" title="Leckhampstead, Buckinghamshire" label="Leckhampstead, Buckinghamshire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416805" wikidata="Q613153" url="?curid=416805" title="Jazz at the Philharmonic">
<text>Jazz at the Philharmonic, or JATP (1944–1983), was the title of a series of jazz concerts, tours and recordings produced by Norman Granz.

Over the years, &quot;Jazz at the Philharmonic&quot; featured many of the era&#x27;s preeminent musicians, including Louie Bellson, Ray Brown, Benny Carter, Nat King Cole, Sonny Criss, Buddy DeFranco, Harry &quot;Sweets&quot; Edison, Roy Eldridge, Herb Ellis, Ella Fitzgerald, Stan Getz, Dizzy Gillespie, Lionel Hampton, Bill Harris, Coleman Hawkins, J. C. Heard, Billie Holiday, Helen Humes, the Modern Jazz Quartet, Illinois Jacquet, J. J. Johnson, Hank Jones, Jo Jones, Barney Kessel, Kenny Kersey, Gene Krupa, Lou Levy, Meade Lux Lewis, Shelly Manne, Fats Navarro, Charlie Parker, Oscar Peterson, Flip Phillips, Buddy Rich, Charlie Shavers, Willie Smith, Sonny Stitt, Slim Gaillard, Clark Terry, Tommy Turk, T-Bone Walker, Ben Webster, Lee Young, Lester Young, and Trummy Young.

== Concerts and tours ==

The very first concert was held on Sunday, July 2, 1944, at the Philharmonic Auditorium, Los Angeles, and featured Illinois Jacquet, Jack McVea, J. J. Johnson, Shorty Sherock, Nat King Cole, Les Paul, Johnny Miller, Meade Lux Lewis, Bumps Myers, Joe Sullivan, Buddy Rich, Randall Miller, Bud Hatch, Marie Bryant, Red Callender, Lee Young, and Carolyn Richards. Illinois Jacquet, Nat King Cole and Les Paul, in particular, created a sensation. The title of the concert had been shortened by the printer of the advertising supplements from &quot;A Jazz Concert at the Philharmonic Auditorium&quot; to &quot;Jazz at the Philharmonic&quot;. Norman Granz organized the concert with about $300 of borrowed money. Only one copy of the first concert program is known to exist.

Jazz tenor saxophonist Flip Phillips played at all the JATP concerts from 1946 to 1957.

Norman Granz recorded many JATP concerts, and sold or leased (from 1945 to 1947) the recordings to Asch/Disc/Stinson Records (record producer Moses Asch&#x27;s labels). Later, from 1948 to 1953, Granz leased the Jazz at the Philharmonic recordings to Mercury Records, and later issued/reissued them on Norgran (founded 1953), from 1953 on Clef (founded 1946), and from 1956 on Verve (founded 1956), which at the time, were his own labels.

In 1961, Granz sold Verve (which by then had absorbed the catalogues of his earlier labels, Clef Records and Norgran Records, as well as material previously licensed to Mercury Records) to MGM Records for $3.1 million.

In the 1970s, Granz kept the spirit of the JATP alive on his many jam session style records for his Pablo label (founded 1973), also used for previously unissued JATP concerts. In 1987, he sold Pablo to Fantasy Records.

The JATP concerts featured swing and bebop musicians. They were among the first high-profile performances to feature racially integrated bands, and Granz cancelled some bookings rather than have the musicians perform for segregated audiences.

===Tours===
JATP Tours - USA and Canada (1945–1957):

#1st National Tour: Late Fall/Winter of 1945–46. 
#2nd National Tour: Spring, 1946. 
#3rd National Tour: Fall, 1946. 
#4th National Tour: Spring, 1947. 
#5th National Tour: Fall, 1947. 
#6th National Tour: Spring, 1948. 
#7th National Tour: Fall, 1948. 
#8th National Tour: Spring, 1949. 
#9th National Tour: Fall, 1949. 
#10th National Tour: Fall, 1950. 
#11th National Tour: Fall, 1951. 
#12th National Tour: Fall, 1952. 
#13th National Tour (USA, Canada, Hawaii, Australia and Japan): Fall, 1953. 
#14th National Tour: Fall, 1954. 
#16th National Tour (Note: the 15th National Tour, in the fall of 1955, was renamed: 16th National Tour, just weeks before the start of the JATP Tour): Fall, 1955. 
#17th National Tour: Fall, 1956. 
#18th National Tour: Fall, 1957.

;JATP Tours - Europe (1952–1959):

*1st European Tour: Spring, 1952. 
*2nd European Tour (Only two concerts in the UK: London, March 8 at Gaumont State Kilburn): Spring, 1953. 
*3rd European Tour: Spring, 1954. 
*4th European Tour: Spring, 1955. 
*5th European Tour: Spring, 1956. 
*6th European Tour: Spring, 1957. 
*7th European Tour (1st UK Tour!): Spring, 1958. 
*8th European Tour: Spring, 1959.

After the JATP concerts in the fall of 1957, &quot;Jazz at the Philharmonic&quot; ceased touring the United States and Canada (with the exception of one final North American Tour in 1967), but continued intermittently mainly in Europe and Japan until 1983, with the last JATP concerts being performed in October, 1983, in Tokyo, Japan.

==Legacy==
Recordings held by Verve Records of the first five years (1944–1949) of JATP have been issued in a Deluxe 10-CD Box Set.

The Jazz at the Philharmonic recordings were selected by the Library of Congress as a 2010 addition to the National Recording Registry, which selects recordings annually that are &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot;.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q613153" start="0" end="24" title="Jazz at the Philharmonic" label="Jazz at the Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q613153" start="29" end="33" title="Jazz at the Philharmonic" label="JATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382555" start="124" end="136" title="Norman Granz" label="Norman Granz"/>
<link wikidata="Q252126" start="256" end="269" title="Louie Bellson" label="Louie Bellson"/>
<link wikidata="Q354542" start="271" end="280" title="Ray Brown (musician)" label="Ray Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q356715" start="282" end="294" title="Benny Carter" label="Benny Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q137042" start="296" end="309" title="Nat King Cole" label="Nat King Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q353828" start="311" end="322" title="Sonny Criss" label="Sonny Criss"/>
<link wikidata="Q493004" start="324" end="338" title="Buddy DeFranco" label="Buddy DeFranco"/>
<link wikidata="Q289821" start="340" end="371" title="Harry Edison" label="Harry &amp;quot;Sweets&amp;quot; Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q376146" start="373" end="385" title="Roy Eldridge" label="Roy Eldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q499662" start="387" end="397" title="Herb Ellis" label="Herb Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768" start="399" end="414" title="Ella Fitzgerald" label="Ella Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587" start="416" end="425" title="Stan Getz" label="Stan Getz"/>
<link wikidata="Q49575" start="427" end="442" title="Dizzy Gillespie" label="Dizzy Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q313525" start="444" end="458" title="Lionel Hampton" label="Lionel Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q368023" start="460" end="471" title="Bill Harris (trombonist)" label="Bill Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q217812" start="473" end="488" title="Coleman Hawkins" label="Coleman Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q725325" start="490" end="501" title="J. C. Heard" label="J. C. Heard"/>
<link wikidata="Q104358" start="503" end="517" title="Billie Holiday" label="Billie Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q129252" start="519" end="530" title="Helen Humes" label="Helen Humes"/>
<link wikidata="Q830379" start="536" end="555" title="Modern Jazz Quartet" label="Modern Jazz Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658835" start="557" end="573" title="Illinois Jacquet" label="Illinois Jacquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q504915" start="575" end="588" title="J. J. Johnson" label="J. J. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q447907" start="590" end="600" title="Hank Jones" label="Hank Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q125686" start="602" end="610" title="Jo Jones" label="Jo Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q498745" start="612" end="625" title="Barney Kessel" label="Barney Kessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738971" start="627" end="639" title="Ken Kersey" label="Kenny Kersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q319980" start="641" end="651" title="Gene Krupa" label="Gene Krupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871302" start="653" end="661" title="Lou Levy (pianist)" label="Lou Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399605" start="663" end="678" title="Meade Lux Lewis" label="Meade Lux Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q246618" start="680" end="692" title="Shelly Manne" label="Shelly Manne"/>
<link wikidata="Q711198" start="694" end="706" title="Fats Navarro" label="Fats Navarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q103767" start="708" end="722" title="Charlie Parker" label="Charlie Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q105349" start="724" end="738" title="Oscar Peterson" label="Oscar Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q485264" start="740" end="753" title="Flip Phillips" label="Flip Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q318339" start="755" end="765" title="Buddy Rich" label="Buddy Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067003" start="767" end="782" title="Charlie Shavers" label="Charlie Shavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270714" start="784" end="796" title="Willie Smith (alto saxophonist)" label="Willie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q502311" start="798" end="809" title="Sonny Stitt" label="Sonny Stitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q628353" start="811" end="824" title="Slim Gaillard" label="Slim Gaillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q432924" start="826" end="837" title="Clark Terry" label="Clark Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819955" start="839" end="849" title="Tommy Turk" label="Tommy Turk"/>
<link wikidata="Q358538" start="851" end="864" title="T-Bone Walker" label="T-Bone Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q438460" start="866" end="877" title="Ben Webster" label="Ben Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q381716" start="879" end="888" title="Lee Young" label="Lee Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q110714" start="890" end="902" title="Lester Young" label="Lester Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375025" start="908" end="920" title="Trummy Young" label="Trummy Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q15223406" start="1013" end="1036" title="Philharmonic Auditorium" label="Philharmonic Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1038" end="1049" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658835" start="1064" end="1080" title="Illinois Jacquet" label="Illinois Jacquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q955738" start="1082" end="1092" title="Jack McVea" label="Jack McVea"/>
<link wikidata="Q504915" start="1094" end="1107" title="J. J. Johnson" label="J. J. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280050" start="1109" end="1123" title="Shorty Sherock" label="Shorty Sherock"/>
<link wikidata="Q137042" start="1125" end="1138" title="Nat King Cole" label="Nat King Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q262399" start="1140" end="1148" title="Les Paul" label="Les Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399605" start="1165" end="1180" title="Meade Lux Lewis" label="Meade Lux Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18616917" start="1182" end="1193" title="Bumps Myers" label="Bumps Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691615" start="1195" end="1207" title="Joe Sullivan" label="Joe Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q318339" start="1209" end="1219" title="Buddy Rich" label="Buddy Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q612365" start="1221" end="1235" title="Randall Miller" label="Randall Miller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1237" end="1246" title="Bud Hatch" label="Bud Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897271" start="1248" end="1260" title="Marie Bryant" label="Marie Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369875" start="1262" end="1275" title="Red Callender" label="Red Callender"/>
<link wikidata="Q381716" start="1277" end="1286" title="Lee Young" label="Lee Young"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1292" end="1308" title="Carolyn Richards" label="Carolyn Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q485264" start="1742" end="1755" title="Flip Phillips" label="Flip Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949140" start="1950" end="1960" title="Moses Asch" label="Moses Asch"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="2059" end="2074" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099663" start="2147" end="2151" title="Clef Records" label="Clef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124849" start="2185" end="2190" title="Verve Records" label="Verve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881437" start="2437" end="2448" title="MGM Records" label="MGM Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809823" start="2568" end="2579" title="Pablo Records" label="Pablo label"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308364" start="2671" end="2686" title="Fantasy Records" label="Fantasy Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q203775" start="2716" end="2721" title="Swing music" label="swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q105513" start="2726" end="2731" title="bebop" label="bebop"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="4688" end="4707" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="4734" end="4761" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416808" wikidata="Q315366" url="?curid=416808" title="James Dwight Dana">
<text>James Dwight Dana (February 12, 1813 – April 14, 1895) was an American geologist, mineralogist, volcanologist, and zoologist. He made pioneering studies of mountain-building, volcanic activity, and the origin and structure of continents and oceans around the world.

His zoological author abbreviation is Dana.

==Early life and career==
Dana was born February 12, 1813, in Utica, New York. His father was merchant James Dana (1780–1860) and his mother was Harriet Dwight (1792–1870). Through his mother he was related to the Dwight New England family of missionaries and educators including uncle Harrison Gray Otis Dwight and first cousin Henry Otis Dwight.
He showed an early interest in science, which had been fostered by Fay Edgerton, a teacher in the Utica high school, and in 1830 he entered Yale College in order to study under Benjamin Silliman the elder.

Graduating in 1833, for the next two years he was teacher of mathematics to midshipmen in the Navy, and sailed to the Mediterranean while engaged in his duties. In 1836 and 1837 he was assistant to Professor Silliman in the chemical laboratory at Yale, and then, for four years, acted as mineralogist and geologist of the United States Exploring Expedition, commanded by Captain Charles Wilkes, in the Pacific Ocean. His labors in preparing the reports of his explorations occupied parts of thirteen years after his return to America in 1842. His notebooks from the four years of travel contained fifty sketches, maps, and diagrams, including views of both Mount Shasta and Castle Crags. Dana&#x27;s sketch of Mount Shasta was engraved in 1849 for publication in the &quot;American Journal of Science and Arts&quot; (which Silliman had founded in 1818), along with a lengthy article based on Dana&#x27;s 1841 geological notes. In the article he described in scientific terms the rocks, minerals, and geology of the Shasta region. As far as is known, his sketch of Mount Shasta became the second view of the mountain ever published.

In 1844 he again became a resident of New Haven, and married Professor Silliman&#x27;s daughter, Henrietta Frances Silliman. In 1850, he was appointed as Silliman&#x27;s successor, as Silliman Professor of Natural History and Geology in Yale College, a position which he held until 1892. In 1846 he became joint editor, and during the later years of his life was chief editor, of the &quot;American Journal of Science and Arts&quot;, to which he was a constant contributor, principally of articles on geology and mineralogy.

The 1849 publication of his geology of Mount Shasta was undoubtedly a response to the California gold rush publicity. Dana was the pre-eminent U.S. geologist of his time, and he also was one of the few trained observers anywhere who had first-hand knowledge of the northern California terrain. He had previously written that there was a likelihood that gold was to be found all along the route between the Umpqua River in Oregon and the Sacramento Valley. He was probably deluged with inquiries about the Shasta region, and was forced to publish in more detail some advice to the would-be gold miners.

He was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society in 1854.

Dana was responsible for developing much of the early knowledge on Hawaiian volcanism. In 1880 and 1881 he led the first geological study of the volcanics of Hawaii island. Dana theorized that the volcanic chain consisted of two volcanic strands, dubbed the &quot;Loa&quot; and &quot;Kea&quot; trends. The Kea trend included Kīlauea, Mauna Kea, Kohala, Haleakala, and West Maui. The Loa trend includes Kamaʻehuakanaloa (formerly Lōihi), Mauna Loa, Hualālai, Kahoolawe, Lānai, and West Molokai.

Following another expedition by fellow geologist C. E. Dutton in 1884, Dana returned to the island once again and in 1890 he published a manuscript on the island that was the most detailed of its day, and would be the definitive source upon the island&#x27;s volcanics for decades.

Dana was a beloved teacher of geology. According to Oliver C. Farrington, &quot;To SIT at the feet of Professor Dana and drink from the overflowing fountains of his knowledge, was a privilege which once enjoyed could never be forgotten&quot;. Some examples of his teaching style were given by Oliver C. Farrington

Dana died on April 14, 1895.

==Family==

Dana was married to Henrietta Silliman in 1844.

Their son, Edward Salisbury Dana (1849–1935), was also a distinguished mineralogist.

==Publications==

Dana&#x27;s best known books were his 
* &quot;System of Mineralogy&quot; (1837) 
* &quot;Manual of Mineralogy&quot; (1848), and his &quot;Manual of Geology&quot; (1863). A bibliographical list of his writings shows 214 titles of books and papers, beginning in 1835 with a paper on the conditions of Vesuvius in 1834. His reports on Zoophytes, on the Geology of the Pacific Area, and on Crustacea, summarizing his work on the Wilkes Expedition, appeared from 1846 onwards. Other works included &quot;Manual of Mineralogy&quot; (1848), afterwards entitled &quot;Manual of Mineralogy and Lithology&quot; (ed. 4, 1887); and &quot;Corals and Coral Islands&quot; (1872; revised ed. 1890). In 1887, Dana revisited the Hawaiian Islands, and the results of his further investigations were published in a quarto volume entitled &quot;Characteristics of Volcanoes&quot; (1890).

The &quot;Manual of Mineralogy&quot; by J. D. Dana became a standard college text, and has been continuously revised and updated by a succession of editors including W. E. Ford (13th-14th eds., 1912–1929), Cornelius S. Hurlbut (15th-21st eds., 1941–1999), and beginning with the 22nd by Cornelis Klein. The 23rd edition is now in print under the title &quot;Manual of Mineral Science (Manual of Mineralogy)&quot; (2007), revised by Cornelis Klein and Barbara Dutrow.

Dana&#x27;s &quot;System of Mineralogy&quot; has also been revised, the 6th edition (1892) being edited by his son Edward Salisbury Dana. A 7th edition was published in 1944, and the 8th edition was published in 1997 under the title &quot;Dana&#x27;s New Mineralogy&quot;, edited by R. V. Gaines et al.

Between 1856 and 1857, Dana published a number of manuscripts in an effort to reconcile scientific findings with the Bible. Among these, he wrote &quot;Science and the Bible: A Review of &quot;The Six Days of Creation&quot; of Prof. Tayler Lewis&quot; (1856), and &quot;Creation, Or, The Biblical Cosmogony in the Light of Modern Science&quot; (1885).

==Awards and recognition==
Dana was awarded the Copley Medal by the Royal Society in 1877, the Wollaston Medal by the Geological Society of London in 1874 and the Clarke Medal by the Royal Society of New South Wales in 1882. Dana was president of the Geological Society of America in 1890.

==Named in honor of Dana==
*Dana Park in Albany, New York, with a fountain/monument in his honor
*Mount Dana (and the nearby Dana Meadows) in the Sierra Nevada, California, US
*Dorsa Dana (a wrinkle-ridge system) on the Moon
*Danalite, a mineral.
*Dana Passage in Puget Sound, US
*Dana, a crater on Mars
* The Dana Medal of the Mineralogical Society of America was named for Dana and his son Edward Salisbury Dana. It recognizes outstanding scientific contributions through research in the mineralogical sciences by an individual in the midst of their career.
*The James Dwight Dana House in New Haven, Connecticut was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1965.
* The fossil horseshoe crab &quot;Euproops danae&quot;
* Dana Peak in Alaska.

==See also==
* Howlite
* European and American voyages of scientific exploration
* Dana&#x27;s System of Mineralogy
* :Category:Taxa named by James Dwight Dana
* Dana Classification System

== References ==
== Additional sources ==
* &quot;American Mineralogist&quot;, Vol. 21 (1936), 173–177.
* *The Life of James Dwight Dana: Scientific Explorer, Mineralogist, Geologist, Zoologist, Professor in Yale University, Daniel Coit Gilman, Harper &amp; Brothers Publishers, New York, 1899
* Artikel &quot;James Dwight Dana&quot; in der &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; von 1911. Gemeinfrei.
* David R. Oldroyd (1996): Thinking about the Earth, Harvard Press, ; dt.: Die Biographie der Erde. Zur Wissenschaftsgeschichte der Geologie, Frankfurt a.M., 1998.
* Johannes Uray, Chemische Theorie und mineralogische Klassifikationssysteme von der chemischen Revolution bis zur Mitte des 19. Jahrhunderts. In: Berhard Hubmann, Elmar Schübl, Johannes Seidl (eds.), &quot;Die Anfänge geologischer Forschung in Österreich&quot;. Beiträge zur Tagung „10 Jahre Arbeitsgruppe Geschichte der Erdwissenschaften Österreichs“ von 24. bis 26. April 2009 in Graz. Graz 2010, S 107–125.

==External links==

* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q315366" start="0" end="17" title="James Dwight Dana" label="James Dwight Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="71" end="80" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="82" end="94" title="mineralogist" label="mineralogist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940086" start="96" end="109" title="volcanologist" label="volcanologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="115" end="124" title="zoologist" label="zoologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="175" end="183" title="volcano" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q315366" start="305" end="309" title="James Dwight Dana" label="Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495519" start="374" end="389" title="Utica, New York" label="Utica, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="533" end="544" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5665631" start="598" end="623" title="Harrison Gray Otis Dwight" label="Harrison Gray Otis Dwight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726555" start="641" end="658" title="Henry Otis Dwight" label="Henry Otis Dwight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599077" start="800" end="812" title="Yale College" label="Yale College"/>
<link wikidata="Q817692" start="837" end="854" title="Benjamin Silliman" label="Benjamin Silliman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="943" end="953" title="midshipman" label="midshipmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="961" end="965" title="United States Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="985" end="998" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q119129" start="1189" end="1223" title="United States Exploring Expedition, 1838-1842" label="United States Exploring Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q119329" start="1246" end="1260" title="Charles Wilkes" label="Charles Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q748355" start="1524" end="1536" title="Mount Shasta" label="Mount Shasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941457" start="1541" end="1553" title="Castle Crags" label="Castle Crags"/>
<link wikidata="Q748355" start="1577" end="1589" title="Mount Shasta" label="Mount Shasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q465355" start="1640" end="1676" title="American Journal of Science and Arts" label="American Journal of Science and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q748355" start="1931" end="1943" title="Mount Shasta" label="Mount Shasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="2038" end="2047" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q748355" start="2565" end="2577" title="Mount Shasta" label="Mount Shasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="2612" end="2632" title="California gold rush" label="California gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="2674" end="2683" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326803" start="2932" end="2944" title="Umpqua River" label="Umpqua River"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="2948" end="2954" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686914" start="2963" end="2980" title="Sacramento Valley" label="Sacramento Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q820037" start="3120" end="3126" title="miners" label="miners"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="3163" end="3193" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3271" end="3289" title="Hawaii hotspot#History of study" label="Hawaiian volcanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="3362" end="3375" title="Hawaii (island)" label="Hawaii island"/>
<link wikidata="Q188698" start="3529" end="3536" title="Kīlauea" label="Kīlauea"/>
<link wikidata="Q131230" start="3538" end="3547" title="Mauna Kea" label="Mauna Kea"/>
<link wikidata="Q516606" start="3549" end="3555" title="Kohala (mountain)" label="Kohala"/>
<link wikidata="Q515719" start="3557" end="3566" title="Haleakala" label="Haleakala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225973" start="3572" end="3581" title="West Maui" label="West Maui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133111" start="3606" end="3622" title="Kamaʻehuakanaloa Seamount" label="Kamaʻehuakanaloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q159762" start="3641" end="3650" title="Mauna Loa" label="Mauna Loa"/>
<link wikidata="Q176762" start="3652" end="3660" title="Hualālai" label="Hualālai"/>
<link wikidata="Q224086" start="3662" end="3671" title="Kahoolawe" label="Kahoolawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q187063" start="3673" end="3678" title="Lanai" label="Lānai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792514" start="3684" end="3696" title="West Molokai" label="West Molokai"/>
<link wikidata="Q595919" start="3748" end="3760" title="C. E. Dutton" label="C. E. Dutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087441" start="4034" end="4054" title="Oliver C. Farrington" label="Oliver C. Farrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087441" start="4275" end="4295" title="Oliver C. Farrington" label="Oliver C. Farrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q446620" start="4399" end="4420" title="Edward Salisbury Dana" label="Edward Salisbury Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q524" start="4792" end="4800" title="Vesuvius" label="Vesuvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q220324" start="4825" end="4834" title="Zoophytes" label="Zoophytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="4879" end="4888" title="Crustacea" label="Crustacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q119129" start="4918" end="4935" title="United States Exploring Expedition, 1838-1842" label="Wilkes Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="5204" end="5220" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5527" end="5537" title="William Ebenezer Ford" label="W. E. Ford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5567" end="5587" title="Cornelius S. Hurlbut" label="Cornelius S. Hurlbut"/>
<link wikidata="Q107413671" start="5812" end="5826" title="Barbara Dutrow" label="Barbara Dutrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q446620" start="5944" end="5965" title="Edward Salisbury Dana" label="Edward Salisbury Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28003" start="6534" end="6546" title="Copley Medal" label="Copley Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="6554" end="6567" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q832424" start="6581" end="6596" title="Wollaston Medal" label="Wollaston Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230936" start="6604" end="6632" title="Geological Society of London" label="Geological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q267842" start="6649" end="6661" title="Clarke Medal" label="Clarke Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q268363" start="6669" end="6701" title="Royal Society of New South Wales" label="Royal Society of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503216" start="6737" end="6766" title="Geological Society of America" label="Geological Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214805" start="6805" end="6814" title="Dana Park" label="Dana Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="6818" end="6834" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862168" start="6875" end="6885" title="Mount Dana" label="Mount Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4248065" start="6902" end="6914" title="Dana Meadows (California)" label="Dana Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="6923" end="6936" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250427" start="6954" end="6964" title="Dorsa Dana" label="Dorsa Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="6997" end="7001" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573999" start="7003" end="7011" title="Danalite" label="Danalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111066" start="7025" end="7037" title="Dana Passage" label="Dana Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q604141" start="7041" end="7052" title="Puget Sound" label="Puget Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423517" start="7058" end="7062" title="Dana (crater)" label="Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="7066" end="7072" title="Impact crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="7076" end="7080" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q29418214" start="7087" end="7097" title="Dana Medal" label="Dana Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936599" start="7105" end="7137" title="Mineralogical Society of America" label="Mineralogical Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q446620" start="7169" end="7190" title="Edward Salisbury Dana" label="Edward Salisbury Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132991" start="7342" end="7365" title="James Dwight Dana House" label="James Dwight Dana House"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="7369" end="7391" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="7407" end="7433" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329239" start="7456" end="7470" title="horseshoe crab" label="horseshoe crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q421527" start="7537" end="7544" title="Howlite" label="Howlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563335" start="7547" end="7602" title="European and American voyages of scientific exploration" label="European and American voyages of scientific exploration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7605" end="7637" title="Timeline of the discovery and classification of minerals#The System of Mineralogy of James D. Dana" label="Dana&amp;#x27;s System of Mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7640" end="7681" title=":Category:Taxa named by James Dwight Dana" label=":Category:Taxa named by James Dwight Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q934210" start="7684" end="7710" title="Dana Classification System" label="Dana Classification System"/>
<link wikidata="Q129598" start="7937" end="7955" title="Daniel Coit Gilman" label="Daniel Coit Gilman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416809" wikidata="Q414247" url="?curid=416809" title="George Howard">
<text>George Howard may refer to:

== Music ==

* George Howard (jazz) (1956–1998), American smooth jazz saxophonist
* George S. Howard (1902–1995), American colonel and conductor of United States Air Force Band

== Politics ==

* George Howard (Governor of Maryland) (1789–1846), governor of Maryland, 1831–1833
* Sir George Howard (courtier) (c.1525–1580), MP for Devizes, Rochester, Winchelsea, Newton and Reigate
* George Howard (died 1671) (1622–1671), English politician who sat in the House of Commons between 1660 and 1671
* George Howard, 4th Earl of Suffolk (1624–1691)
* George Howard, 6th Earl of Carlisle (1773–1848), English statesman
* George R. Howard (died 1884), American politician
* George Howard, 7th Earl of Carlisle (1802–1864), British politician and statesman
* George Howard, 9th Earl of Carlisle (1843–1911), English aristocrat, politician and painter
* George Howard, 11th Earl of Carlisle (1895–1963), British peer
* George Howard, 13th Earl of Carlisle (born 1949), English hereditary peer
* George Howard, Baron Howard of Henderskelfe (1920–1984), British life peer

== Religion ==

* George Howard (Hebraist), American professor of Jewish Studies

== Sports ==

* George Howard (rugby league), rugby league footballer of the 1940s and 1950s
* George Howard (footballer) (born 1996), association footballer for Melbourne Victory

== Other ==

* George Howard (British Army officer) (1718–1796), British military officer and field marshal
* George C. Howard (1818–1887), Nova Scotian-born American actor and showman
* George W. Howard (1848–?), American railway worker and union leader
* George Elliott Howard (1849–1928), American professor of history

* George Bronson Howard (1884–1922), American reporter and fiction writer
* George Wren Howard (1893–1968), British publisher
* George Howard Jr. (1924–2007), American federal judge</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q414247" start="0" end="13" title="George Howard" label="George Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101666" start="44" end="64" title="George Howard (jazz)" label="George Howard (jazz)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544163" start="113" end="129" title="George S. Howard" label="George S. Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q382854" start="225" end="261" title="George Howard (Governor of Maryland)" label="George Howard (Governor of Maryland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260718" start="309" end="337" title="Sir George Howard (courtier)" label="Sir George Howard (courtier)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540778" start="413" end="438" title="George Howard (died 1671)" label="George Howard (died 1671)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540774" start="527" end="561" title="George Howard, 4th Earl of Suffolk" label="George Howard, 4th Earl of Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q335600" start="576" end="611" title="George Howard, 6th Earl of Carlisle" label="George Howard, 6th Earl of Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q119357151" start="645" end="661" title="George R. Howard" label="George R. Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079517" start="697" end="732" title="George Howard, 7th Earl of Carlisle" label="George Howard, 7th Earl of Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q337630" start="781" end="816" title="George Howard, 9th Earl of Carlisle" label="George Howard, 9th Earl of Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760533" start="875" end="911" title="George Howard, 11th Earl of Carlisle" label="George Howard, 11th Earl of Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760534" start="940" end="976" title="George Howard, 13th Earl of Carlisle" label="George Howard, 13th Earl of Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540777" start="1016" end="1059" title="George Howard, Baron Howard of Henderskelfe" label="George Howard, Baron Howard of Henderskelfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540776" start="1110" end="1134" title="George Howard (Hebraist)" label="George Howard (Hebraist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16226262" start="1190" end="1218" title="George Howard (rugby league)" label="George Howard (rugby league)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874440" start="1269" end="1295" title="George Howard (footballer)" label="George Howard (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4140861" start="1370" end="1406" title="George Howard (British Army officer)" label="George Howard (British Army officer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537551" start="1465" end="1481" title="George C. Howard" label="George C. Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407772" start="1542" end="1558" title="George W. Howard" label="George W. Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316427" start="1612" end="1633" title="George Elliott Howard" label="George Elliott Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17453082" start="1680" end="1701" title="George Bronson Howard" label="George Bronson Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16006402" start="1754" end="1772" title="George Wren Howard" label="George Wren Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540775" start="1806" end="1823" title="George Howard Jr." label="George Howard Jr."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416810" wikidata="Q15054193" url="?curid=416810" title="Ledburn">
<text>Ledburn is a hamlet in the parish of Mentmore, in Buckinghamshire, England.

==History==
The name Ledburn is Anglo Saxon in origin, and means &quot;stream with a conduit&quot;. In manorial records of 1212 it was recorded as &quot;Leteburn&quot;.

The hamlet consists of two roads with a mixture of Victorian cottages and modern houses, a public house (The Hare) which was converted to private dwellings in 2016, two 16th century farm houses and a manor house. Ledburn Manor was built in the 16th century, and in the early 18th century it was given a new front facade in the classical style.

During the 19th and 20th century, the hamlet was owned by Baron Mayer de Rothschild and, by inheritance, became part of the Earl of Rosebery&#x27;s Mentmore estate. The manor house at that time served as the estate office and home of the resident Land Agent. A tiny Methodist chapel in the hamlet has recently been converted to a private house.

The agricultural land in the village, having passed out of the Rothschild&#x27;s ownership in the 20th century, is now back in the family&#x27;s ownership, and is part of Sir Evelyn de Rothschild&#x27;s Ascott Estate.

Ledburn was the scene of the so-called Great Train Robbery, in which a £2.6 million train robbery was committed at Bridego Railway Bridge (Bridge Number 127) on 8 August 1963.

==References==
==External links==
*BBC News On This Day archive: The Great Train Robbery of 1963</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15054193" start="0" end="7" title="Ledburn" label="Ledburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="13" end="19" title="hamlet (place)" label="hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="27" end="33" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077567" start="37" end="45" title="Mentmore" label="Mentmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="50" end="65" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="109" end="120" title="Old English language" label="Anglo Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="180" end="188" title="Manorialism" label="manorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="298" end="307" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="338" end="350" title="public house" label="public house"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="447" end="458" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198718" start="574" end="589" title="classical style" label="classical style"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853190" start="650" end="675" title="Mayer Amschel de Rothschild" label="Baron Mayer de Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277407" start="716" end="732" title="Earl of Rosebery" label="Earl of Rosebery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077567" start="740" end="748" title="Mentmore" label="Mentmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484023" start="839" end="849" title="Land Agent" label="Land Agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="858" end="867" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804054" start="1141" end="1147" title="Ascott, Buckinghamshire" label="Ascott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140155" start="1196" end="1215" title="Great Train Robbery (1963)" label="Great Train Robbery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416811" wikidata="Q4140861" url="?curid=416811" title="George Howard (British Army officer)">
<text>Field Marshal Sir George Howard KB, PC (17 June 1718 – 16 July 1796) was a British military officer and politician. After commanding the 3rd Regiment of Foot at the Battle of Fontenoy in May 1745 during the War of the Austrian Succession and after commanding that regiment again at the Battle of Falkirk Muir and the Battle of Culloden during the Jacobite Rebellion, he returned to the continent and fought at the Battle of Lauffeld. He went on to command a brigade at the Battle of Warburg during the Seven Years&#x27; War. He subsequently became the Governor of Minorca.

==Military career==
Born the son of Lieutenant General Thomas Howard and his wife Mary Howard (née Moreton, daughter of William Moreton, Bishop of Meath), Howard was educated at Westminster School and Christ Church, Oxford and was commissioned as a lieutenant in his father&#x27;s regiment (later the 24th Regiment of Foot) in 1736. He was promoted to captain in 1737 and transferred to the 3rd Regiment of Foot in 1739. Promoted to lieutenant colonel on 2 April 1744, he commanded the 3rd Regiment of Foot at the Battle of Fontenoy in May 1745 during the War of the Austrian Succession.

Howard commanded the 3rd Regiment of Foot again, under the Duke of Cumberland, at the Battle of Falkirk Muir in January 1746 and the Battle of Culloden in April 1746 during the Jacobite Rebellion and was accused of treating the defeated highlanders unduly harshly. He then returned to the continent and fought at the Battle of Lauffeld in July 1747. He succeeded his father as colonel of the 3rd Regiment of Foot in August 1749. He went on to take part in the Raid on Rochefort in September 1757 and, having been promoted to major-general on 24 January 1758, he commanded a brigade, under the Marquess of Granby, at the Battle of Warburg in July 1760 during the Seven Years&#x27; War. He was promoted to lieutenant-general on 14 March 1761.

Howard became Member of Parliament (MP) for Lostwithiel in 1761 and, having been appointed a Knight Companion of the Bath in early 1763, he became colonel of the 7th (The Queen&#x27;s Own) Regiment of Dragoons in August 1763. He acquired Stoke Place in Buckinghamshire for use as a country home in 1764.

Howard stood down from Parliament and became Governor of Minorca in 1766. After retiring as Governor of Minorca, he became governor of the Royal Hospital Chelsea in February 1768 and was elected as Member of Parliament for Stamford that same year.

Promoted to full general on 6 September 1777, Howard became colonel of the 1st (The King&#x27;s) Dragoon Guards in April 1779. He was promoted to field marshal on 18 October 1793 and appointed to the honorary post of Governor of Jersey in July 1795. He died at his London home in Grosvenor Square on 16 July 1796 and was buried at Great Bookham in Surrey.

==Family==
On 16 February 1747–8, Howard married Lady Lucy Wentworth (sister of William Wentworth, Earl of Strafford), under licence from the Bishop of London, at the King Street Chapel in St James&#x27;s, Westminster: they had one daughter Anne. After the death of his first wife, Howard married Elizabeth Beckford, the widow of Thomas Howard, 2nd Earl of Effingham; there were no children by the second marriage.
==References==
==Sources==
* 




|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="0" end="13" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4140861" start="14" end="31" title="George Howard (British Army officer)" label="Sir George Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="32" end="34" title="Order of the Bath" label="KB"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="36" end="38" title="Privy Council of Great Britain" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899477" start="137" end="157" title="Buffs (Royal East Kent Regiment)" label="3rd Regiment of Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q569953" start="165" end="183" title="Battle of Fontenoy" label="Battle of Fontenoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="207" end="237" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417580" start="286" end="308" title="Battle of Falkirk Muir" label="Battle of Falkirk Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q651919" start="317" end="335" title="Battle of Culloden" label="Battle of Culloden"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="347" end="365" title="Jacobite risings" label="Jacobite Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q696699" start="414" end="432" title="Battle of Lauffeld" label="Battle of Lauffeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q506909" start="473" end="490" title="Battle of Warburg" label="Battle of Warburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="502" end="523" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572158" start="552" end="571" title="Governor of Minorca" label="Governor of Minorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845227" start="610" end="642" title="Thomas Howard (British Army officer, born 1684)" label="Lieutenant General Thomas Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943307" start="694" end="709" title="William Moreton" label="William Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917919" start="711" end="726" title="Bishop of Meath" label="Bishop of Meath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341516" start="752" end="770" title="Westminster School" label="Westminster School"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="775" end="796" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="805" end="817" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="823" end="833" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492283" start="875" end="896" title="South Wales Borderers" label="24th Regiment of Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="926" end="933" title="Captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899477" start="965" end="985" title="Buffs (Royal East Kent Regiment)" label="3rd Regiment of Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="1007" end="1025" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q569953" start="1088" end="1106" title="Battle of Fontenoy" label="Battle of Fontenoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="1130" end="1160" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q378088" start="1222" end="1240" title="Prince William, Duke of Cumberland" label="Duke of Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417580" start="1249" end="1271" title="Battle of Falkirk Muir" label="Battle of Falkirk Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q651919" start="1296" end="1314" title="Battle of Culloden" label="Battle of Culloden"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="1340" end="1358" title="Jacobite risings" label="Jacobite Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q696699" start="1480" end="1498" title="Battle of Lauffeld" label="Battle of Lauffeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417631" start="1623" end="1640" title="Raid on Rochefort" label="Raid on Rochefort"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="1688" end="1701" title="major-general" label="major-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q333565" start="1756" end="1774" title="John Manners, Marquess of Granby" label="Marquess of Granby"/>
<link wikidata="Q506909" start="1783" end="1800" title="Battle of Warburg" label="Battle of Warburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="1825" end="1846" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="1867" end="1885" title="lieutenant-general" label="lieutenant-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="1919" end="1939" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797267" start="1949" end="1960" title="Lostwithiel (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Lostwithiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="1998" end="2026" title="Order of the Bath" label="Knight Companion of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644158" start="2067" end="2114" title="7th Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Hussars" label="7th (The Queen&amp;#x27;s Own) Regiment of Dragoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162569" start="2143" end="2154" title="Stoke Place" label="Stoke Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="2158" end="2173" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572158" start="2255" end="2274" title="List of Governors of Minorca" label="Governor of Minorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="2333" end="2341" title="governor" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628509" start="2349" end="2371" title="Royal Hospital Chelsea" label="Royal Hospital Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597374" start="2433" end="2441" title="Stamford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Stamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="2476" end="2483" title="general" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q3597958" start="2534" end="2570" title="1st King&amp;#x27;s Dragoon Guards" label="1st (The King&amp;#x27;s) Dragoon Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="2605" end="2618" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281611" start="2676" end="2694" title="Lieutenant Governor of Jersey" label="Governor of Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q932992" start="2739" end="2755" title="Grosvenor Square" label="Grosvenor Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q948813" start="2790" end="2803" title="Great Bookham" label="Great Bookham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="2807" end="2813" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020192" start="2896" end="2932" title="William Wentworth, 2nd Earl of Strafford (1722–1791)" label="William Wentworth, Earl of Strafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q50804871" start="3113" end="3131" title="Elizabeth Howard, Countess of Effingham" label="Elizabeth Beckford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619942" start="3146" end="3182" title="Thomas Howard, 2nd Earl of Effingham" label="Thomas Howard, 2nd Earl of Effingham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416813" wikidata="Q238101" url="?curid=416813" title="University of Minnesota">
<text>The University of Minnesota Twin Cities (historically known as University of Minnesota) is a public land-grant research university in the Twin Cities of Minneapolis and Saint Paul, Minnesota, United States. It is the flagship institution of the University of Minnesota System and is organized into 19 colleges, schools, and other major academic units.

The Twin Cities campus is the oldest and largest in the University of Minnesota system and has the ninth-largest (as of the 2022–2023 academic year) main campus student body in the United States, with 54,890 students at the start of the 2023–24 academic year. 
The campus comprises locations in Minneapolis and Falcon Heights, a suburb of St. Paul, approximately apart.

The Minnesota Territorial Legislature drafted a charter for the University of Minnesota as a territorial university in 1851, seven years before Minnesota became a state. The university is currently classified among &quot;R1: Doctoral Universities – Very high research activity&quot;. It is a member of the Association of American Universities. The National Science Foundation ranked the University of Minnesota 22nd among American universities for research and development expenditures in 2022 with $1.202 billion. The University of Minnesota is considered a Public Ivy university.

The Minnesota Golden Gophers compete in 21 intercollegiate sports in the NCAA Division I Big Ten Conference and have won 29 national championships. As of March 2024, Minnesota&#x27;s current and former students have won a total of 90 Olympic medals. There are 25 Nobel laureates associated with the university. 

==History==

The University of Minnesota was founded in Minneapolis in 1851 as a college preparatory school, seven years prior to Minnesota&#x27;s statehood. It struggled in its early years and relied on donations to stay open from donors, including South Carolina Governor William Aiken Jr.

In 1867, the university received land grant status through the Morrill Act of 1862. With lands taken from Dakota people, the university was able to revive itself after closing in 1858. The Dakota people have not been credited for the expropriation of their lands.

An 1876 donation from flour miller John S. Pillsbury is generally credited with saving the school. Since then, Pillsbury has become known as &quot;The Father of the University.&quot; Pillsbury Hall is named in his honor.

Academic milestones began with Warren Clark Eustis and Henry Martyn Williamson graduating in 1873 as the university&#x27;s first graduates. Helen Marr Ely was the first female graduate in 1875. The university progressed by awarding its first master&#x27;s degree in 1880 and conferring its first Ph.D. in 1888.

As the 20th century began, the university expanded its academic offerings. In 1908, the university inaugurated the Program of Mortuary Science, becoming the first state university in the United States to do so. The School of Nursing was established in 1909, the first continuous nursing school on a university campus in the United States. The nursing school later opened its doors to male students in 1949.

20th-century breakthroughs at the University of Minnesota positioned it as a leader in medical innovation. In 1954, C. Walton Lillehei and F. John Lewis performed the world&#x27;s first successful open-heart surgery using cross-circulation. 1955 saw Richard DeWall and Lillehei develop the bubble oxygenator, setting the stage for modern heart-lung machines. This was followed by Lillehei&#x27;s performance of the first artificial heart valve implant in a human in 1958, and in the same year, Earl Bakken, co-founder of Medtronic, Inc., developed the first portable pacemaker, introduced into practice by Lillehei.

The latter part of the 20th century saw the university&#x27;s continued innovation in medical transplantation, including the world&#x27;s first successful kidney/pancreas transplant in 1967, a bone marrow transplant in 1968, and a living donor pancreas transplant in 1998. Another notable contribution to agriculture came in 1991, with the development of the honeycrisp apple.

==Campuses==
&quot;Note: The flagship University of Minnesota campus is the Twin Cities campus, which comprises grounds in St. Paul and Minneapolis, the latter divided into areas on both the east and west banks of the Mississippi River. Administratively, these are all one campus, but for purposes of simplicity, this article will apply &quot;campus&quot; to its component parts where necessary to avoid confusion with the names of cities.&quot;

As the largest of five campuses across the University of Minnesota system, the Twin Cities campus has more than 50,000 students; this makes it the ninth-largest campus student body in the United States overall. It also has more than 300 research, education, and outreach centers and institutes.

===Minneapolis===
The original Minneapolis campus overlooked the Saint Anthony Falls on the Mississippi River, but it was later moved about a mile (1.6 km) downstream to its current location. The original site is now marked by a small park known as Chute Square at the intersection of and Central avenues. The school shut down following a financial crisis during the American Civil War, but reopened in 1867 with considerable financial help from John S. Pillsbury. It was upgraded from a preparatory school to a college in 1869. Today, the university&#x27;s Minneapolis campus is divided by the Mississippi River into an East Bank and a West Bank.

The Minneapolis campus has several residence halls: 17th Avenue Hall, Centennial Hall, Frontier Hall, Territorial Hall, Pioneer Hall, Sanford Hall, Wilkins Hall, Middlebrook Hall, Yudof Hall, and Comstock Hall.

====East Bank====

The East Bank, the main portion of the campus, covers and is divided into several areas: the Knoll area, the Mall area, the Health area, the Athletic area, and the Gateway area.

The Knoll area, the oldest extant part of the university, is in the northwestern corner of the campus. Many buildings in this area are well over 100 years old, such as some of the 13 in the Old Campus Historic District. Today, most disciplines in this area relate to the humanities. Burton Hall is home to the College of Education and Human Development. Folwell Hall and Jones Hall are primarily used by the language departments. A residence hall, Sanford Hall, and a student-apartment complex, Roy Wilkins Hall, are in this area. This area is just south of the Dinkytown neighborhood and business area.

Northrop Mall is arguably the center of the Minneapolis campus. The plan for the Mall was based on a design by Cass Gilbert, although his scheme was too extravagant to be fully implemented. Several of the campus&#x27;s primary buildings surround the Mall area. Northrop Auditorium provides a northern anchor, with Coffman Memorial Union (CMU) to the south. Four of the larger buildings to the sides of the Mall are the primary mathematics, physics, and chemistry buildings (Vincent Hall, Tate Laboratory and Smith Hall, respectively) and Walter Library. Smith Hall and Walter Library were built during the Lotus Coffman administration. The Mall area is home to the College of Liberal Arts, which is Minnesota&#x27;s largest public or private college, and the College of Science and Engineering. Behind CMU is another residence hall, Comstock Hall, and another student-apartment complex, Yudof Hall. The Northrop Mall Historic District was formally listed in the National Register of Historic Places in January 2018.

The Health area is to the southeast of the Mall area and focuses on undergraduate buildings for biological science students, as well as the homes of the College of Pharmacy, the School of Nursing, the School of Dentistry, the Medical School, the School of Public Health, and M Health Fairview Hospitals and Clinics. This complex of buildings forms what is known as the University of Minnesota Medical Center. Part of the College of Biological Sciences is housed in this area.

Across the street from the University of Minnesota Medical Center Fairview is an area known as the &quot;Superblock&quot;, a four-city-block space comprising four residence halls (Pioneer, Frontier, Centennial and Territorial Halls). The Superblock is one of the most popular locations for on-campus housing because it has the largest concentration of students living on campus and has a multitude of social activities between the residence halls.

The Athletic area is directly north of the Superblock and includes four recreation/athletic facilities: the University Recreation Center, Cooke Hall, the University Fieldhouse, and the University Aquatic Center. These facilities are all connected by tunnels and skyways, allowing students to use one locker room facility. North of this complex is the Huntington Bank Stadium, Williams Arena, Mariucci Arena, Ridder Arena, and the Baseline Tennis Center.

The Gateway area, the easternmost section of campus, is primarily composed of office buildings instead of classrooms and lecture halls. The most prominent building is McNamara Alumni Center. The university is also heavily invested in a biomedical research initiative and has built five biomedical research buildings that form a biomedical complex directly north of Huntington Bank Stadium.

=====Architecture=====

The Armory, northeast of the Mall area, is built like a Norman castle. It features a sally-port entrance facing Church Street and a tower that was originally intended to be the professor of military science&#x27;s residence. Since it originally held the athletics department, the Armory also features a gymnasium. Today it is home to military science classes and the university&#x27;s Reserve Officers&#x27; Training Corps.

Several buildings in the Old Campus Historic District were designed by early Minnesota architect LeRoy Buffington. One of the most notable is Pillsbury Hall, designed by Buffington and Harvey Ellis in the Richardsonian Romanesque style. Pillsbury Hall&#x27;s polychromatic facade incorporates several sandstone varieties that were available in Minnesota during the time of construction. Buffington also designed the exterior of Burton Hall, considered one of the strongest specimens of Greek Revival architecture in Minnesota.

Many of the buildings on the East Bank were designed by the prolific Minnesota architect Clarence H. Johnston, including the Jacobean Folwell Hall and the Beaux-Arts edifices of Northrop Auditorium and Walter Library, which he considered the heart of the university. Johnston&#x27;s son, Clarence Johnston Jr, was also an architect and designed the original Bell Museum building and Coffman Memorial Union in the 1930s.

The Malcolm Moos Health Sciences Tower, which is the tallest building on the Twin Cities campus, is a noted example of brutalist architecture.

In more recent years, Frank Gehry designed the Frederick R. Weisman Art Museum. Completed in 1993, the Weisman Art Museum is a typical example of his work with curving metallic structures. The abstract structure is considered highly significant because it was built prior to the widespread use of computer-aided design in architecture. It also ushered in a new era of architecture at the university, which continued with the completion of the McNamara Alumni Center in 2000 and Bruininks Hall (formerly STSS) in 2010.

Another notable structure is the addition to the Architecture building, designed by Steven Holl and completed in 2002. It won an American Institute of Architects award for its innovative design. The Architecture building was then renamed Rapson Hall after the local modernist architect and School of Architecture Dean Ralph Rapson.

The university also has a &quot;Greek row&quot; of historic fraternities and sororities located north of campus on University Avenue SE. 

====West Bank====
The West Bank covers . The West Bank is home to the University of Minnesota Law School, the Humphrey School of Public Affairs, the Carlson School of Management, various social science buildings, and the performing arts center. The West Bank Arts Quarter includes the Rarig Center, Barbara Barker Center for Dance, Ferguson Hall (School of Music), Ted Mann Concert Hall and Regis Center for Art. Due to the numerous arts departments on the West Bank, it is home to several annual interdisciplinary arts festivals.

Wilson Library, the largest library in the university system, is also on the West Bank, as is Middlebrook Hall, the largest residence hall on campus. The Elmer L. Andersen Library is home to the University&#x27;s Archives and Special Collections Department.

===St. Paul===
The St. Paul campus is in the city of Falcon Heights, about from the Minneapolis campus. The default place name for the ZIP code serving the campus is &quot;St. Paul&quot;, but &quot;Falcon Heights&quot; is also recognized for use in the street addresses of all campus buildings. The College of Food, Agricultural and Natural Resource Sciences, including the University of Minnesota Food Industry Center and many other disciplines from social sciences to vocational education, are on this campus. It also includes the College of Continuing and Professional Studies, College of Veterinary Medicine, and College of Biological Sciences. The extensive lawns, flowers, trees, and surrounding University research farm plots create a greener and quieter campus. It has a grassy mall of its own and can be a bit of a retreat from the more urban Minneapolis campus. Prominent on this campus is Bailey Hall, the St. Paul campus&#x27; only residence hall. Campus Connector buses run every five minutes on weekdays when school is in session, and every 20 minutes on weekends, allowing students easy access to both campuses.

The Continuing Education and Conference Center, which serves over 20,000 conference attendees per year, is also on the St. Paul campus.

The St. Paul campus is home to the College of Design&#x27;s Department of Design, Housing, and Apparel (DHA). Located in McNeal Hall, DHA includes the departmental disciplines of apparel design, graphic design, housing studies, interior design, and retail merchandising. McNeal Hall is also the home to the University&#x27;s Goldstein Museum of Design.

The St. Paul campus is known to University students and staff for the Meat and Dairy Salesroom, which sells animal food products (such as ice cream, cheese, and meat) produced in the university&#x27;s state-certified pilot plant by students, faculty and staff.

The St. Paul campus borders the Minnesota State Fairgrounds, which hosts the largest state fair in the United States by daily attendance. The fair lasts 12 days, from late August through Labor Day. The grounds also serve a variety of functions during the rest of the year.

Although the Falcon Heights area code is 651, the university telephone system trunk lines use Minneapolis exchanges and its 612 area code.

===Commuting===

Walking and riding bicycles are the most common modes of transportation among students. At times, the University Police has occasionally cited individuals for jaywalking or riding bicycles on restricted sidewalks in areas surrounding the university.

The Washington Avenue Bridge crossing the Mississippi River provides access between the East and West Banks in Minneapolis, on foot and via designated bike lanes and a free shuttle service. Several pedestrian tunnels ease the passage from building to building during harsh weather; they are marked with signs reading &quot;The Gopher Way&quot;. The Minneapolis campus is near Interstates 94 and 35W and is bordered by the Minneapolis neighborhoods of Dinkytown (on the north), Cedar-Riverside (on the west), Stadium Village (on the southeast), and Prospect Park (on the east).

On regular weekdays during the school year, the Campus Connectors operate with schedule-less service as often as every five minutes during the busiest parts of the school day (between 7 am and 5:30 pm), slowing to once every 15 or 20 minutes during earlier or later hours. The estimated commute time between St. Paul and the East Bank is 15 minutes. In 2008, the system carried 3.55 million riders. Although the shuttle service is free, it is comparatively inexpensive to operate; with an operating cost of $4.55 million in 2008, the operating subsidy was only $1.28 per passenger. Even Metro Transit&#x27;s busy Metro Blue Line light rail required a subsidy of $1.44 that year, and that was with many riders paying $1.75 or more for a ride.

Three light-rail stations serve the university along the Green Line: Stadium Village, East Bank, and West Bank. The university partnered with Metro to offer students, staff, and faculty members a Campus Zone Pass that enables free travel on the three stations that pass through campus, as well as a discounted unlimited pass for students. More recently, the university has instituted the Universal Transit Pass, which allows most students unlimited access to the Metro Transit light rail and bus networks as well as a number of other transit systems in the area.

===Campus safety===
The Step Up campaign is a program that helps students prevent excessive drinking, as well as sexual assault and other crimes, by teaching them how to intervene and prevent in a positive way. This is done, in part, by explaining the bystander effect. The U of M also has a SAFE-U emergency notification text messaging system that sends out a notification to all faculty, staff, and students in case of emergency. The commitment to a safe inclusive campus is also articulated through the comprehensive University of Minnesota Safety Plan, aligned with MPact 2025&#x27;s Commitment 5, Action Item 5.4, emphasizing the need to assess and improve campus safety continually. The establishment of the Strategic Safety Advisory Committee and public safety forums fosters community engagement and dialogue on safety concerns and improvements. Additionally, the university has made strides in off-campus safety through nightly patrols in Dinkytown and the introduction of blue light kiosks and mobile light trailers to enhance visibility and security. Other resources help students get home safely. Calling 624-WALK secures an escort for walks to adjacent campuses and neighborhoods, and Gopher Chauffeur, a van service, offers rides near and on campus. Both are free and open to all students, staff, and faculty.

In addition, the campus has nearly 200 automated external defibrillators (AEDs) and 200 yellow phones for emergency-only calls. The University Police Station has 20 Code Blue phones around campus that immediately connect people to their office. There are also over 2,000 security cameras being monitored 24 hours a day. The university also maintains a vigilant stance on cybersecurity, conducting annual external assessments and updating strategies for risk mitigation. Emergency preparedness is also a key focus, with updated Emergency Operations Plans and disaster recovery protocols ensuring readiness for a variety of potential threats.

====Sexual assaults====
Minnesota Gophers football player Dominic Jones was convicted of sexual assault in 2008. In July 2009, an appeals court upheld Jones&#x27; conviction, but reduced his four-year prison sentence to one year. More than 1,000 sexual assaults on campus were reported between 2010 and 2015. No prosecutions for rape occurred, according to Katie Eichele of the Aurora Center, until the conviction of Daniel Drill-Mellum in 2016, for the rapes of two fellow students. Drill-Mellum received a six-year prison sentence.

It has been alleged that few sexual assaults on campus are reported to University police. Six resulted in arrest from 2010 to 2015; one was determined to be unfounded. In a study by campus police, in the years between 2005 and 2015, sexual assaults at the university remained the same or increased despite six sexual assault resources and many anti-crime programs on campus. In August 2020, the University of Minnesota agreed to pay $500,000 to a woman who in the fall of 2016, accused several Gophers football players of sexually assaulting her. In February 2017, a University of Minnesota panel cleared four of the 10 Gopher football players the woman accused and agreed with investigators&#x27; recommendation that four other players be expelled and the other two players should be suspended for a year.

==Academics==
The university is organized into 19 colleges, schools, and other major academic units:
Six university-wide interdisciplinary centers and institutes work across collegiate lines:
* Center for Cognitive Sciences
* Consortium on Law and Values in Health, Environment, and the Life Sciences
* Institute for Advanced Study, University of Minnesota
* Institute for Engineering in Medicine
* Institute for Translational Neuroscience
* Institute on the Environment
* Minnesota Population Center

The university (system-wide) offers 154 undergraduate degree programs, 24 undergraduate certificates, 307 graduate degree programs, and 79 graduate certificates. The university offers the majority of these programs and certificates at its Twin Cities campus. The university has all three branches of the Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC). The Twin Cities campus, as well as the campuses at Crookston, Duluth, Morris, and Rochester, are accredited by the Higher Learning Commission (HLC).

===Admissions===
For incoming undergraduates enrolled in fall 2023, Minnesota received more than 39,000 applications. The Class of 2027 consisted of approximately 6,700 students. For the following year, the Class of 2028 consisted of approximately of 7,300 students.

Of the 50% of enrolled freshmen in 2024 who submitted ACT scores; the middle 50 percent Composite score was between 27 and 33. Of the 50% of the incoming freshman class who submitted SAT scores; the middle 50 percent Composite scores were 1350–1500.

The University of Minnesota is a college sponsor of the National Merit Scholarship Program and sponsored 97 Merit Scholarship awards in 2020. In the 2020–2021 academic year, 112 freshman students were National Merit Scholars.

===Rankings===



In 2024, Minnesota was ranked as the 26th best university in the United States by the &quot;Academic Ranking of World Universities&quot;, and 25th in the United States in &quot;Washington Monthly&quot;″s 2021 National University Rankings. Minnesota&#x27;s undergraduate program was ranked 53rd among national universities by &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; for 2023, and 23rd in the nation among public colleges and universities. The same publication ranked Minnesota&#x27;s graduate Carlson School of Management as 28th in the nation among business schools, and 6th in the nation for its information systems graduate program. Other graduate schools ranked highly by &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; for 2022 include the University of Minnesota Law School at 22nd, the University of Minnesota Medical School, which was 4th for family medicine and 5th for primary care, the University of Minnesota College of Pharmacy, which ranked 3rd, the Hubert H. Humphrey School of Public Affairs, which ranked 9th, the University of Minnesota College of Education and Human Development, which ranked 10th for education psychology and special education, and the University of Minnesota School of Public Health, which ranked 10th.

In 2020, the Center for Measuring University Performance ranked Minnesota 16th in the nation in terms of total research, 30th in endowment assets, 24th in annual giving, 28th in the number of National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine memberships, 9th in its number of faculty awards, and 14th in its number of National Merit Scholars. Minnesota is listed as a &quot;Public Ivy&quot; in 2001 Greenes&#x27; Guides &quot;The Public Ivies: America&#x27;s Flagship Public Universities&quot;.

In 2021, the University of Minnesota was ranked as the 40th best university in the world by the &quot;Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU)&quot;, which assesses academic and research performance. The same 2021 ranking by subject placed the University of Minnesota&#x27;s ecology program as 2nd best in the world, management program as 10th best, biotechnology program as 11th best, mechanical engineering and medical technology programs as 14th best, law and psychology programs as 19th best, and veterinary sciences program as 20th best. The Center for World University Rankings (CWUR) for 2021–22 ranked Minnesota 46th in the world and 26th in the United States. The 2021 Nature Index, which assesses the institutions that dominate high-quality research output, ranked Minnesota 53rd in the world based on research publication data from 2020. &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranked Minnesota as the 47th best global university for 2021. The 2015 &quot;Times Higher Education World University Rankings&quot; placed Minnesota 46th worldwide, based primarily on teaching, research, knowledge transfer, and international outlook.

==Research==
Inventions by University of Minnesota students and faculty have ranged from food science to health technologies. Most of the public research funding in Minnesota is funneled to the University of Minnesota as a result of long-standing advocacy by the university itself.

The university developed Gopher, a precursor to the World Wide Web which used hyperlinks to connect documents across computers on the internet. However, the version produced by CERN was favored by the public since it was freely distributed and could more easily handle multimedia webpages. The university also houses the Charles Babbage Institute, a research and archive center specializing in computer history. The department has strong roots in the early days of supercomputing with Seymour Cray of Cray supercomputers.

The university also became a member of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) in 2007 and has led data analysis projects searching for gravitational waves — their existence was confirmed by scientists in February 2016.

Discoveries and innovation by faculty or alumni include:
* Puffed rice – Alexander P. Anderson performed work leading to the discovery of &quot;puffed rice&quot;, a starting point for a new breakfast cereal later advertised as &quot;Food Shot From Guns&quot;.
* Transistorized cardiac pacemaker – Earl Bakken founded Medtronic, where he developed the first external, battery-operated, transistorized, wearable artificial pacemaker in 1957.
* Green Revolution – Norman Borlaug was an agronomist who led initiatives worldwide that contributed to extensive increases in agricultural production termed the Green Revolution. Borlaug, often called &quot;the father of the Green Revolution&quot;, is credited with saving over a billion people worldwide from starvation. Borlaug was awarded multiple honors for his work, including the Nobel Peace Prize, the Presidential Medal of Freedom, and the Congressional Gold Medal.
* ATP synthase – Paul D. Boyer elucidated the enzymatic mechanism for synthesis of the cellular &quot;energy currency&quot;, adenosine triphosphate (ATP), leading to a Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 1997.
* Point-contact transistor – Walter Houser Brattain and John Bardeen, later joined by William Shockley, invented the point-contact transistor in December 1947. For their invention, the trio was awarded a Nobel Prize in Physics in 1956.
* Infusion pump – Henry Buchwald invented the world&#x27;s first infusion port, peritoneovenous shunts, and specialty vascular catheters. He also invented the first implantable infusion pump, a precursor to implantable infusion pumps in use throughout the world today.
* Photosynthesis – Melvin Calvin discovered the Calvin cycle along with Andrew Benson and James Bassham; for this, he won the 1961 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
* Ecology – Raymond Lindeman revolutionized ecology, primarily through his 1942 paper &quot;Trophic Dynamic Aspect of Ecology&quot;, which described how energy and nutrients cycled through ecosystems.
* Supercomputer – Seymour Cray designed a series of computers that were the fastest in the world for decades, and founded Cray Research, which built many of these machines.
* Taconite – Edward Wilson Davis developed an engineering process to economically extract iron ore from hard taconite rocks, making taconite valuable as iron ore for the iron and steel industries.
* Cosmic rays – Phyllis S. Freier discovered the presence of heavy nuclei in cosmic rays, proving the similarity between the Solar System and the rest of the galaxy.
* U.S. aviation – Robert Rowe Gilruth led the development of flying qualities for airplanes, the use of rockets to achieve data at supersonic speeds, and the establishment of many of the nation&#x27;s leading flight research and human space flight operations facilities.
* Bone marrow transplant – Robert A. Good in 1968 performed the first successful human bone marrow transplant between persons who were not identical twins and is regarded as a founder of modern immunology. In 2018 Minnesota Gov. Mark Dayton proclaimed August 24 as University of Minnesota Blood and Marrow Transplant Day.
* Gore-Tex – Robert Gore invented Gore-Tex materials in 1969.
* Disk drive – Reynold B. Johnson invented a method and machinery to score tests electronically.
* K-rations – Ancel Keys developed the rations for the U.S. military and also conducted dietary studies: the Minnesota Starvation Study and the Seven Countries Study.
* Synthetic rubber – Izaak Kolthoff developed the &quot;cold process&quot; for producing synthetic rubber, which he undertook under the U.S. synthetic rubber program during World War II.
* Cyclotron – Ernest Lawrence won the Nobel Prize for Physics 1939 for inventing and developing the cyclotron.
* &quot;Drosophila melanogaster&quot; – Edward Lewis won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1995 for his work on the &quot;Drosophila&quot; bithorax complex of homeotic genes.
* Cardiac surgery – C. Walton Lillehei pioneered open-heart surgery, as well as numerous techniques, equipment, and prostheses for cardiothoracic surgery.
* POPmail – Mark P. McCahill led the development of the Gopher protocol, the effective predecessor of the World Wide Web; was involved in creating and codifying the standard for Uniform Resource Locators (URLs); and led the development of POPmail, one of the first e-mail clients, which had a foundational influence on later e-mail clients and the popularization of graphical user interfaces in Internet technologies more broadly.
* MMPI – Starke R. Hathaway and J. C. McKinley created the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), which was first published in 1943.
* Zatocoding – Calvin Mooers developed a mechanical system using superimposed codes of descriptors for information retrieval called Zatocoding, 1948.
* Atomic bomb – Edward P. Ney discovered cosmic ray heavy nuclei and solar proton events. After early work involving separating isotopes from uranium, he worked on the Manhattan Project.
* Atomic bomb – Alfred O. C. Nier devised a method to isolate the isotopes of uranium, a critical discovery in the atomic age. Nier worked with Kellex Corporation in New York City on the design and development of efficient and effective mass spectrographs for use in the Manhattan Project to build the atomic bomb in World War II. He designed most of the spectrographs used for monitoring uranium separations during the war.
* Atomic bomb – Frank Oppenheimer worked on uranium isotope separation in 1945 and joined the Manhattan Project.
* Biotechnology – Ronald L. Phillips was the first to generate whole corn plants from cells grown in culture, which laid the foundation for, and sparked, a new industry using cell-culture methods to genetically modify corn plants and other cereals. The corn cell line most widely used for genetic modification of corn has greatly accelerated the improvement of corn as food, feed, and fuel.
* Renewable energy – Lanny D. Schmidt designed a reactor to extract hydrogen from ethanol, offering the first real hope hydrogen could be a source of inexpensive and renewable energy.
* Biomimetics – Otto Schmitt invented the Schmitt trigger, the cathode follower, the differential amplifier, and the chopper-stabilized amplifier.
* NASA – Deke Slayton was one of the original NASA Mercury Seven astronauts and became NASA&#x27;s first chief of the Astronaut Office. He served as NASA&#x27;s director of flight crew operations, making him responsible for crew assignments at NASA, from November 1963 until March 1972. At that time, he was granted medical clearance to fly and was assigned as the docking module pilot of the 1975 Apollo–Soyuz Test Project, at age 51 becoming the oldest person to fly in space at the time.
* Bathythermograph – Athelstan Spilhaus fully developed the bathythermograph (BT) in 1938, an instrument he perfected that was of vital importance in World War II against the German U-boat. During the war, the BT became standard equipment on all U.S. Navy subs and vessels involved in antisubmarine warfare.
* CDC 6600 – James Thornton developed the CDC 6600, the world&#x27;s first supercomputer, designed with Seymour Cray.
* Ziagen – Robert Vince worked on antiviral drug candidates at UMN, where he went on to develop carbocyclic nucleosides termed &#x27;carbovirs.&#x27; This class of medicinal agents included the drug abacavir. Abacavir was commercialized by GlaxoSmithKline as Ziagen for the treatment of AIDS.
* US3D – Graham Candler pioneered the future of hypersonics research with the development of the US3D CFD code which builds off of NASA&#x27;s DPLR code, but uses unstructured grids and has many advanced numerical capabilities and physical models for multi-physics, highly coupled problems.

==Student life==
Among matriculants to the university, 66.8% are considered Minnesota residents and 33.2% are considered out-of-state residents. According to the University Office of Institutional Data and Research, as of fall 2023, there were 30,469 undergraduates at the University of Minnesota Twin Cities campus. Of that number, 6,736 were first-time, degree-seeking freshmen. There were 11,233 graduate students.

===Greek life, professional and honor societies===

The University of Minnesota has numerous fraternities and sororities. Including defunct branches, the Greek System numbers more than 200 organizations, approximately half of which operate today. The university&#x27;s Greek societies include the residential Academic and Social chapters, including non-residential multicultural groups. The Greek System includes some but not all Professional Fraternities, Honor Societies, Religious and Service Fraternities. Fraternities and sororities have built several historically significant &quot;Fraternity Row&quot; homes along University Ave. SE, 10th Ave. SE, 4th Street SE, and 5th Street SE, all in Minneapolis, or along Cleveland Ave. near the St. Paul campus.

As of June 2018, approximately 3,900 system members made up about 11% of the campus population. Minnesota hosts 38 academic fraternities, 20 academic sororities, 56 honors societies, 31 professional societies, and two service-focused chapters.

===Media===
====Print====
&quot;The Minnesota Daily&quot; has been published twice a week during the normal school season since the fall semester 2016. It is printed weekly during the summer. The &quot;Daily&quot; is operated by an autonomous organization run entirely by students. It was first published on May 1, 1900. Besides everyday news coverage, the paper has also published special issues, such as the Grapevine Awards, Ski-U-Mah, the Bar &amp; Beer Guide, Sex-U-Mah, and others.

A long-defunct humor magazine, &quot;Ski-U-Mah&quot;, was published from about 1930 to 1950. It launched the career of novelist and scriptwriter Max Shulman.

A relative newcomer to the university&#x27;s print media community is &quot;The Wake Student Magazine&quot;, a weekly that covers UMN-related stories and provides a forum for student expression. It was founded in November 2001 in an effort to diversify campus media and achieved student group status in February 2002. Students from many disciplines do all of the reporting, writing, editing, illustration, photography, layout, and business management for the publication. The magazine was founded by James DeLong and Chris Ruen. &quot;The Wake&quot; was named the nation&#x27;s best campus publication (2006) by the Independent Press Association.

Additionally, the &quot;Wake&quot; publishes &quot;Liminal&quot;, a literary journal begun in 2005. &quot;Liminal&quot; was created in the absence of an undergraduate literary journal and continues to bring poetry and prose to the university community.

&quot;The Wake&quot; has faced a number of challenges during its existence, due in part to the reliance on student fees funding. In April 2004, after the Student Services Fees Committee had initially declined to fund it, the needed $60,000 in funding was restored, allowing the magazine to continue publishing. It faced further challenges in 2005, when its request for additional funding to publish weekly was denied and then partially restored.

In 2005 conservatives on campus began formulating a new publication named &quot;The Minnesota Republic&quot;. The first issue was released in February 2006, and funding by student service fees started in September 2006. &quot;The Republic&quot; is a biweekly newspaper run entirely by students, reporting on campus, state, and national news with commentary on sports, economics, and arts and entertainment.

&quot;The Republic&quot; is a member of the Collegiate Network, a program that includes over 100 publications at colleges and universities around the United States.

====Radio====

The campus radio station, KUOM &quot;Radio K&quot;, broadcasts an eclectic variety of independent music during the day on 770 kHz AM. Its 5,000-watt signal has a range of , but shuts down at dusk because of Federal Communications Commission regulations. In 2003, the station added a low-power (8-watt) signal on 106.5 MHz FM overnight and on weekends. In 2005, a 10-watt translator began broadcasting from Falcon Heights on 100.7 FM at all times. Radio K also streams its content at www.radiok.org. With roots in experimental transmissions that began before World War I, the station received the first AM broadcast license in the state on January 13, 1922, and began broadcasting as WLB, changing to the KUOM call sign about two decades later. The station had an educational format until 1993, when it merged with a smaller campus-only music station to become what is now known as Radio K. A small group of full-time employees are joined by over 20 part-time student employees who oversee the station. Most of the on-air talent consists of student volunteers.

====Television====
Some television programs made on campus have been broadcast on local PBS station KTCI channel 17. Several episodes of &quot;Great Conversations&quot; have been made since 2002, featuring one-on-one discussions between University faculty and experts brought in from around the world. &quot;Tech Talk&quot; was a show meant to help people who feel intimidated by modern technology, including cell phones and computers.

===Student Government===
The Undergraduate Student Government advocates for student interests on local, state, and federal levels, and focuses on efforts that directly benefit the student population. It was instrumental in passing legislation in the 2013 Minnesota Legislature for medical amnesty.

The Council of Graduate Students and the Professional Student Government represent the interests of students in graduate and professional study programs, respectively. Formerly, they were represented by one organization known as the Graduate and Professional Student Assembly, which splintered in 2014.

===Student activism===
Student activism has played an important role at the university, including campaigns to desegregate campus housing in the 1930s and 1940s, Black students&#x27; take over of Morrill Hall in 1969, which led to the creation of the Department of Afro-American Studies, now known as the Department of African-American and African Studies, the 1970 student strike against war, campaigns to keep the General College open in the 2000s, campaigns against racism in 2014–2015 known as Whose Diversity?, and many graduate student unionization efforts. For example, labor coalition efforts in the 2021–2022 academic year highlighted poor wages, poor stipend conditions, and administrative disrespect for graduate student workers. In the 2022-2023 academic year, labor efforts materialized into a campaign and a vote that culminated in the formation of the Graduate Labor Union-United Electrical (GLU-UE), the labor union currently representing graduate student workers at the University of Minnesota.

==Athletics==

Minnesota&#x27;s Twin Cities campus athletics teams are called the Minnesota Golden Gophers and are members of the Big Ten Conference and the Western Collegiate Hockey Association (WCHA) in the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). As of 2019, they have won 19 NCAA championships and claim six national football championships.

Since the 2013–14 school year, the only Minnesota team that does not compete in the Big Ten is the women&#x27;s ice hockey team, which competes in the WCHA. The Gophers men&#x27;s ice hockey team was a longtime WCHA member, but left when the Big Ten began operating a men&#x27;s ice hockey league with six inaugural members. The current athletic director is Mark Coyle.

The Golden Gophers&#x27; most notable rivalry is the annual college football game against the Wisconsin Badgers for Paul Bunyan&#x27;s Axe. The two universities also compete in the Border Battle, a year-long athletic competition in which each sport season is worth 40 points divided by the number of times the teams play each other (i.e. football is worth 40 points because they play each other only once, while women&#x27;s ice hockey is worth 10 points per game because they play four times a year). Conference and postseason playoffs do not count in the point standings.

Goldy Gopher is the mascot for the Twin Cities campus and the associated sports teams. The gopher mascot is a tradition as old as the state, which was tabbed the &quot;Gopher State&quot; in 1857 after a political cartoon ridiculing the $5 million railroad loan that helped open up the West. The cartoon portrayed shifty railroad barons as striped gophers pulling a railroad car carrying the Territorial Legislature. Later, the university picked up the nickname with the first university yearbook, bearing the name &quot;Gopher Annual&quot;, appearing in 1887.

The Minnesota Rouser is the university&#x27;s fight song. It is commonly played and sung by the 320-member Minnesota Marching Band at events such as commencement, convocation, and athletic games. Other songs associated with the university include the Minnesota March, which was composed for the university by John Philip Sousa, and Hail! Minnesota, the university&#x27;s alma mater and state song of Minnesota.

===Football===

The Minnesota Golden Gophers are one of the oldest programs in college football history. They have won seven national championships and 18 Big Ten Conference Championships. The Golden Gophers played their first game on September 29, 1882, a 4–0 victory over Hamline University, St. Paul. In 1887, the Golden Gophers played host to the Wisconsin Badgers in a 63–0 victory. With the exception of 1906, the Golden Gophers and Badgers have played each other every year since. The 128 games played against each other make this the most played rivalry in NCAA Division I FBS college football.

During their illustrious history, the Golden Gophers achieved a remarkable feat with a three-peat national championship run from 1934 to 1936. This period solidified their reputation as a powerhouse in the sport, leaving an indelible mark on college football history. To date, this remains the highest consecutive championship count in NCAA Division I FBS college football history, a record shared with the Georgia Bulldogs.

In 1981, the Golden Gophers played their last game in Memorial Stadium. Between 1982 and 2008, the school played their home games in the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome in downtown Minneapolis. They moved back to campus on September 12, 2009, when their new home, TCF Bank Stadium, opened with a game against the Air Force Falcons of the U.S. Air Force Academy. Often referred to as The Bank, the stadium was renamed Huntington Bank Stadium in June 2021 to reflect the acquisition of TCF Bank by Huntington Bank.

===Basketball===

The Golden Gophers men&#x27;s basketball team has won two National Championships, two National Invitation Tournament (NIT) Championships, and eight Big Ten Regular Season Championships. They also have fourteen NCAA Tournament appearances, including a Final Four appearance in 1997 and three Sweet 16 appearances. Overall the Golden Gophers have a 15-13 record in the NCAA tournament with their highest ranking being a 1 seed in 1997. However, because of NCAA sanctions for academic fraud, all postseason appearances from 1994 to 1998—in the NCAA Tournament in 1994, 1995, and 1997 and NIT in 1996 and 1998—were vacated. With these seasons removed the Gophers have gone 9-10 in the NCAA tournament with a highest ranking of the 2 seed in 1984. Most recently, in April 2014 the Golden Gophers defeated SMU to win the NIT championship at Madison Square Garden in New York City.

The Golden Gophers women&#x27;s basketball team has enjoyed success in recent years under Pam Borton, including a Final Four appearance in 2004. The Golden Gophers have a 12-10 record in the NCAA tournament with their highest ranking being a 3 seed in 2005. Overall, they have ten NCAA Tournament appearances and three Sweet 16 appearances.

===Hockey===

The Golden Gophers men&#x27;s hockey program has won 5 Division I National Championships, and 29 conference championships (including 22 WCHA and 7 Big Ten Hockey season championships. They have won 14 WCHA Tournament Championships and have 23 NCAA Frozen Four appearances. Their most recent NCAA tournament run was in 2023 where they made it to the championship game, but lost to the Quinnipiac Bobcats. A former Golden Gophers hockey tradition was to fill a majority of the team roster with Minnesota natives. Home games are played at Mariucci Arena. The Golden Gophers&#x27; big rivals are the University of Wisconsin–Madison and the University of North Dakota.

The Golden Gophers women&#x27;s hockey team has won six NCAA National Championships, most recently in 2016, and nine WCHA Regular Season Championships. They have also won seven WCHA Tournament Championships and have eleven NCAA Frozen Four appearances. They play their home games in Ridder Arena. They were the first collegiate women&#x27;s hockey team to play in an arena dedicated solely to women&#x27;s ice hockey. In the 2012–2013 season they finished undefeated at 41–0, and are the first and only NCAA women&#x27;s hockey team to do so. After winning the NCAA tournament their winning streak stood at 49 games, dating back to February 17, 2012, when they lost to North Dakota.

===Other sports===
The Minnesota Golden Gophers baseball team boasts a storied history marked by championship success, particularly in the Big Ten Conference. Since its inception, the Golden Gophers have won 24 Big Ten championships with their most recent being in 2018. Along with Big Ten titles the Golden Gophers have made the College World Series 5 times with a 17-7 record and 3 NCAA championships with their most recent being in 1964.

The first Division I collegiate women&#x27;s rugby club in the state, the Golden Gophers women&#x27;s rugby club team won the Midwest conference championship in 2015, 2016, and 2017.

The Golden Gophers women&#x27;s gymnastics team competes in the Maturi Pavilion. The team has won nine Big Ten titles, the most recent in 2021. Along with nine Big Ten titles, the Golden Gophers have made the NCAA tournament six times, with their highest placement being 6th in 2022, with a total team score of 197.1125.

The cross country and track and field programs have produced several professional runners, including Ben Blankenship, Gabriele Grunwald, and Charlie Lawrence. They also host the Roy Griak meet, a large collegiate cross country meet.

==Notable people==


==See also==

* List of colleges and universities in Minnesota
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* University of Minnesota Athletics
* University Digital Conservancy
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="4" end="39" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota Twin Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="63" end="86" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="93" end="99" title="public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="100" end="110" title="Land-grant university" label="land-grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="111" end="130" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480013" start="138" end="149" title="Minneapolis–Saint Paul" label="Twin Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="153" end="164" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="169" end="190" title="Saint Paul, Minnesota" label="Saint Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="217" end="237" title="Flagship#Colleges and universities in the United States" label="flagship institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q14552696" start="245" end="275" title="University of Minnesota System" label="University of Minnesota System"/>
<link wikidata="Q14552696" start="409" end="439" title="University of Minnesota system" label="University of Minnesota system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602985" start="452" end="465" title="List of United States university campuses by enrollment" label="ninth-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000232" start="664" end="678" title="Falcon Heights, Minnesota" label="Falcon Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404968" start="728" end="761" title="Minnesota Territorial Legislature" label="Minnesota Territorial Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223026" start="922" end="932" title="Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q743812" start="1030" end="1066" title="Association of American Universities" label="Association of American Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="1072" end="1099" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q576759" start="1283" end="1293" title="Public Ivy" label="Public Ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465468" start="1311" end="1335" title="Minnesota Golden Gophers" label="Minnesota Golden Gophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="1380" end="1395" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q729478" start="1396" end="1414" title="Big Ten Conference" label="Big Ten Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004892" start="1538" end="1555" title="List of American universities with Olympic medals" label="90 Olympic medals"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="1676" end="1687" title="Minneapolis, Minnesota" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q428602" start="1701" end="1727" title="University-preparatory school" label="college preparatory school"/>
<link wikidata="Q889421" start="1894" end="1911" title="William Aiken Jr." label="William Aiken Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1066087" start="1976" end="1995" title="Morrill Land-Grant Acts" label="Morrill Act of 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148367" start="2019" end="2032" title="Dakota people" label="Dakota people"/>
<link wikidata="Q885099" start="2213" end="2230" title="John S. Pillsbury" label="John S. Pillsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895803" start="2361" end="2375" title="University of Minnesota Old Campus Historic District" label="Pillsbury Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140024" start="4096" end="4106" title="honeycrisp" label="honeycrisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752963" start="4923" end="4942" title="Saint Anthony Falls" label="Saint Anthony Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="4950" end="4967" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q885099" start="5304" end="5321" title="John S. Pillsbury" label="John S. Pillsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q428602" start="5346" end="5364" title="University-preparatory school" label="preparatory school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895803" start="6107" end="6135" title="University of Minnesota Old Campus Historic District" label="Old Campus Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315911" start="6149" end="6159" title="discipline" label="discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="6188" end="6198" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895792" start="6227" end="6269" title="University of Minnesota College of Education and Human Development" label="College of Education and Human Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q123162924" start="6522" end="6535" title="Northrop Mall Historic District" label="Northrop Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q464603" start="6633" end="6645" title="Cass Gilbert" label="Cass Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059663" start="6783" end="6802" title="Northrop Auditorium" label="Northrop Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141029" start="6836" end="6858" title="Coffman Memorial Union" label="Coffman Memorial Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="6949" end="6960" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="6962" end="6969" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="6975" end="6984" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902868" start="7060" end="7074" title="Walter Library" label="Walter Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685138" start="7128" end="7141" title="Lotus Coffman" label="Lotus Coffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895795" start="7187" end="7210" title="University of Minnesota College of Liberal Arts" label="College of Liberal Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895796" start="7281" end="7315" title="University of Minnesota Institute of Technology" label="College of Science and Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q123162924" start="7425" end="7456" title="Northrop Mall Historic District" label="Northrop Mall Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="7484" end="7520" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="7635" end="7653" title="biological science" label="biological science"/>
<link wikidata="Q614304" start="7703" end="7711" title="Pharmacy" label="Pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q121176" start="7727" end="7734" title="Nursing" label="Nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895807" start="7740" end="7759" title="University of Minnesota School of Dentistry" label="School of Dentistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895802" start="7765" end="7779" title="University of Minnesota Medical School" label="Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895808" start="7785" end="7808" title="University of Minnesota School of Public Health" label="School of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430813" start="7814" end="7831" title="M Health Fairview" label="M Health Fairview"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895801" start="7908" end="7946" title="University of Minnesota Medical Center" label="University of Minnesota Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895791" start="7960" end="7990" title="University of Minnesota College of Biological Sciences" label="College of Biological Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8650" end="8675" title="Memorial Stadium (University of Minnesota)#University Aquatic center" label="University Aquatic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512039" start="8816" end="8839" title="Huntington Bank Stadium" label="Huntington Bank Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020979" start="8841" end="8855" title="Williams Arena" label="Williams Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740614" start="8857" end="8871" title="Mariucci Arena" label="Mariucci Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151806" start="8873" end="8885" title="Ridder Arena" label="Ridder Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802471" start="9087" end="9109" title="McNamara Alumni Center" label="McNamara Alumni Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q864601" start="9156" end="9175" title="biomedical" label="biomedical research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895788" start="9335" end="9345" title="University of Minnesota Armory" label="The Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q136693" start="9391" end="9397" title="Norman architecture" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="9398" end="9404" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15930902" start="9420" end="9430" title="sally port" label="sally-port"/>
<link wikidata="Q192386" start="9525" end="9541" title="military science" label="military science"/>
<link wikidata="Q14092" start="9638" end="9641" title="gym" label="gym"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="9720" end="9757" title="Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895803" start="9785" end="9813" title="University of Minnesota Old Campus Historic District" label="Old Campus Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599774" start="9857" end="9873" title="Leroy Buffington" label="LeRoy Buffington"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9902" end="9916" title="University of Minnesota Old Campus Historic District#Pillsbury Hall, 1889" label="Pillsbury Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501297" start="9965" end="9989" title="Richardsonian Romanesque" label="Richardsonian Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q183127" start="10019" end="10032" title="polychromatic" label="polychromatic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10188" end="10199" title="University of Minnesota Old Campus Historic District#Burton Hall, 1894" label="Burton Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="10246" end="10272" title="Greek Revival architecture" label="Greek Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126552" start="10377" end="10397" title="Clarence H. Johnston, Sr." label="Clarence H. Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860343" start="10413" end="10421" title="Jacobean architecture" label="Jacobean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268134" start="10443" end="10453" title="Beaux-Arts architecture" label="Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059663" start="10466" end="10485" title="Northrop Auditorium" label="Northrop Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902868" start="10490" end="10504" title="Walter Library" label="Walter Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883219" start="10646" end="10657" title="Bell Museum of Natural History" label="Bell Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141029" start="10671" end="10693" title="Coffman Memorial Union" label="Coffman Memorial Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742750" start="10713" end="10747" title="Malcolm Moos Health Sciences Tower" label="Malcolm Moos Health Sciences Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q994776" start="10828" end="10850" title="brutalist architecture" label="brutalist architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q180374" start="10875" end="10886" title="Frank Gehry" label="Frank Gehry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431431" start="10900" end="10931" title="Weisman Art Museum" label="Frederick R. Weisman Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="11150" end="11171" title="computer-aided design" label="computer-aided design"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802471" start="11296" end="11318" title="McNamara Alumni Center" label="McNamara Alumni Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q451141" start="11456" end="11467" title="Steven Holl" label="Steven Holl"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="11501" end="11533" title="American Institute of Architects" label="American Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="11638" end="11647" title="modernist architecture" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287998" start="11690" end="11702" title="Ralph Rapson" label="Ralph Rapson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="11765" end="11792" title="fraternities and sororities" label="fraternities and sororities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895798" start="11914" end="11948" title="University of Minnesota Law School" label="University of Minnesota Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927315" start="11954" end="11987" title="Humphrey School of Public Affairs" label="Humphrey School of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042920" start="11993" end="12021" title="Carlson School of Management" label="Carlson School of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710043" start="12129" end="12141" title="Rarig Center" label="Rarig Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q440445" start="12530" end="12547" title="Elmer L. Andersen" label="Elmer L. Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000232" start="12688" end="12702" title="Falcon Heights, Minnesota" label="Falcon Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895794" start="12934" end="12993" title="University of Minnesota College of Food, Agricultural and Natural Resource Sciences" label="College of Food, Agricultural and Natural Resource Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="13105" end="13125" title="vocational education" label="vocational education"/>
<link wikidata="Q26201767" start="14225" end="14251" title="Goldstein Museum of Design" label="Goldstein Museum of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937367" start="14548" end="14568" title="Minnesota State Fair" label="Minnesota State Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333621" start="14601" end="14611" title="state fair" label="state fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562566" start="14818" end="14827" title="North American Numbering Plan" label="area code"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="14896" end="14905" title="Telephone exchange" label="exchanges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814666" start="15106" end="15116" title="jaywalking" label="jaywalking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550402" start="15202" end="15226" title="Washington Avenue Bridge (Minneapolis)" label="Washington Avenue Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972651" start="15521" end="15535" title="The Gopher Way" label="The Gopher Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="15574" end="15585" title="Interstate Highway System" label="Interstates"/>
<link wikidata="Q94965" start="15586" end="15588" title="Interstate 94" label="94"/>
<link wikidata="Q94150" start="15593" end="15596" title="Interstate 35" label="35W"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226555" start="15649" end="15658" title="Dinkytown" label="Dinkytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056562" start="15675" end="15690" title="Cedar-Riverside, Minneapolis" label="Cedar-Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596500" start="15706" end="15721" title="Stadium Village" label="Stadium Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250792" start="15746" end="15759" title="Prospect Park, Minneapolis" label="Prospect Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307442" start="16363" end="16376" title="Metro Transit (Minnesota)" label="Metro Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715488" start="16389" end="16394" title="Metro (Minnesota)" label="Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617191" start="16395" end="16404" title="Blue Line (Minnesota)" label="Blue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835240" start="16525" end="16544" title="Light rail in Minnesota" label="light-rail stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060656" start="16576" end="16586" title="Green Line (Minnesota)" label="Green Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596495" start="16588" end="16603" title="Stadium Village (Metro Transit station)" label="Stadium Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327783" start="16605" end="16614" title="East Bank (Metro Transit station)" label="East Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984379" start="16620" end="16629" title="West Bank (Metro Transit station)" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715488" start="16661" end="16666" title="Metro (Minnesota)" label="Metro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16715" end="16731" title="Go-To card#Campus Zone Pass" label="Campus Zone Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q230749" start="17335" end="17351" title="bystander effect" label="bystander effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q18637505" start="19108" end="19121" title="Dominic Jones" label="Dominic Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404912" start="19467" end="19486" title="2014 University of Minnesota rape case" label="Daniel Drill-Mellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868400" start="20866" end="20893" title="Minnesota Population Center" label="Minnesota Population Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="21199" end="21229" title="Reserve Officer Training Corps" label="Reserve Officer Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895797" start="21289" end="21298" title="University of Minnesota Crookston" label="Crookston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495874" start="21300" end="21306" title="University of Minnesota Duluth" label="Duluth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551758" start="21308" end="21314" title="University of Minnesota Morris" label="Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895805" start="21320" end="21329" title="University of Minnesota Rochester" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739633" start="21353" end="21379" title="Higher Learning Commission" label="Higher Learning Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="21710" end="21713" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="21839" end="21842" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974311" start="22108" end="22131" title="National Merit Scholars" label="National Merit Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q478743" start="22244" end="22282" title="Academic Ranking of World Universities" label="Academic Ranking of World Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972062" start="22329" end="22347" title="Washington Monthly" label="Washington Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="22483" end="22511" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042920" start="22645" end="22673" title="Carlson School of Management" label="Carlson School of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895798" start="22890" end="22924" title="University of Minnesota Law School" label="University of Minnesota Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895802" start="22938" end="22976" title="University of Minnesota Medical School" label="University of Minnesota Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q60762392" start="23042" end="23085" title="University of Minnesota College of Pharmacy" label="University of Minnesota College of Pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927315" start="23109" end="23152" title="Hubert H. Humphrey School of Public Affairs" label="Hubert H. Humphrey School of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895792" start="23176" end="23242" title="University of Minnesota College of Education and Human Development" label="University of Minnesota College of Education and Human Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895808" start="23318" end="23365" title="University of Minnesota School of Public Health" label="University of Minnesota School of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059760" start="23400" end="23443" title="Center for Measuring University Performance" label="Center for Measuring University Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233780" start="23579" end="23635" title="National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine" label="National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974311" start="23712" end="23735" title="National Merit Scholars" label="National Merit Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q576759" start="23768" end="23778" title="Public Ivy" label="Public Ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q478743" start="23992" end="24030" title="Academic Ranking of World Universities" label="Academic Ranking of World Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="24750" end="24778" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318318" start="24862" end="24910" title="Times Higher Education World University Rankings" label="Times Higher Education World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q322654" start="25345" end="25351" title="Gopher (protocol)" label="Gopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="25372" end="25386" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q102014" start="25398" end="25408" title="hyperlinks" label="hyperlinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="25497" end="25501" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975167" start="25641" end="25666" title="Charles Babbage Institute" label="Charles Babbage Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q92765" start="25805" end="25817" title="Seymour Cray" label="Seymour Cray"/>
<link wikidata="Q144060" start="25821" end="25825" title="Cray" label="Cray"/>
<link wikidata="Q255371" start="25886" end="25937" title="Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory" label="Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q22683173" start="26040" end="26053" title="First observation of gravitational waves" label="was confirmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q154092" start="26146" end="26157" title="Puffed rice" label="Puffed rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996039" start="26160" end="26181" title="Alexander P. Anderson" label="Alexander P. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276995" start="26384" end="26395" title="Earl Bakken" label="Earl Bakken"/>
<link wikidata="Q186050" start="26529" end="26545" title="Green Revolution" label="Green Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q154824" start="26548" end="26562" title="Norman Borlaug" label="Norman Borlaug"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="26914" end="26931" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="26937" end="26966" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q721743" start="26976" end="27000" title="Congressional Gold Medal" label="Congressional Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22327117" start="27004" end="27016" title="ATP synthase" label="ATP synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q102395" start="27019" end="27032" title="Paul D. Boyer" label="Paul D. Boyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="27127" end="27149" title="adenosine triphosphate" label="adenosine triphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515631" start="27204" end="27228" title="Point-contact transistor" label="Point-contact transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q184577" start="27231" end="27253" title="Walter Houser Brattain" label="Walter Houser Brattain"/>
<link wikidata="Q949" start="27258" end="27270" title="John Bardeen" label="John Bardeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q163415" start="27288" end="27304" title="William Shockley" label="William Shockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="27406" end="27428" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q201035" start="27440" end="27453" title="Infusion pump" label="Infusion pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q17305728" start="27456" end="27470" title="Henry Buchwald" label="Henry Buchwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="27709" end="27723" title="Photosynthesis" label="Photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49347" start="27726" end="27739" title="Melvin Calvin" label="Melvin Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q220389" start="27755" end="27767" title="Calvin cycle" label="Calvin cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="27866" end="27873" title="Ecology" label="Ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298962" start="27876" end="27892" title="Raymond Lindeman" label="Raymond Lindeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="28067" end="28080" title="Supercomputer" label="Supercomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q92765" start="28083" end="28095" title="Seymour Cray" label="Seymour Cray"/>
<link wikidata="Q143689" start="28240" end="28248" title="Taconite" label="Taconite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345942" start="28251" end="28270" title="Edward Wilson Davis" label="Edward Wilson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="28437" end="28448" title="Cosmic rays" label="Cosmic rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q4511479" start="28451" end="28468" title="Phyllis S. Freier" label="Phyllis S. Freier"/>
<link wikidata="Q254785" start="28619" end="28638" title="Robert Rowe Gilruth" label="Robert Rowe Gilruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128050" start="28874" end="28896" title="Bone marrow transplant" label="Bone marrow transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q704418" start="28899" end="28913" title="Robert A. Good" label="Robert A. Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q513091" start="29101" end="29112" title="Mark Dayton" label="Mark Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q867068" start="29196" end="29204" title="Gore-Tex" label="Gore-Tex"/>
<link wikidata="Q285283" start="29207" end="29218" title="Robert W. Gore" label="Robert Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046817" start="29258" end="29268" title="Disk drive" label="Disk drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297016" start="29271" end="29289" title="Reynold B. Johnson" label="Reynold B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137966" start="29355" end="29364" title="K-rations" label="K-rations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569283" start="29367" end="29377" title="Ancel Keys" label="Ancel Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714735" start="29522" end="29538" title="Synthetic rubber" label="Synthetic rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845271" start="29541" end="29555" title="Izaak Kolthoff" label="Izaak Kolthoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q204469" start="29709" end="29718" title="Cyclotron" label="Cyclotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q169577" start="29721" end="29736" title="Ernest Lawrence" label="Ernest Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q130888" start="29826" end="29849" title="Drosophila melanogaster" label="Drosophila melanogaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q274123" start="29858" end="29870" title="Edward B. Lewis" label="Edward Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q235007" start="30006" end="30021" title="Cardiac surgery" label="Cardiac surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q358046" start="30024" end="30042" title="C. Walton Lillehei" label="C. Walton Lillehei"/>
<link wikidata="Q92934" start="30161" end="30168" title="POPmail" label="POPmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q92934" start="30171" end="30187" title="Mark P. McCahill" label="Mark P. McCahill"/>
<link wikidata="Q556298" start="30592" end="30596" title="Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory" label="MMPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010938" start="30599" end="30617" title="Starke R. Hathaway" label="Starke R. Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15997986" start="30622" end="30636" title="J. C. McKinley" label="J. C. McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574901" start="30738" end="30748" title="Zatocoding" label="Zatocoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q330079" start="30751" end="30764" title="Calvin Mooers" label="Calvin Mooers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="30888" end="30899" title="Atomic bomb" label="Atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344733" start="30902" end="30915" title="Edward P. Ney" label="Edward P. Ney"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="31075" end="31086" title="Atomic bomb" label="Atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q429114" start="31089" end="31106" title="Alfred O. C. Nier" label="Alfred O. C. Nier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821018" start="31217" end="31235" title="Kellex Corporation" label="Kellex Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="31500" end="31511" title="Atomic bomb" label="Atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396898" start="31514" end="31531" title="Frank Oppenheimer" label="Frank Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="31613" end="31626" title="Biotechnology" label="Biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365043" start="31629" end="31647" title="Ronald L. Phillips" label="Ronald L. Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="32004" end="32020" title="Renewable energy" label="Renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487271" start="32023" end="32039" title="Lanny D. Schmidt" label="Lanny D. Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145644" start="32188" end="32199" title="Biomimetics" label="Biomimetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q706821" start="32202" end="32214" title="Otto Schmitt" label="Otto Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="32335" end="32339" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q336810" start="32342" end="32354" title="Deke Slayton" label="Deke Slayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q225561" start="32826" end="32842" title="Bathythermograph" label="Bathythermograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813345" start="32845" end="32863" title="Athelstan Spilhaus" label="Athelstan Spilhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q683851" start="33134" end="33142" title="CDC 6600" label="CDC 6600"/>
<link wikidata="Q15820721" start="33145" end="33159" title="James E. Thornton" label="James Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q304330" start="33252" end="33258" title="Ziagen" label="Ziagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19981105" start="33261" end="33273" title="Robert Vince (scientist)" label="Robert Vince"/>
<link wikidata="Q830787" start="33591" end="33602" title="Hypersonic speed" label="hypersonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q815820" start="33645" end="33648" title="Computational fluid dynamics" label="CFD"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078677" start="33706" end="33723" title="unstructured grid" label="unstructured grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="34563" end="34582" title="Fraternities and sororities in North America" label="Academic and Social"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248071" start="34684" end="34709" title="Professional fraternities and sororities" label="Professional Fraternities"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078534" start="34711" end="34726" title="Honor society" label="Honor Societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455754" start="34742" end="34762" title="Service fraternities and sororities" label="Service Fraternities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868213" start="35291" end="35310" title="Minnesota Daily" label="The Minnesota Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919443" start="35785" end="35794" title="Ski-U-Mah (magazine)" label="Ski-U-Mah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795240" start="35893" end="35904" title="Max Shulman" label="Max Shulman"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="35983" end="36008" title="The Wake Student Magazine" label="The Wake Student Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146968" start="37708" end="37726" title="Collegiate Network" label="Collegiate Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280867" start="37871" end="37875" title="KUOM" label="KUOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q42201" start="37931" end="37948" title="independent music" label="independent music"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="37971" end="37974" title="kHz" label="kHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="37975" end="37977" title="AM radio" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="38052" end="38085" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="38167" end="38169" title="FM radio" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="38305" end="38311" title="Internet radio" label="stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280867" start="38528" end="38531" title="Radio K" label="WLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q353659" start="38554" end="38563" title="radio call sign" label="call sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="38994" end="38997" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858119" start="39006" end="39010" title="KTCI" label="KTCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q104860137" start="40362" end="40377" title="General College Truth Movement" label="General College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465468" start="41041" end="41065" title="Minnesota Golden Gophers" label="Minnesota Golden Gophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q729478" start="41089" end="41107" title="Big Ten Conference" label="Big Ten Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q950899" start="41116" end="41153" title="Western Collegiate Hockey Association" label="Western Collegiate Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="41168" end="41208" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868285" start="41412" end="41440" title="Minnesota Golden Gophers women&amp;#x27;s ice hockey" label="women&amp;#x27;s ice hockey team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868280" start="41482" end="41508" title="Minnesota Golden Gophers men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey" label="men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey team"/>
<link wikidata="Q729478" start="41581" end="41609" title="Big Ten Conference (ice hockey)" label="men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey league"/>
<link wikidata="Q106626691" start="41671" end="41681" title="Mark Coyle" label="Mark Coyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098117" start="41778" end="41795" title="Wisconsin Badgers" label="Wisconsin Badgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149588" start="41800" end="41822" title="Paul Bunyan&amp;#x27;s Axe" label="Paul Bunyan&amp;#x27;s Axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q868291" start="42212" end="42220" title="playoffs" label="playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580399" start="42259" end="42271" title="Goldy Gopher" label="Goldy Gopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q756901" start="42350" end="42356" title="gopher (animal)" label="gopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q11089011" start="42746" end="42754" title="yearbook" label="yearbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868422" start="42824" end="42840" title="Minnesota Rouser" label="Minnesota Rouser"/>
<link wikidata="Q261434" start="42866" end="42876" title="fight song" label="fight song"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895800" start="42927" end="42950" title="University of Minnesota Marching Band" label="Minnesota Marching Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054021" start="42969" end="42981" title="Graduation" label="commencement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765035" start="42983" end="42994" title="convocation" label="convocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868356" start="43071" end="43086" title="Minnesota March" label="Minnesota March"/>
<link wikidata="Q295935" start="43129" end="43146" title="John Philip Sousa" label="John Philip Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639166" start="43152" end="43167" title="Hail! Minnesota" label="Hail! Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q844450" start="43191" end="43201" title="Alma mater (song)" label="alma mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q783790" start="43206" end="43216" title="state song" label="state song"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270632" start="43357" end="43378" title="national championship" label="national championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563965" start="43387" end="43419" title="List of Big Ten National Championships" label="Big Ten Conference Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366519" start="43506" end="43524" title="Hamline University" label="Hamline University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815529" start="44316" end="44332" title="Memorial Stadium (University of Minnesota)" label="Memorial Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072186" start="44399" end="44427" title="Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome" label="Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613159" start="44572" end="44589" title="2009 Air Force Falcons football team" label="Air Force Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="44597" end="44619" title="United States Air Force Academy" label="U.S. Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512039" start="44676" end="44699" title="Huntington Bank Stadium" label="Huntington Bank Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44849" end="44871" title="Helms Athletic Foundation#National championship selections" label="National Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q571381" start="44877" end="44907" title="National Invitation Tournament" label="National Invitation Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q996954" start="45001" end="45016" title="NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division I Basketball Championship" label="NCAA Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416059" start="45042" end="45052" title="Final Four" label="Final Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q996954" start="45082" end="45090" title="NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division I Basketball Championship" label="Sweet 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515757" start="45245" end="45278" title="University of Minnesota basketball scandal" label="NCAA sanctions for academic fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465468" start="45671" end="45685" title="Golden Gophers" label="Golden Gophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128917" start="45757" end="45767" title="Pam Borton" label="Pam Borton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416059" start="45781" end="45791" title="Final Four" label="Final Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948738" start="45948" end="45963" title="NCAA Women&amp;#x27;s Division I Basketball Championship" label="NCAA Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948738" start="45986" end="45994" title="NCAA Women&amp;#x27;s Division I Basketball Championship" label="Sweet 16"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46078" end="46111" title="NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Ice Hockey Championship#NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division I Ice Hockey Championship" label="Division I National Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987729" start="46159" end="46163" title="Western Collegiate Hockey Association men&amp;#x27;s champions" label="WCHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17137168" start="46170" end="46184" title="Big Ten men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey champions" label="Big Ten Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987729" start="46224" end="46253" title="Western Collegiate Hockey Association men&amp;#x27;s champions" label="WCHA Tournament Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969895" start="46271" end="46282" title="Frozen Four" label="Frozen Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="46619" end="46650" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q968559" start="46659" end="46685" title="University of North Dakota" label="University of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151806" start="46971" end="46983" title="Ridder Arena" label="Ridder Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q23801154" start="48421" end="48436" title="Ben Blankenship" label="Ben Blankenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209703" start="48438" end="48455" title="Gabriele Grunewald" label="Gabriele Grunwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q124486391" start="48461" end="48477" title="Charles R. Lawrence" label="Charlie Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23833020" start="48498" end="48507" title="Roy Griak" label="Roy Griak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853336" start="48591" end="48637" title="List of colleges and universities in Minnesota" label="List of colleges and universities in Minnesota"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416816" wikidata="Q3196540" url="?curid=416816" title="Alki Point, Seattle">
<text>Alki Point (, ) is a neighborhood in western Seattle, Washington. It is a point jutting into Puget Sound, the westernmost landform in the city&#x27;s West Seattle district. Alki is the peninsular neighborhood on Alki Point. Alki was the original settlement in what was to become the city of Seattle. It was part of the city of West Seattle from 1902 until that city&#x27;s annexation by Seattle in 1907.

The Alki neighborhood extends along the shore from the point, both southeast and northeast. To the northeast it continues past Alki Beach roughly to Duwamish Head, the northernmost point of West Seattle.

Alki Point also marks the southern extent of Elliott Bay; a line drawn northwest to West Point marks the division between bay and sound.

== Etymology ==
The name &quot;Alki&quot; is a Chinook Jargon word meaning &quot;by and by&quot; or &quot;eventually&quot;. It is a shortened version of the original name, &quot;New York Alki.&quot; The name &quot;New York&quot; may have been chosen because it was the state of origin of several of the settlers.

In the Lushootseed language, the name of the point is &quot;sbaqʷabqs&quot;, meaning &quot;prairie point.&quot;

Other names in English for the point include Battery Point, Me-Kwah-Mooks Point, and Roberts Point.

==History==

Prior to American settlement, the Duwamish people used the area for cultivating and gathering at nearby prairies. They were maintained through seasonal burning.

The Denny Party landed at Alki Point November 13, 1851, and platted a settlement of six blocks of eight lots, calling the settlement &quot;New York Alki&quot;. However, the next April, Arthur A. Denny abandoned the site at Alki for a better-situated site on the east shore of Elliott Bay, just north of the plat of David Swinson &quot;Doc&quot; Maynard. This site is now known as Pioneer Square.

Charles C. Terry, who owned the land, and some others held on at Alki for a while, but most eventually joined the others in Pioneer Square. Terry gave his claim to Maynard in 1857 in exchange for his Pioneer Square holdings; Maynard farmed the land for 11 years and sold it to Hans Martin Hanson and Knud Olson in 1868, Hanson taking possession of the point itself.
The Stockade Hotel was photographed by early Seattle photographers Asahel Curtis and Theodore Peiser.

The Alki Point Lighthouse dates from 1913, replacing the United States Lighthouse Service&#x27;s post light from 1887 and Hanson&#x27;s lantern-on-a-post from the mid-1870s.
From 1925 to 1936, a ferry route across Puget Sound connected Alki Point with Manchester, Washington on the Kitsap Peninsula.

Well into the 20th century, Alki was reachable from most of Seattle only by boat. Alki today is reminiscent of a Pacific Northwest beach town, with a mix of mid-century bungalows, medium-rise waterfront apartment houses, waterfront businesses, a thin beach, and a road with a bike/foot trail running several miles along the water. This section of West Seattle is bounded on the northwest by Elliott Bay; on the southwest by Puget Sound; and on the east by the West Seattle hill. Its main thoroughfares are Alki Avenue S.W. (northeast- and southwest-bound); Beach Drive S.W. (northwest- and southeast-bound); and S.W. Admiral Way (east- and westbound).

There have been summer concerts at Alki Beach since the early 1900s; the original streetcars to West Seattle were established in order to bring people to these events. Today, the beach plays host to the Seattle Music Fest every August, a three-day music festival that plays host to emerging Northwest artists and selected national and international headliners.

The Birthplace of Seattle Monument is located at Alki Beach. It has the names of the first Seattle colony listed on it. The third side of the monument gives the names of the adults composing the first Seattle Colony: &quot;Arthur A. Denny and his Wife. John N. Low and Wife. Carson D. Boren and Wife. David D. Denny. Charles C. Terry&quot;, and on the base, &quot;New York Alki (By and By)&quot;, the name first given the settlement. The fourth side says &quot;Erected by the Washington University State Historical Society, 13 November 1905&quot;, and on the base, &quot;Presented by Lenora Denny.&quot;

==Geology==
Just inland from the point is a small hill of about . This hill is one of the Seattle area&#x27;s few bedrock outcroppings, and possibly the only one outside of the Duwamish River valley. It constitutes a piece of the 23-million-year-old sedimentary Blakeley Formation. It is believed to have once formed a sea stack, though it is possible that it was always connected to the mainland by a tombolo.

==Tourism==

===Alki Beach===

Alki Beach is the principal tourist attraction at Alki Point. It features sand, saltwater, bungalows, and local restaurants. It is generally not a popular swimming beach, owing to the cold waters of Puget Sound. It overlooks the Olympic Mountains and downtown Seattle from all points. There is access for wheelchair users and roller-skaters. In the summer months, Alki Beach becomes crowded, especially on weekends. Alki Beach is also famed for its biking and walking trail, which provides a picturesque view of nearby Blake Island. Tourist attractions include the miniature of the Statue of Liberty, the iconic Alki Point Lighthouse and the Birthplace of Seattle monument which also includes a tribute to the Indigenous Duwamish people without whom the first settlers would not have thrived. The main commercial strip in West Seattle, uphill from Alki Beach, California Ave SW provides five-and-dime shops and diners that recall earlier decades.

===Landmarks===

Alki Point Lighthouse is a historic landmark built in 1913 that still functions today. Though the property is not open to the public, the tower is available for touring on summer weekend afternoons when the lens can be viewed. Despite its normal inaccessibility, it provides the tourist with the feeling of an authentic beach town and contributes to the overall picturesque.

A scale replica of the Statue of Liberty at Alki Beach was donated by Reginald H. Parsons and the Seattle Area Council of The Boy Scouts of America in 1952. The statue may allude to &quot;New York-Alki&quot;, the name of the 1851 settlement at Alki (see above). Many tourists mourned the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center at the site.

===Music===

Alki Beach has been a venue for summer concerts every August since the early 20th century. The local music scene draws tourists and locals alike. Live music can also be found at Kenyon Hall which features a Wurlitzer theater organ. The Historic Admiral Theater also presents live performances on occasion.

===Bungalows and historic buildings===

Bungalows are nestled between condominiums along Harbor Avenue. These historic homes, such as the Hanson-Olsen Home, originally built in the 1860s, provide a glimpse into the Arts and Crafts movement which flourished in the cities of the American West in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. Many of these bungalows are today in poor condition, and residents have been increasingly forced to renovate or move them to another destination, or risk demolition.

===Parks===

Hamilton Viewpoint Park, founded in 1954, provides a picturesque view of Elliott Bay. This park is located above Alki Beach on California Avenue SW. There are benches and lawn suitable for picnics and resting. Within the Alki neighborhood is Schmitz Park, the only old-growth forest in Seattle. Other parks in the Alki neighborhood: Me-Kwa-Mooks, Constellation Park and Marine Reserve, Whale Tail Park, Alki Playground, Bar-S Baseball Field. Alki Beach is also a city park.

==See also==
*History of Seattle before 1900

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* Kline, Mary S., and Bayless, G.A., &quot;Ferryboats -- A Legend on Puget Sound&quot;, Bayless Books, Seattle 1983 

==External links==

*City of Seattle Neighborhood Map: Alki
*Cormorant Cove
*Me-Kwa-Mooks Park
*Charles Richey Sr Viewpoint</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3196540" start="0" end="10" title="Alki Point, Seattle" label="Alki Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253982" start="21" end="33" title="List of neighborhoods in Seattle" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="45" end="52" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="74" end="79" title="Point (landform)" label="point"/>
<link wikidata="Q604141" start="93" end="104" title="Puget Sound" label="Puget Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q731067" start="150" end="162" title="West Seattle, Seattle" label="West Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196540" start="173" end="177" title="Alki Point, Seattle" label="Alki"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="185" end="194" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317643" start="554" end="567" title="Duwamish Head" label="Duwamish Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051501" start="655" end="666" title="Elliott Bay" label="Elliott Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567436" start="694" end="704" title="West Point (Seattle)" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q35173" start="795" end="809" title="Chinook Jargon" label="Chinook Jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="926" end="934" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q33658" start="1069" end="1080" title="Lushootseed" label="Lushootseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q491721" start="1323" end="1331" title="Duwamish people" label="Duwamish"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="1432" end="1448" title="Slash-and-burn" label="seasonal burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q15061637" start="1455" end="1466" title="Denny Party" label="Denny Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595543" start="1636" end="1651" title="Arthur A. Denny" label="Arthur A. Denny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051501" start="1727" end="1738" title="Elliott Bay" label="Elliott Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q464506" start="1766" end="1803" title="David Swinson Maynard" label="David Swinson &amp;quot;Doc&amp;quot; Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388921" start="1831" end="1845" title="Pioneer Square, Seattle, Washington" label="Pioneer Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803332" start="2281" end="2294" title="Asahel Curtis" label="Asahel Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q56159174" start="2299" end="2314" title="Theodore Peiser" label="Theodore Peiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641400" start="2321" end="2342" title="Alki Point Lighthouse" label="Alki Point Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241355" start="2374" end="2406" title="United States Lighthouse Service" label="United States Lighthouse Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727698" start="2512" end="2523" title="Alki-Manchester Ferry" label="ferry route"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502741" start="2569" end="2591" title="Manchester, Washington" label="Manchester, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047590" start="2599" end="2615" title="Kitsap Peninsula" label="Kitsap Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q40080" start="2749" end="2754" title="beach" label="beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="2821" end="2830" title="apartment" label="apartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051501" start="3009" end="3020" title="Elliott Bay" label="Elliott Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q604141" start="3042" end="3053" title="Puget Sound" label="Puget Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727699" start="3306" end="3316" title="Alki Beach" label="Alki Beach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3474" end="3492" title="Seattle Music Fest" label="Seattle Music Fest"/>
<link wikidata="Q116846165" start="3637" end="3667" title="Birthplace of Seattle Monument" label="Birthplace of Seattle Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046912" start="3908" end="3923" title="Carson D. Boren" label="Carson D. Boren"/>
<link wikidata="Q570309" start="4352" end="4359" title="bedrock" label="bedrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q751663" start="4415" end="4429" title="Duwamish River" label="Duwamish River"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510340" start="4500" end="4518" title="Blakeley Formation" label="Blakeley Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q747957" start="4557" end="4566" title="sea stack" label="sea stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q498274" start="4640" end="4647" title="tombolo" label="tombolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727699" start="4681" end="4691" title="Alki Beach" label="Alki Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q255079" start="4910" end="4927" title="Olympic Mountains" label="Olympic Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497904" start="5200" end="5212" title="Blake Island" label="Blake Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="5263" end="5280" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641400" start="5293" end="5314" title="Alki Point Lighthouse" label="Alki Point Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q15061637" start="5323" end="5353" title="Denny Monument" label="Birthplace of Seattle monument"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5541" end="5558" title="California Ave SW" label="California Ave SW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627825" start="6008" end="6019" title="picturesque" label="picturesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="6045" end="6062" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308835" start="6092" end="6111" title="Reginald H. Parsons" label="Reginald H. Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096915" start="6120" end="6140" title="Seattle Area Council" label="Seattle Area Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="6144" end="6169" title="The Boy Scouts of America" label="The Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="6354" end="6372" title="World Trade Center (1973-2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6578" end="6589" title="Kenyon Hall" label="Kenyon Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078587" start="6607" end="6616" title="Wurlitzer" label="Wurlitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742272" start="6617" end="6630" title="theater organ" label="theater organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683714" start="6645" end="6660" title="Admiral Theater" label="Admiral Theater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6796" end="6809" title="Harbor Avenue" label="Harbor Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6845" end="6862" title="Hanson-Olsen Home" label="Hanson-Olsen Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645229" start="7231" end="7249" title="Hamilton Viewpoint" label="Hamilton Viewpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051501" start="7304" end="7315" title="Elliott Bay" label="Elliott Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431836" start="7473" end="7485" title="Schmitz Park" label="Schmitz Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="7496" end="7513" title="old-growth forest" label="old-growth forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866440" start="7720" end="7750" title="History of Seattle before 1900" label="History of Seattle before 1900"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416819" wikidata="Q15137879" url="?curid=416819" title="Alki">
<text>Alki (ælkaɪ) is a Chinook word meaning &quot;by and by&quot; and is the unofficial state motto of Washington.

It may also refer to:

*Alki Point, Seattle, a geographic feature
**Alki Point Light, a lighthouse an Alki Point
**Alki Beach Park, a park at Alki Point
*Alki Larnaca FC, a Cypriot football team that played from 1948 to 2014
*Alki Oroklini, a Cypriot football club based in Larnaca
*Alki David (born c. 1967–1968), a Greek businessman
*Alki Zei (born 1925), a Greek novelist
*Alki (boat), a fireboat in Seattle</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q610586" start="18" end="25" title="Chinookan languages" label="Chinook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357912" start="83" end="108" title="List of U.S. state and territory mottos" label="state motto of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196540" start="135" end="154" title="Alki Point, Seattle" label="Alki Point, Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641400" start="179" end="195" title="Alki Point Light" label="Alki Point Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727699" start="226" end="241" title="Alki Beach Park" label="Alki Beach Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q658131" start="265" end="280" title="Alki Larnaca FC" label="Alki Larnaca FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17414600" start="337" end="350" title="Alki Oroklini" label="Alki Oroklini"/>
<link wikidata="Q171882" start="385" end="392" title="Larnaca" label="Larnaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727700" start="394" end="404" title="Alki David" label="Alki David"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620055" start="447" end="455" title="Alki Zei" label="Alki Zei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442099" start="487" end="498" title="Alki (boat)" label="Alki (boat)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416820" wikidata="Q1287930" url="?curid=416820" title="Albert Einstein World Award of Science">
<text>The Albert Einstein World Award for Science is an annual award given by the World Cultural Council &quot;as a means of recognition and encouragement for scientific and technological research and development&quot;, with special consideration for researches which &quot;have brought true benefit and wellbeing to mankind&quot;. Named for physicist and theoretician Albert Einstein, the award includes a diploma, a commemorative medal, and US$10,000.

The recipient of the award is evaluated and elected by an Interdisciplinary Committee, which is composed of world-renowned scientists, among them 25 Nobel laureates.

== Award recipients ==
*2024 - Eske Willerslev
*2023 - Christoph Gerber
== See also ==
* Leonardo da Vinci World Award of Arts
* José Vasconcelos World Award of Education
* Albert Einstein Medal
* Albert Einstein Award
* Prizes named after people
* List of things named after Albert Einstein
* List of physics awards
* List of general science and technology awards

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1287930" start="4" end="43" title="Albert Einstein World Award of Science" label="Albert Einstein World Award for Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q15278864" start="76" end="98" title="World Cultural Council" label="World Cultural Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="336" end="345" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="363" end="378" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="598" end="603" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398061" start="647" end="662" title="Eske Willerslev" label="Eske Willerslev"/>
<link wikidata="Q122773" start="671" end="687" title="Christoph Gerber" label="Christoph Gerber"/>
<link wikidata="Q15281367" start="705" end="742" title="Leonardo da Vinci World Award of Arts" label="Leonardo da Vinci World Award of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088440" start="745" end="786" title="José Vasconcelos World Award of Education" label="José Vasconcelos World Award of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q17712" start="789" end="810" title="Albert Einstein Medal" label="Albert Einstein Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q577432" start="813" end="834" title="Albert Einstein Award" label="Albert Einstein Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272146" start="837" end="862" title="Prizes named after people" label="Prizes named after people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643270" start="865" end="907" title="List of things named after Albert Einstein" label="List of things named after Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q85780228" start="910" end="932" title="List of physics awards" label="List of physics awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779590" start="935" end="980" title="List of general science and technology awards" label="List of general science and technology awards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416823" wikidata="Q1885380" url="?curid=416823" title="Square triangular number">
<text>In mathematics, a square triangular number (or triangular square number) is a number which is both a triangular number and a square number. There are infinitely many square triangular numbers; the first few are:
==Solution as a Pell equation==

Write formula_1 for the formula_2th square triangular number, and write formula_3 and formula_4 for the sides of the corresponding square and triangle, so that 

Define the &quot;triangular root&quot; of a triangular number formula_5 to be formula_6. From this definition and the quadratic formula,

Therefore, formula_7 is triangular (formula_6 is an integer) if and only if formula_9 is square. Consequently, a square number formula_10 is also triangular if and only if formula_11 is square, that is, there are numbers formula_12 and formula_13 such that formula_14. This is an instance of the Pell equation formula_15 with formula_16. All Pell equations have the trivial solution formula_17 for any formula_6; this is called the zeroth solution, and indexed as formula_19. If formula_20 denotes the formula_2th nontrivial solution to any Pell equation for a particular formula_6, it can be shown by the method of descent that the next solution is

Hence there are infinitely many solutions to any Pell equation for which there is one non-trivial one, which is true whenever formula_6 is not a square. The first non-trivial solution when formula_16 is easy to find: it is formula_25. A solution formula_20 to the Pell equation for formula_16 yields a square triangular number and its square and triangular roots as follows:

Hence, the first square triangular number, derived from formula_25, is formula_29, and the next, derived from formula_30, is formula_31.

The sequences formula_1, formula_3 and formula_4 are the OEIS sequences , , and respectively.

==Explicit formula==
In 1778 Leonhard Euler determined the explicit formula

 \right)^2.
&lt;/math&gt;}}

Other equivalent formulas (obtained by expanding this formula) that may be convenient include

The corresponding explicit formulas for formula_3 and formula_4 are:
t_k &amp;= \frac{\left(3 + 2\sqrt{2}\right)^k + \left(3 - 2\sqrt{2}\right)^k - 2}{4}.
\end{align}&lt;/math&gt;}}

==Recurrence relations==
The solution to the Pell equation can be expressed as a recurrence relation for the equation&#x27;s solutions. This can be translated into recurrence equations that directly express the square triangular numbers, as well as the sides of the square and triangle involved. We have

 - \sqrt{N_{k-2}}\right)^2,&amp; \text{with }N_0 &amp;= 0\text{ and }N_1 = 1.
\end{align}&lt;/math&gt;}}

We have

==Other characterizations==

All square triangular numbers have the form formula_37, where formula_38 is a convergent to the continued fraction expansion of formula_39, the square root of 2.

A. V. Sylwester gave a short proof that there are infinitely many square triangular numbers: If the formula_6th triangular number formula_41 is square, then so is the larger formula_42th triangular number, since:

The left hand side of this equation is in the form of a triangular number, and as the product of three squares, the right hand side is square.

The generating function for the square triangular numbers is:
:formula_43

==See also==
*Cannonball problem, on numbers that are simultaneously square and square pyramidal
*Sixth power, numbers that are simultaneously square and cubical

==Notes==
==External links==
* Triangular numbers that are also square at cut-the-knot
* Michael Dummett&#x27;s solution</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885380" start="18" end="42" title="Square triangular number" label="square triangular number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885380" start="47" end="71" title="Square triangular number" label="triangular square number"/>
<link wikidata="Q245102" start="101" end="118" title="triangular number" label="triangular number"/>
<link wikidata="Q50705" start="125" end="138" title="square number" label="square number"/>
<link wikidata="Q205" start="150" end="165" title="Infinity" label="infinitely many"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="606" end="620" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q853067" start="841" end="854" title="Pell equation" label="Pell equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q728415" start="1767" end="1771" title="OEIS" label="OEIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="1834" end="1848" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q740970" start="2270" end="2289" title="recurrence relation" label="recurrence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q206816" start="2716" end="2726" title="Convergent (continued fraction)" label="convergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q206816" start="2734" end="2762" title="simple continued fraction" label="continued fraction expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q389813" start="2782" end="2798" title="square root of 2" label="square root of 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q860609" start="3163" end="3182" title="generating function" label="generating function"/>
<link wikidata="Q32178732" start="3248" end="3266" title="Cannonball problem" label="Cannonball problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q37947496" start="3332" end="3343" title="Sixth power" label="Sixth power"/>
<link wikidata="Q56811887" start="3471" end="3483" title="cut-the-knot" label="cut-the-knot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416824" wikidata="Q2696226" url="?curid=416824" title="The Lee">
<text>The Lee (formally known as just Lee) is a village and civil parish in Buckinghamshire, England. It is located in the Chiltern Hills, about north east of Great Missenden and south east of Wendover. Within the parish is the hamlet of Lee Clump, named for a small group of houses separate from the main village. In 2011 the parish had a population of 698. From 1974 to 2020 it was in Chiltern district.

==Early history==
The village name is Anglo Saxon in origin and means &#x27;woodland clearing&#x27;. In the Domesday Book of 1086 it was recorded as &quot;Lee&quot; and was, following the Norman Conquest, granted by William I to Odo, Bishop of Bayeux. Its early history is closely tied up with that of Weston Turville and a chapel-of-ease was established in this connection. It and also had associations with the Earl of Leicester who, in the early part of the 12th century, charged Ralph de Halton to oversee the lands. At the end of that century the Turville family took over this role. Soon after this Robert, Earl of Leicester granted the land to Missenden Abbey. After the dissolution of the abbey The Lee stayed in the possession of the Crown until 1547 when Edward VI granted a lease on the estate to John Russell, 1st Earl of Bedford.

The events that led to Francis Russell, 2nd Earl of Bedford initially leasing the lands at The Lee to William Plaistowe in 1635 and later selling the land to the Plaistowe family are obscure; either they were mortgaged to pay off debts or were sequestrated as a consequence of the Russells&#x27; involvement on the &quot;wrong&quot; side of the English Civil War. Thomas Plaistowe, who died in 1715, was the first of the family to be the outright owner of The Lee and his namesake in 1785 passed ownership to his daughter Elizabeth, who married Irishman Henry Deering. Deering bequeathed the estate in 1827 to his friend John Peter Gandy, the architect, who changed his name to that of his benefactor.

The Plaistowes once more owned the village for another 50 years.

==Twentieth century==
In 1900, Arthur Lasenby Liberty bought the manor from John Plaistowe and built a new manor house on the outskirts of the village. The old manor house became three attached properties which remain so today. Outside the new manor house he sited a figurehead depicting Admiral Richard Howe taken from HMS &quot;Howe&quot;. The figurehead was moved to outside Pipers where the family moved to in 1953. 

The ship, which had subsequently been renamed &quot;Impregnable&quot;, was scrapped by the Royal Navy in 1919, and purchased by Liberty in 1926. He used the timbers of this ship to refurbish, in Tudor revivalist style, the interior and frontage of his famed Liberty&#x27;s department store in central London. The Liberty family still live at The Lee.

==Churches==
The parish church in the village St John the Baptist is unusual in that it consists of two buildings: the ancient chapel of ease built in the 12th century which includes a window depicting Oliver Cromwell and John Hampden as &#x27;champions of liberty&#x27;, and the more modern Victorian construction that was built of red brick in 1867. Both sit within an oval churchyard, common in places of importance in the pre-Roman period.

There is a Methodist chapel at Lee Common, which was built in 1839 as a Primitive Methodist chapel. It is one of the oldest Methodist chapels in Bucks. There is a small churchyard attached to it. The Methodist church is part of the Amersham Methodist Circuit.

Formerly there was also a Strict Baptist chapel at Lee Clump, and Mission Halls at Swan Bottom and Potter Row.

==Hamlets==
Hamlets in the parish of The Lee include Lee Clump, Lee Common, Lee Gate, Hunt&#x27;s Green, Potter Row and Swan Bottom.

==Locations==
The village has been used as the backdrop for a number of television programmes including several episodes of &quot;Midsomer Murders&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
* The village&#x27;s website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2696226" start="0" end="7" title="The Lee" label="The Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696226" start="32" end="35" title="The Lee" label="Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="54" end="66" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="70" end="85" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19849" start="117" end="131" title="Chiltern Hills" label="Chiltern Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817504" start="153" end="168" title="Great Missenden" label="Great Missenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569184" start="187" end="195" title="Wendover" label="Wendover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696226" start="232" end="241" title="The Lee" label="Lee Clump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073057" start="381" end="389" title="Chiltern District" label="Chiltern"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="439" end="450" title="Old English language" label="Anglo Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="509" end="522" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="589" end="604" title="Norman Conquest" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="617" end="626" title="William I of England" label="William I"/>
<link wikidata="Q49961" start="630" end="651" title="Odo of Bayeux" label="Odo, Bishop of Bayeux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079423" start="703" end="718" title="Weston Turville" label="Weston Turville"/>
<link wikidata="Q30671684" start="725" end="739" title="chapel-of-ease" label="chapel-of-ease"/>
<link wikidata="Q639709" start="814" end="831" title="Earl of Leicester" label="Earl of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q639709" start="1006" end="1031" title="Earl of Leicester" label="Robert, Earl of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878233" start="1052" end="1067" title="Missenden Abbey" label="Missenden Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="1166" end="1175" title="Edward VI" label="Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q745977" start="1209" end="1242" title="John Russell, 1st Earl of Bedford" label="John Russell, 1st Earl of Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084556" start="1268" end="1304" title="Francis Russell, 2nd Earl of Bedford" label="Francis Russell, 2nd Earl of Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="1590" end="1607" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252635" start="1866" end="1882" title="John Peter Gandy" label="John Peter Gandy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1903" end="1919" title="Name_change#Historical_usage" label="changed his name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069251" start="2045" end="2067" title="Arthur Lasenby Liberty" label="Arthur Lasenby Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="2121" end="2132" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q875016" start="2199" end="2218" title="terraced house" label="attached properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q729329" start="2281" end="2291" title="Figurehead (object)" label="figurehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q332616" start="2302" end="2322" title="Richard Howe, 1st Earl Howe" label="Admiral Richard Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632827" start="2334" end="2354" title="HMS Howe (1860)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Howe&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="2527" end="2537" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851317" start="2631" end="2653" title="Tudor Revival architecture" label="Tudor revivalist style"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237793" start="2694" end="2725" title="Liberty (department store)" label="Liberty&amp;#x27;s department store"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="2834" end="2853" title="John the Baptist" label="St John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="2990" end="3005" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q329843" start="3010" end="3022" title="John Hampden" label="John Hampden"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="3080" end="3089" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="3218" end="3223" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="3618" end="3625" title="Hamlet (place)" label="Hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q751917" start="3870" end="3886" title="Midsomer Murders" label="Midsomer Murders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416830" wikidata="Q2007769" url="?curid=416830" title="ONERA">
<text>The Office National d&#x27;Études et de Recherches Aérospatiales (English: National office for aerospace studies and research) or ONERA, dubbed &quot;The French Aerospace Lab&quot; in English, is the French national aerospace research center. Originally founded as the &quot;Office National d’Études et de Recherches Aéronautiques&quot; (National Office for Aeronautical Studies and Research) in 1946, it was relabeled in 1963. 

It is France&#x27;s leading research center in aerospace and defense. It covers all disciplines and technologies in the field. Numerous high-profile French and European aerospace programs have passed through the ONERA since its creation including the Ariane family of launch vehicles, the Concorde supersonic airliner, the Dassault Mirage family of fighter aircraft and the Rafale, the Dassault Falcon family of business jets, Aérospatiale and later Airbus projects, missiles, engines, radars and many more.

Under the supervision of the Ministry of the Armed Forces, it is a public industrial and commercial establishment employing around 2,000 people, the majority of whom are researchers, engineers and technicians, with half of its budget coming from government subsidies. The ONERA has extensive testing and computing resources, including the largest wind tunnel fleet in Europe. The ONERA&#x27;s chairman is appointed by the Council of Ministers on the recommendation of the Minister of the Armed Forces.

== History ==
ONERA&#x27;s historic roots are in the Paris suburb of Meudon, south of Paris. As early as 1877, the Chalais-Meudon site hosted an aeronautical research center for military aerostats (balloons): Etablissement central de l’aérostation militaire.

ONERA was created in May 1946 to relaunch aeronautics research, an activity that had gone into hibernation during the Second World War and the German occupation. Its creation reflected the government&#x27;s decision to recover the large wind tunnel in Ötztal, Austria, in the French administrative zone, and move it to France. Today, ONERA&#x27;s extensive array of wind tunnels is one of its main assets. ONERA operates a world-class fleet of wind tunnels, the largest in Europe. The S1MA wind tunnel at Modane-Avrieux, developing 88 MW of total power, is Europe&#x27;s largest transonic wind tunnel (tests at Mach 0.05 to Mach 1).

== Organization ==
The Chairman and CEO of ONERA is appointed by the French Council of Ministers, acting on a proposal by the Minister of Defense. Since June 2014, the Chairman and CEO is Bruno Sainjon.

=== Sites of ONERA facilities ===
ONERA is organized in eight geographic areas. It has about 2,000 employees, with 1,500 engineers and scientists (including 230 doctoral candidates), as well as support staff.

Three centers in the greater Paris area (Ile-de-France):
* ONERA Palaiseau, current headquarters
* ONERA Châtillon 
* ONERA Meudon
Two centers in the Midi-Pyrenees region of southwest France: 
* ONERA Toulouse, near the leading aeronautical engineering schools &quot;ISAE-Sup’Aéro&quot; and ENAC
* ONERA Fauga–Mauzac (wind tunnels), south of Toulouse.
Three other centers:
* ONERA Lille, northern France (formerly the Lille Fluid Mechanics Institute)
* ONERA Salon de Provence, southern France, on the site of the &quot;Ecole de l’air&quot; flying school
* ONERA Modane-Avrieux (wind tunnels), in the Savoy region of southeast France.

=== Scientific departments ===
ONERA is organized in four scientific branches: Fluid Mechanics and Energetics; Materials and Structures; Physics; and Information Processing and Systems. Wind tunnel testing is managed in the GMT (Grands Moyens Techniques) department. Aerospace prospective depends on a specific department.

The &quot;Direction Technique et des Programmes&quot; (&quot;DTP&quot;) comprises the following departments:
* &quot;DAAA - Aérodynamique, aéroélasticité, acoustique.&quot;
* &quot;DEMR - Électromagnétisme et radar.&quot;
* &quot;DMAS - Matériaux et structures.&quot;
* &quot;DMPE - Multi-physique pour l&#x27;énergétique.&quot;
* &quot;DOTA - Optique et techniques associées.&quot;
* &quot;DPHY - Physique, instrumentation, environnement, espace.&quot;
* &quot;DTIS - Traitement de l&#x27;information et systèmes.&quot;

== Missions ==
Unlike NASA in the United States, ONERA is not an agency for space science and exploration. However, it carries out a wide range of research for space agencies, both CNES in France and the European Space Agency (ESA), as well as for the French defense agency, DGA (Direction générale de l’armement). ONERA also independently conducts its own long-term research to anticipate future technology needs. It focuses on scientific research, for example in aerodynamics for concrete applications on aircraft, the design of launchers and new defense technologies, such as drones or unmanned aerial systems (UAS).

ONERA also uses its research and innovation capabilities to support both French and European industry. ONERA has contributed to a number of landmark aerospace and defense programs in recent decades, including Airbus, Ariane, Rafale, Falcon, Mirage and Concorde.

===Rockets===

Various rockets have been developed through ONERA, some of which are listed below:
* Daniel
* Antarès
* Bérénice
* Tibère
* Tacite
* Titus
* LEX

== Commercial partnerships ==
ONERA&#x27;s customer-partners include Airbus, Safran (Snecma, Turbomeca, Sagem), Dassault Aviation, Thales and other major industry players. Innovative small businesses are also encouraged to call on the expertise of ONERA&#x27;s scientists and engineers, and to take advantage of technology transfer opportunities. The company Tefal was created by two ONERA engineers, the inventors of the “non-stick pan”. These products were produced and sold by Tefal S.A., which was subsequently acquired by Groupe SEB.

== Notes and references ==
== See also ==
* French space program
* CNES
* Aerospace Valley

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2007769" start="4" end="64" title="ONERA" label="Office National d&amp;#x27;Études et de Recherches Aérospatiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="66" end="73" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007769" start="130" end="135" title="ONERA" label="ONERA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876213" start="216" end="225" title="aerospace" label="aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="491" end="498" title="defense industry" label="defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q131535" start="681" end="687" title="Ariane (rocket family)" label="Ariane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505" start="719" end="727" title="Concorde" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q672323" start="753" end="768" title="Dassault Mirage" label="Dassault Mirage"/>
<link wikidata="Q190973" start="804" end="810" title="Dassault Rafale" label="Rafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142879" start="816" end="831" title="Dassault Falcon" label="Dassault Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q650639" start="857" end="869" title="Aérospatiale" label="Aérospatiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="880" end="886" title="Airbus" label="Airbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q75706" start="968" end="996" title="Ministry of the Armed Forces (France)" label="Ministry of the Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="1286" end="1297" title="wind tunnel" label="wind tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q234735" start="1511" end="1517" title="Meudon" label="Meudon"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751370" start="1557" end="1571" title="Chalais-Meudon" label="Chalais-Meudon"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1820" end="1836" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="1939" end="1950" title="wind tunnel" label="wind tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q307456" start="1954" end="1960" title="Ötztal" label="Ötztal"/>
<link wikidata="Q160669" start="2313" end="2317" title="Mach number" label="Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="2372" end="2375" title="CEO" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450662" start="2405" end="2432" title="French Council of Ministers" label="French Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215099" start="2462" end="2481" title="Minister of Defence (France)" label="Minister of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2524" end="2537" title="Bruno Sainjon" label="Bruno Sainjon"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="2675" end="2685" title="scientists" label="scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q205580" start="2815" end="2824" title="Palaiseau" label="Palaiseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q212947" start="2855" end="2864" title="Châtillon, Hauts-de-Seine" label="Châtillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751370" start="2874" end="2880" title="Chalais-Meudon" label="Meudon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="2951" end="2959" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419129" start="3054" end="3059" title="Le Fauga" label="Fauga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3060" end="3066" title="Mauzac, Haute Garonne" label="Mauzac"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="3068" end="3080" title="wind tunnels" label="wind tunnels"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="3131" end="3136" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q232567" start="3209" end="3226" title="Salon de Provence" label="Salon de Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q537113" start="3313" end="3327" title="Modane" label="Modane-Avrieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="3329" end="3341" title="wind tunnels" label="wind tunnels"/>
<link wikidata="Q172145" start="3465" end="3480" title="Fluid Mechanics" label="Fluid Mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3523" end="3530" title="Physics" label="Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="4254" end="4258" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="4379" end="4387" title="research" label="research"/>
<link wikidata="Q22991" start="4392" end="4406" title="space agencies" label="space agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q48756" start="4413" end="4417" title="CNES" label="CNES"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="4436" end="4457" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029559" start="4507" end="4510" title="Direction générale de l&amp;#x27;armement" label="DGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q56291515" start="4622" end="4639" title="future technology" label="future technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="4661" end="4680" title="scientific research" label="scientific research"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="4697" end="4709" title="aerodynamics" label="aerodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="4739" end="4747" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="4821" end="4850" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aerial systems (UAS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q174165" start="4886" end="4896" title="innovation" label="innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="5062" end="5068" title="Airbus" label="Airbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131535" start="5070" end="5076" title="Ariane (rocket family)" label="Ariane"/>
<link wikidata="Q190973" start="5078" end="5084" title="Rafale" label="Rafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142879" start="5086" end="5092" title="Dassault Falcon" label="Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q672323" start="5094" end="5100" title="Dassault Mirage" label="Mirage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505" start="5105" end="5113" title="Concorde" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q380124" start="5216" end="5222" title="Daniel (rocket)" label="Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17391" start="5225" end="5232" title="Antarès (OPd-56-39-22D)" label="Antarès"/>
<link wikidata="Q23789" start="5235" end="5243" title="Bérénice (rocket)" label="Bérénice"/>
<link wikidata="Q380094" start="5246" end="5252" title="Tibère" label="Tibère"/>
<link wikidata="Q10377762" start="5255" end="5261" title="Tacite (rocket)" label="Tacite"/>
<link wikidata="Q366637" start="5264" end="5269" title="Titus (rocket)" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q97278931" start="5272" end="5275" title="LEX (sounding rocket)" label="LEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="5346" end="5352" title="Airbus" label="Airbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886126" start="5354" end="5360" title="Safran" label="Safran"/>
<link wikidata="Q773875" start="5362" end="5368" title="Snecma" label="Snecma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849871" start="5370" end="5379" title="Turbomeca" label="Turbomeca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347160" start="5381" end="5386" title="Sagem" label="Sagem"/>
<link wikidata="Q460487" start="5389" end="5406" title="Dassault Aviation" label="Dassault Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161666" start="5408" end="5414" title="Thales Group" label="Thales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061910" start="5589" end="5608" title="technology transfer" label="technology transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q764155" start="5636" end="5641" title="Tefal" label="Tefal"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="5667" end="5676" title="engineers" label="engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049048" start="5700" end="5709" title="Non-stick surface" label="non-stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168517" start="5804" end="5814" title="Groupe SEB" label="Groupe SEB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407053" start="5861" end="5881" title="French space program" label="French space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q48756" start="5884" end="5888" title="CNES" label="CNES"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500572" start="5891" end="5907" title="Aerospace Valley" label="Aerospace Valley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416831" wikidata="Q17147271" url="?curid=416831" title="Testing hypotheses suggested by the data">
<text>In statistics, hypotheses suggested by a given dataset, when tested with the same dataset that suggested them, are likely to be accepted even when they are not true. This is because circular reasoning (double dipping) would be involved: something seems true in the limited data set; therefore we hypothesize that it is true in general; therefore we wrongly test it on the same, limited data set, which seems to confirm that it is true. Generating hypotheses based on data already observed, in the absence of testing them on new data, is referred to as &quot;post hoc&quot; theorizing (from Latin &quot;post hoc&quot;, &quot;after this&quot;).

The correct procedure is to test any hypothesis on a data set that was not used to generate the hypothesis.

==The general problem==

Testing a hypothesis suggested by the data can very easily result in false positives (type I errors). If one looks long enough and in enough different places, eventually data can be found to support any hypothesis. Yet, these positive data do not by themselves constitute evidence that the hypothesis is correct. The negative test data that were thrown out are just as important, because they give one an idea of how common the positive results are compared to chance. Running an experiment, seeing a pattern in the data, proposing a hypothesis from that pattern, then using the &quot;same&quot; experimental data as evidence for the new hypothesis is extremely suspect, because data from all other experiments, completed or potential, has essentially been &quot;thrown out&quot; by choosing to look only at the experiments that suggested the new hypothesis in the first place.

A large set of tests as described above greatly inflates the probability of type I error as all but the data most favorable to the hypothesis is discarded. This is a risk, not only in hypothesis testing but in all statistical inference as it is often problematic to accurately describe the process that has been followed in searching and discarding data. In other words, one wants to keep all data (regardless of whether they tend to support or refute the hypothesis) from &quot;good tests&quot;, but it is sometimes difficult to figure out what a &quot;good test&quot; is. It is a particular problem in statistical modelling, where many different models are rejected by trial and error before publishing a result (see also overfitting, publication bias).

The error is particularly prevalent in data mining and machine learning. It also commonly occurs in academic publishing where only reports of positive, rather than negative, results tend to be accepted, resulting in the effect known as publication bias.

==Correct procedures==

All strategies for sound testing of hypotheses suggested by the data involve including a wider range of tests in an attempt to validate or refute the new hypothesis. These include:
*Collecting confirmation samples
*Cross-validation
*Methods of compensation for multiple comparisons
*Simulation studies including adequate representation of the multiple-testing actually involved

Henry Scheffé&#x27;s simultaneous test of all contrasts in multiple comparison problems is the most well-known remedy in the case of analysis of variance. It is a method designed for testing hypotheses suggested by the data while avoiding the fallacy described above.

==See also==
*Bonferroni correction
*Data analysis
*Data dredging, &quot;p&quot;-hacking
*Exploratory data analysis
*HARKing
*Post hoc analysis
*Predictive analytics
*Texas sharpshooter fallacy
*Type I and type II errors
*Uncomfortable science

== Notes and references ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="3" end="13" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147271" start="15" end="54" title="Testing hypotheses suggested by the data" label="hypotheses suggested by a given dataset"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011160" start="182" end="200" title="circular reasoning" label="circular reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147271" start="552" end="583" title="Testing hypotheses suggested by the data" label="&amp;quot;post hoc&amp;quot; theorizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="590" end="595" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105849" start="602" end="610" title="post hoc analysis" label="post hoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q989120" start="864" end="876" title="type I error" label="type I error"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320364" start="1050" end="1058" title="scientific evidence" label="evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="1718" end="1729" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q989120" start="1733" end="1745" title="type I error" label="type I error"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="1788" end="1798" title="hypothesis" label="hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q210832" start="1841" end="1859" title="statistical hypothesis testing" label="hypothesis testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q938438" start="1871" end="1892" title="statistical inference" label="statistical inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="2006" end="2010" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284399" start="2261" end="2278" title="statistical model" label="statistical model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219080" start="2328" end="2343" title="trial and error" label="trial and error"/>
<link wikidata="Q331309" start="2381" end="2392" title="overfitting" label="overfitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q919364" start="2394" end="2410" title="publication bias" label="publication bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q172491" start="2453" end="2464" title="data mining" label="data mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="2469" end="2485" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246046" start="2514" end="2533" title="academic publishing" label="academic publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q919364" start="2650" end="2666" title="publication bias" label="publication bias"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2886" end="2905" title="confirmation sample" label="confirmation sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q541014" start="2908" end="2924" title="Cross-validation (statistics)" label="Cross-validation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038757" start="2954" end="2974" title="multiple comparisons" label="multiple comparisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431079" start="3072" end="3110" title="Scheffé test" label="Henry Scheffé&amp;#x27;s simultaneous test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038757" start="3131" end="3150" title="multiple comparisons" label="multiple comparison"/>
<link wikidata="Q42297" start="3205" end="3225" title="analysis of variance" label="analysis of variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q385989" start="3355" end="3376" title="Bonferroni correction" label="Bonferroni correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988917" start="3378" end="3391" title="Data analysis" label="Data analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227277" start="3393" end="3406" title="Data dredging" label="Data dredging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322871" start="3431" end="3456" title="Exploratory data analysis" label="Exploratory data analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521930" start="3458" end="3465" title="HARKing" label="HARKing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105849" start="3467" end="3484" title="Post hoc analysis" label="Post hoc analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053367" start="3486" end="3506" title="Predictive analytics" label="Predictive analytics"/>
<link wikidata="Q199024" start="3508" end="3534" title="Texas sharpshooter fallacy" label="Texas sharpshooter fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q989120" start="3536" end="3561" title="Type I and type II errors" label="Type I and type II errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882866" start="3563" end="3584" title="Uncomfortable science" label="Uncomfortable science"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416838" wikidata="Q261001" url="?curid=416838" title="Shaun Woodward">
<text>Shaun Anthony Woodward (born 26 October 1958) is a British politician who served as Secretary of State for Northern Ireland from 2007 to 2010.

A former television researcher and producer, Woodward began his political career in the Conservative Party. He was elected in 1997 as Conservative MP for Witney, but joined Labour in 1999. He then served as Labour MP for St Helens South from 2001 to 2015.

After serving in junior ministerial offices in the Northern Ireland Office and Department for Culture, Media and Sport, Woodward served in the cabinet from 28 June 2007 to 11 May 2010 as Secretary of State for Northern Ireland. Following the 2010 general election, Woodward was the Shadow Secretary of State for Northern Ireland until 7 October 2011, when he was replaced by Vernon Coaker.

==Early life and education==
Woodward was educated at Bristol Grammar School, at the time a direct grant grammar school, and now an independent day school, followed by Jesus College, Cambridge, where he studied English literature. He also studied at Harvard University as a Kennedy Scholar. From 1981 to 1982, he was parliamentary lobbyist for the National Consumer Council. From 1982 to 1990, he worked as a researcher and producer for BBC TV News and Current Affairs on the programmes &quot;That&#x27;s Life!&quot;, &quot;Panorama&quot; and &quot;Newsnight&quot;. He subsequently wrote a book about Ben Hardwick, Britain&#x27;s youngest liver transplant patient who had been a subject of &quot;That&#x27;s Life!&quot;. From 1991 to 1992, he was director of communications for the Conservative Party.

==Member of Parliament==
Woodward was selected as Douglas Hurd&#x27;s successor as Conservative candidate for the safe seat of Witney at the 1997 election, having previously been a senior official of the party. Hurd&#x27;s majority from the previous election was over 22,000. Elected with a 7,000 majority, he was a front-bench spokesman on London for the Conservative opposition under William Hague until 1999, when he was sacked for supporting the repeal of Section 28, a regulation which aimed at preventing the promotion of homosexuality in schools.

===Defection to the Labour Party===
After being sacked from the Tory front bench, on 20 December 1999, Woodward left the Conservative Party to move to the ruling Labour Party, without resigning as an MP. This meant that no by-election took place. He was given a job co-ordinating the Labour party&#x27;s 2001 general election campaign. Woodward&#x27;s local Conservative constituency association requested that he resign and run again in a by-election, under the Labour banner, as he had originally won the safe Conservative seat by campaigning as a Conservative. Woodward refused to hold a by-election, and continued to represent Witney for a further eighteen months.

Woodward was criticised by his former colleagues in the Conservative Party, including leader William Hague, Conservative former Deputy Prime Minister Michael Heseltine and party chairman Michael Ancram. Other critics included backbench Labour MPs Tony Benn and Jeremy Corbyn, and ten years later, former Labour government minister Chris Mullin, in his political diaries. 

Michael Heseltine said Woodward would &quot;soon become a dot on the horizon&quot;, whilst Conservative leader William Hague wrote a public letter to Woodward on his resignation, in which he stated: &quot;You have left a party whose members have given you their loyal support. You have done so for reasons not of integrity or of principle, but for your own careerist reasons. That is an attitude of which I am determined to rid our party...&quot; Conservative chairman Michael Ancram said: &quot;Shaun has decided for his own reasons to leave the party and no amount of sincerity or fake sincerity is going to hide that fact...&quot;

Woodward&#x27;s defection was welcomed by senior Labour figures.

In the June 2001 general election, Woodward decided not to contest his Witney seat as a Labour candidate and instead found a safe Labour seat in St Helens South. Chris Mullin wrote with shock of &quot;the awful Shaun Woodward&quot; defecting to Mullin&#x27;s own side, calling &quot;the New Labour elite parachuting [Woodward] into a safe seat ... one of New Labour&#x27;s vilest stitch-ups ... made my flesh creep&quot;. His successor in Witney was David Cameron, who subsequently became Prime Minister in 2010.

When news of Woodward&#x27;s intention to stand reached St. Helens, a strong left-wing challenge was put forward in an attempt to deny the former Conservative the safe Labour seat. Neil Thompson of the Socialist Alliance and Michael Perry of the Socialist Labour Party both contested the St Helens South seat and received a total of 12% of the vote between them. Woodward won the seat with a much reduced 49% of the vote.

As a Labour MP, Woodward served on the Joint Committee on Human Rights, and was a prominent supporter of the Gender Recognition Act 2004.

In May 2005, Woodward was re-elected in St Helens South receiving 54% of the vote and his majority increased. However, the Liberal Democrats&#x27; candidate, Brian Spencer, saw his party&#x27;s share of the vote increase from 23% in 2001 to 28%. Michael Perry of the Socialist Labour Party contested the seat again and received just under 2% of the vote.

===In government===
Following the 2005 election, Woodward was appointed Parliamentary under-secretary of state at the Northern Ireland Office.

In the May 2006 reshuffle, Tony Blair named Woodward Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State at the Department for Culture, Media and Sport with responsibilities for the digital switchover for TV. On 28 June 2007, in his first cabinet, newly appointed Prime Minister Gordon Brown appointed Woodward as the Northern Ireland Secretary, replacing Peter Hain. Woodward chose not to receive a ministerial salary because of his personal wealth. As Northern Ireland Secretary, Woodward reportedly became a close confidant of the Prime Minister, Gordon Brown. This was largely due to Woodward&#x27;s previous first hand experiences of the beleaguered Conservative government of John Major.

===In Opposition===
Woodward stood for election to Labour&#x27;s shadow cabinet, but was unsuccessful. Nevertheless, he was retained as Shadow Secretary of State for Northern Ireland by Labour leader Ed Miliband for just under a year.

In November 2013 he announced that he would stand down from Parliament at the next general election,
to work on human rights issues. He was praised for his role by then Labour leader, Ed Miliband, who wrote to him: &quot;In 1999, you made an incredibly hard decision to cross the floor of the House and join the Labour party. It took personal courage and political commitment, and our party will forever be grateful to you.&quot;

==Personal life==
He married Camilla Davan Sainsbury, daughter of former Conservative MP Tim Sainsbury of the wealthy supermarket Sainsbury family, on 2 May 1987; they announced their separation after 28 years on 20 December 2015. They have one son and three daughters, including the food blogger Ella Woodward.

His current partner is Hollywood camera operator Luke Redgrave.
In March 2001, he was said to be the only Labour MP with a butler. 

Woodward is chair of the board of trustees at the Human Dignity Trust and the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art (LAMDA). He is a member of the board of directors at the Hamptons International Film Festival.

==Works==
*&quot;Death by Television&quot; by Esther Rantzen, Shaun Woodward (Century, 1999) 
*&quot;Drugwatch: Just Say No!&quot; by Sarah Caplin, Shaun Woodward (Corgi, 1986) 
*&quot;Ben: Story of Ben Hardwick&quot; by Esther Rantzen, Shaun Woodward (Penguin Character Books, 1985) 
*&quot;&quot;That&#x27;s Life&quot; Survey on Tranquillisers&quot; by Ron Lacey, Shaun Woodward (BBC, 1985) 

==References==
==External links==
*Shaun Woodward MP &quot;official constituency website&quot;
*Joint Committee on Human Rights


|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q261001" start="0" end="22" title="Shaun Woodward" label="Shaun Anthony Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369302" start="84" end="123" title="Secretary of State for Northern Ireland" label="Secretary of State for Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="232" end="250" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="270" end="274" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q874194" start="298" end="304" title="Witney (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Witney"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="351" end="357" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119969" start="365" end="380" title="St Helens South (UK Parliament constituency)" label="St Helens South"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="386" end="390" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="394" end="398" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q218886" start="452" end="475" title="Northern Ireland Office" label="Northern Ireland Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q910019" start="480" end="519" title="Department for Culture, Media and Sport" label="Department for Culture, Media and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q112014" start="544" end="551" title="Cabinet of the United Kingdom" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369302" start="588" end="627" title="Secretary of State for Northern Ireland" label="Secretary of State for Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460599" start="683" end="729" title="Shadow Secretary of State for Northern Ireland" label="Shadow Secretary of State for Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q285975" start="776" end="789" title="Vernon Coaker" label="Vernon Coaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968912" start="846" end="868" title="Bristol Grammar School" label="Bristol Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280337" start="884" end="911" title="direct grant grammar school" label="direct grant grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="924" end="935" title="Private school" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146700" start="960" end="984" title="Jesus College, Cambridge" label="Jesus College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1042" end="1060" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389684" start="1066" end="1081" title="Kennedy Scholar" label="Kennedy Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164663" start="1140" end="1165" title="National Consumer Council" label="National Consumer Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1229" end="1232" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q512130" start="1285" end="1302" title="That&amp;#x27;s Life!" label="That&amp;#x27;s Life!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247810" start="1316" end="1324" title="Panorama (British TV programme)" label="Panorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q25869" start="1341" end="1350" title="Newsnight" label="Newsnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885789" start="1393" end="1405" title="Ben Hardwick" label="Ben Hardwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368191" start="1431" end="1447" title="liver transplant" label="liver transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q337375" start="1645" end="1657" title="Douglas Hurd" label="Douglas Hurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="1678" end="1690" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q874194" start="1722" end="1728" title="Witney (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Witney"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="1736" end="1749" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q58282" start="1981" end="1994" title="William Hague" label="William Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098925" start="2055" end="2065" title="Section 28" label="Section 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328925" start="2110" end="2136" title="promotion of homosexuality" label="promotion of homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="2312" end="2324" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="2590" end="2601" title="by-election" label="by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q58282" start="2913" end="2926" title="William Hague" label="William Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q332314" start="2970" end="2987" title="Michael Heseltine" label="Michael Heseltine"/>
<link wikidata="Q332962" start="3007" end="3021" title="Michael Ancram" label="Michael Ancram"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="3067" end="3076" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="3081" end="3094" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107532" start="3151" end="3163" title="Chris Mullin (politician)" label="Chris Mullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q332314" start="3193" end="3210" title="Michael Heseltine" label="Michael Heseltine"/>
<link wikidata="Q58282" start="3304" end="3317" title="William Hague" label="William Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q332962" start="3662" end="3676" title="Michael Ancram" label="Michael Ancram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119969" start="4039" end="4054" title="St Helens South (UK Parliament constituency)" label="St Helens South"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396591" start="4181" end="4191" title="New Labour" label="New Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="4344" end="4357" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="4401" end="4405" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491460" start="4654" end="4676" title="Socialist Labour Party (UK)" label="Socialist Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269142" start="4870" end="4901" title="Joint Committee on Human Rights" label="Joint Committee on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530946" start="4940" end="4967" title="Gender Recognition Act 2004" label="Gender Recognition Act 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="5093" end="5110" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492070" start="5398" end="5436" title="Parliamentary under-secretary of state" label="Parliamentary under-secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q218886" start="5444" end="5467" title="Northern Ireland Office" label="Northern Ireland Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="5497" end="5507" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q910019" start="5569" end="5608" title="Department for Culture, Media and Sport" label="Department for Culture, Media and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="5736" end="5748" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q333165" start="5813" end="5823" title="Peter Hain" label="Peter Hain"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="6007" end="6019" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="6139" end="6149" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q303329" start="6217" end="6231" title="shadow cabinet" label="shadow cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q216594" start="6352" end="6363" title="Ed Miliband" label="Ed Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="6466" end="6487" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="next general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q216594" start="6572" end="6583" title="Ed Miliband" label="Ed Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804223" start="6908" end="6921" title="Tim Sainsbury" label="Tim Sainsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400533" start="6949" end="6965" title="Sainsbury family" label="Sainsbury family"/>
<link wikidata="Q23770514" start="7116" end="7129" title="Ella Woodward" label="Ella Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q833899" start="7255" end="7261" title="butler" label="butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q110913637" start="7315" end="7334" title="Human Dignity Trust" label="Human Dignity Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q385471" start="7343" end="7383" title="London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art" label="London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070755" start="7441" end="7477" title="Hamptons International Film Festival" label="Hamptons International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513293" start="7526" end="7540" title="Esther Rantzen" label="Esther Rantzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422165" start="7614" end="7626" title="Sarah Caplin" label="Sarah Caplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513293" start="7701" end="7715" title="Esther Rantzen" label="Esther Rantzen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7835" end="7844" title="Ron Lacey" label="Ron Lacey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416842" wikidata="Q2078620" url="?curid=416842" title="Peter Temple-Morris">
<text>Peter Temple-Morris, Baron Temple-Morris (12 February 1938 – 1 May 2018) was a British politician. He was elected as the Conservative Member of Parliament (MP) for Leominster in 1974; he stood down in 2001 after changing parties. He sat in the House of Lords as a Labour peer. 

==Early life==
Born in Cardiff, Temple-Morris attended Llandaff Cathedral School and Hillstone School (Malvern College&#x27;s preparatory school) in Malvern, then Malvern College. He went to St Catharine&#x27;s College, Cambridge, gaining a BA in Law in 1958. He became a barrister, like his father, from 1962 at the Inner Temple, practising until 1989. His family home was in Cardiff, as his father Sir Owen Temple-Morris was MP for Cardiff East.

==Parliamentary career==
Temple-Morris was selected as the Conservative candidate for Newport (Monmouthshire) in 1964 and 1966 and Norwood in 1970. In February 1974, he was elected for Leominster, having been selected for the seat in March 1973. That same year, he was appointed vice-chairman, Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (UK Branch). In 1979, he was appointed Parliamentary Private Secretary to the Minister of Transport, Norman Fowler, Executive Member, Inter-Parliamentary Union (British Group) and Founding Co-Chairman, British-Irish Inter-Parliamentary Body. He was a member of the Select Committees on Agriculture (1982–83) and on Foreign Affairs (1987–90). Temple-Morris was a strong supporter of Michael Heseltine.

===Crossing the floor===
Temple-Morris resigned after he was suspended from the Conservative Party in 1997 because Tory officials said he had &quot;repeatedly and publicly questioned his continued commitment to the Conservative Party.&quot; Speaking after his resignation, the MP told BBC Radio 5 Live: &quot;I&#x27;m not surprised in all the circumstances and not a little bit relieved in view of the unhappy state of politics of the Conservative Party for some years now.&quot;

The BBC reported that Conservative leader William Hague&#x27;s action would be seen as an attempt to deflect attention from disappointing election results in Winchester and Beckenham. As for Temple-Morris, his disaffection toward his old party grew due to their hard-line stance on the euro.

From 1997 to 1998, Temple-Morris sat on the government Labour benches, but did not take the whip, instead sitting as a one-man &#x27;Independent One-Nation Conservative&#x27; group. However, on Saturday 20 June 1998 he joined the Labour Party but stood down as an MP at the 2001 general election. He is the only person ever to serve as a Labour MP representing Herefordshire, though he was never elected as a member of that party.

===House of Lords===
Temple-Morris was made a life peer on 22 June 2001 as Baron Temple-Morris, of Llandaff in the County of South Glamorgan and of Leominster in the County of Herefordshire. He sat in the House of Lords as a Labour peer.

Outside politics, Temple-Morris was appointed Chairman of the Macleod Group, an association of left-of-centre Conservative MPs, in 1979. In 1995, he became President of the British-Iranian Business Association Society.

Temple-Morris contributed to the book &quot;What next for Labour? Ideas for a new generation&quot; in September 2011, his piece being entitled &quot;Labour: Progressive Politics&quot;.

==Personal life==
Temple-Morris&#x27;s father, Owen Temple-Morris, was also a Conservative MP. His son, Eddy Temple-Morris, is a DJ, Virgin Radio presenter, record producer and former MTV presenter.

Temple-Morris married Taheré Khozeimé-Alam (the daughter of Amir-Hossein Khozeimé Alam of Dezashib who fled to London from Iran in 1979) in 1964 in London. The couple had two sons and two daughters.

When he was an MP, Temple-Morris was known for his love of shooting, wine and food.

Temple-Morris died from cancer in London on 1 May 2018, at the age of 80.

==References==
==External links==
* Lord Temple-Morris - UK Parliament
* They Work For You</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2078620" start="0" end="40" title="Peter Temple-Morris" label="Peter Temple-Morris, Baron Temple-Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="121" end="133" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119965" start="164" end="174" title="Leominster (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Leominster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="244" end="258" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="264" end="270" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="302" end="309" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721717" start="334" end="359" title="Llandaff Cathedral School" label="Llandaff Cathedral School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4367464" start="405" end="423" title="Preparatory school (UK)" label="preparatory school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536562" start="442" end="457" title="Malvern College" label="Malvern College"/>
<link wikidata="Q256754" start="470" end="508" title="St Catharine&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St Catharine&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233784" start="596" end="608" title="Inner Temple" label="Inner Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114653" start="679" end="701" title="Owen Temple-Morris" label="Sir Owen Temple-Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q126746175" start="713" end="725" title="Cardiff East (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cardiff East"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797277" start="814" end="837" title="Newport (Monmouthshire) (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Newport (Monmouthshire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q220208" start="841" end="845" title="1964 United Kingdom general election" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q918430" start="850" end="854" title="1966 United Kingdom general election" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061601" start="859" end="866" title="Norwood (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Norwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q918442" start="870" end="874" title="1970 United Kingdom general election" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q119524" start="879" end="892" title="February 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="February 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119965" start="913" end="923" title="Leominster (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Leominster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153823" start="1022" end="1060" title="Commonwealth Parliamentary Association" label="Commonwealth Parliamentary Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477321" start="1100" end="1131" title="Parliamentary Private Secretary" label="Parliamentary Private Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q332919" start="1162" end="1175" title="Norman Fowler" label="Norman Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q176815" start="1195" end="1220" title="Inter-Parliamentary Union" label="Inter-Parliamentary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971477" start="1263" end="1301" title="British-Irish Inter-Parliamentary Body" label="British-Irish Inter-Parliamentary Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q332314" start="1443" end="1460" title="Michael Heseltine" label="Michael Heseltine"/>
<link wikidata="Q58282" start="1986" end="1999" title="William Hague" label="William Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="2230" end="2234" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="2292" end="2298" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="2511" end="2532" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="2715" end="2724" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244613" start="2768" end="2776" title="Llandaff" label="Llandaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152204" start="2784" end="2809" title="South Glamorgan" label="County of South Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q550424" start="2817" end="2827" title="Leominster" label="Leominster"/>
<link wikidata="Q23129" start="2835" end="2858" title="County of Herefordshire" label="County of Herefordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="2874" end="2888" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3172" end="3220" title="What next for Labour? (2011 book)" label="What next for Labour? Ideas for a new generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114653" start="3361" end="3379" title="Owen Temple-Morris" label="Owen Temple-Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336695" start="3418" end="3436" title="Eddy Temple-Morris" label="Eddy Temple-Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221293" start="3447" end="3459" title="Virgin Radio UK" label="Virgin Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746495" start="3574" end="3600" title="Amir-Hossein Khozeimé Alam" label="Amir-Hossein Khozeimé Alam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3604" end="3612" title="Dezashib" label="Dezashib"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416844" wikidata="Q942027" url="?curid=416844" title="S. I. Hayakawa">
<text>Samuel Ichiye Hayakawa (July 18, 1906 – February 27, 1992) was a Canadian-born American academic and politician of Japanese ancestry. A professor of English, he served as president of San Francisco State University and then as U.S. Senator from California from 1977 to 1983.

== Early life, education, and activism in Canada ==
His parents were Japanese immigrants Ichiro Hayakawa and Otoko Toro (née Isono) Hayakawa. Born in Vancouver, British Columbia, Hayakawa was educated in the public schools of Calgary, Alberta, and Winnipeg, Manitoba, and graduated from the University of Manitoba in 1927. He received his MA in English from McGill University in 1928 and his PhD in the discipline from the University of Wisconsin–Madison in 1935.

Advocacy for Japanese Canadian Voting Rights

In 1936, the Japanese Canadian Citizens&#x27; League, an organisation created to fight for Japanese Canadian voting rights, sent a four-person delegation to speak to the federal government. Hayakawa was chosen alongside schoolteacher Hide Hyodo Shimizu, dentist Dr. Edward Banno, and insurance agent Minoru Kobayashi. 
At that time, those who could not vote in provincial elections also could not vote in federal elections. Since Japanese Canadians had been denied the vote in British Columbia, where the bulk of Canada&#x27;s Japanese population lived, most Japanese Canadians also could not vote in federal elections.
On May 22, 1936, in Ottawa, the delegation presented to the Special Committee on Elections and Franchise Acts, which was discussing the possibility of granting voting rights to Japanese Canadians. Despite the fact that all four delegates were Canadian born and that Hayakawa was an English professor, the committee members seemed surprised by their fluency in English. One said, they spoke “English so fluently that if [they] did not see [them] face to face [they] would take [them] to be Englishmen.” Another congratulated them “on their splendid command of the English language” and “on what they [had] done to help built up Canada.” Nonetheless, the delegation returned home only to learn that the committee had decided to deny Japanese Canadians the franchise, which they would not receive until after the Second World War.

==Academic career==
Hayakawa lectured at the University of Chicago from 1950 to 1955. He presented a talk at the 1954 Conference of Activity Vector Analysts at Lake George, New York, in which he discussed a theory of personality from the semantic point of view. It was later published as &quot;The Semantic Barrier&quot;. The definitive lecture discussed the Darwinism of the &quot;survival of self&quot; as contrasted with the &quot;survival of self-concept.&quot; His ideas on general semantics influenced A. E. van Vogt&#x27;s Null-A novels, &quot;The World of Null-A&quot; and &quot;The Pawns of Null-A&quot;. Van Vogt in &quot;The World of Null-A&quot; (i.e., non-Aristotelian) makes Hayakawa a character, introducing him as: &quot;Professor Hayakawa is today&#x27;s Mr. Null-A himself, the elected head of the International Society for General Semantics.&quot;

Hayakawa was an English professor at San Francisco State College (now San Francisco State University) from 1955 to 1968. In the early 1960s, he helped organize the &quot;Anti Digit Dialing League&quot;, a San Francisco group that opposed the introduction of all-digit telephone exchange names. Among the students he trained were commune leader Stephen Gaskin and author Gerald Haslam. He was named acting president of San Francisco State College on November 26, 1968, during a student strike, when Ronald Reagan was governor of California and Joseph Alioto was mayor of San Francisco. On July 9, 1969, the California State Colleges board of trustees appointed Hayakawa the ninth president of San Francisco State. Hayakawa retired on July 10, 1973.

Hayakawa wrote a column for the Register and Tribune Syndicate from 1970 to 1976. In 1973, Hayakawa changed his political affiliation from the Democratic Party to the Republican Party and became president emeritus at what became San Francisco State University.

===Student strike at San Francisco State College===
From November 1968 to March 1969, there was a student strike at San Francisco State College in order to establish an ethnic studies program. It was a major news event at the time and chapter in the radical history of the United States and the Bay Area. The strike was led by the Black Student Union, Third World Liberation Front supported by Students for a Democratic Society, the Black Panthers and the countercultural community.

The students presented fifteen &quot;non-negotiable demands&quot;, including a Black Studies department chaired by sociologist Nathan Hare independent of the university administration, open admission for all black students to &quot;put an end to racism&quot;, and the unconditional, immediate end to the War in Vietnam and the university&#x27;s involvement. It was threatened that if these demands were not immediately and completely satisfied the entire campus was to be forcibly shut down. Hayakawa became popular with conservative voters during this period after he pulled out the wires from the loudspeakers on a protesters&#x27; van at an outdoor rally. Hayakawa relented on December 6, 1968, and announced the creation of a Black Studies program at the university.

==United States Senator==

Hayakawa won an unexpected victory in the 1976 Republican Senate primary over three better-known career politicians: former HEW Secretary Robert Finch, long-time U.S. Representative Alphonzo Bell and former California Lieutenant Governor John L. Harmer. Much like Jimmy Carter, Hayakawa touted himself as a political outsider.

On the Democratic side, incumbent Senator John Tunney faced a surprisingly strong challenge from another political outsider, Tom Hayden. Hayden&#x27;s extremely liberal candidacy forced Tunney to run more to the left in the primary, which hurt him in the general election.

Nevertheless, Tunney was favored to easily win re-election. Comfortably ahead in the polls, Tunney did not aggressively campaign until the final weeks before the election. But Hayakawa&#x27;s position as a political outsider was popular in the wake of the Watergate scandal. In addition, Tunney had a high absenteeism rate while serving in the Senate and missed numerous votes. Hayakawa exploited this with a television ad that showed an empty chair in the U.S. Senate chamber. Hayakawa gradually closed the gap with Tunney, and ultimately defeated him by just over three percentage points.
During his Senate campaign, Hayakawa spoke about the proposal to transfer possession of the Panama Canal and Canal Zone from the United States to Panama, stating, &quot;We should hang on to [the Panama Canal]. We stole it fair and square.&quot; In 1978 he helped win Senate approval of the Torrijos–Carter Treaties, which transferred control of the zone and canal to Panama. He also supported a bill that led to the creation of the Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians, which examined the causes and effects of the incarceration of Japanese Americans during World War II. During his time in the Senate, Hayakawa was one of three Japanese Americans in the chamber, the other two being Daniel Inouye and Spark Matsunaga, both of Hawaii.

Hayakawa was news media reporters&#x27; favorite fodder, as he was often found napping through important legislative voting.

He planned to run for re-election in 1982 but trailed other Republican candidates badly in early polls and was short on money. He dropped out of the race early in the year and was ultimately succeeded by Republican San Diego Mayor Pete Wilson. To date, he is the only Japanese American Republican to have served in the U.S. Senate.

Hayakawa and John Tanton founded the political lobbying organization U.S. English, which is dedicated to making English the official language of the United States. Despite his support for creating the Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians, Hayakawa, who lived in Chicago as a Canadian citizen during World War II and thus was not subject to confinement, argued that the internment of Japanese Americans was beneficial and that Japanese Americans should not be paid for &quot;fulfilling their obligations&quot; to submit to Executive Order 9066.

== Personal life ==
Hayakawa was a resident of Mill Valley, California. His daughter, Wynne Hayakawa, is a painter.

He had an abiding interest in traditional jazz and wrote extensively on that subject, including several erudite sets of album liner notes. Sometimes in his lectures on semantics, he was joined by the respected traditional jazz pianist Don Ewell, whom Hayakawa employed to demonstrate various points in which he analyzed semantic and musical principles.

He died at a hospital in nearby Greenbrae, California, on February 27, 1992, at the age of 85, from complications of a stroke and bronchitis.

==See also==
*List of Asian Americans and Pacific Islands Americans in the United States Congress
*List of United States senators born outside the United States

==Bibliography==
* Hayakawa, S. I. &quot;Choose the Right Word: A Modern Guide to Synonyms and Related Words&quot;. 1968. Reprint. New York: Perennial Library, 1987. Originally published as &quot;Funk &amp; Wagnalls Modern Guide to Synonyms and Related Words&quot;.
* Hayakawa, S. I. &quot;Education Revisited&quot;. &quot;In The World Today&quot;, edited by Phineas J. Sparer. Memphis: Memphis State University Press, 1975.
* Hayakawa, S. I. &quot;Language in Thought and Action&quot;. 1939. Enlarged ed. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1978. Originally published as &quot;Language in Action&quot;.
* Hayakawa, S. I. &quot;Symbol, Status, and Personality&quot;. New York: Harcourt, Brace &amp; World, 1963.
* Hayakawa, S. I. &quot;Through the Communication Barrier: On Speaking, Listening, and Understanding&quot;. Edited by Arthur Chandler. New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1979.
* Hayakawa, S. I., ed. &quot;Language, Meaning, and Maturity&quot;. New York: Harper &amp; Brothers, 1954.
* Hayakawa, S. I., ed. &quot;Our Language and Our World&quot;. 1959. Reprint. Freeport, NY: Books for Libraries Press, 1971.
* Hayakawa, S. I., ed. &quot;The Use and Misuse of Language&quot;. Greenwich, CT: Fawcett Publications, 1964.
* Hayakawa, S. I., and William Dresser, eds. &quot;Dimensions of Meaning&quot;. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill Co., 1970. Includes Hayakawa&#x27;s essays &quot;General Semantics and the Cold War Mentality&quot; and &quot;Semantics and Sexuality&quot;.
* Paris, Richard, and Janet Brown, eds. &quot;Quotations from Chairman S. I. Hayakawa&quot;. San Francisco: n.p., 1969.

==References==
* Fox, R. F. (1991). A conversation with the Hayakawas. &quot;The English Journal&quot;, Vol. 80, No. 2 (Feb., 1991), pp. 36–40.
* Haslam, Gerald, and Janice E. Haslam. &quot;In Thought and Action: The Enigmatic Life of S. I. Hayakawa&quot; (U. of Nebraska Press; 2011) 427 pages; scholarly biography

==External links==
* Samuel I. Hayakawa papers at the Hoover Institution Archives
* Australian General Semantics Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q942027" start="0" end="22" title="S. I. Hayakawa" label="Samuel Ichiye Hayakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27968" start="149" end="156" title="English studies" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256981" start="184" end="214" title="San Francisco State University" label="San Francisco State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="227" end="239" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="245" end="255" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="426" end="435" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="437" end="453" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="502" end="509" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="511" end="518" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="524" end="532" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="534" end="542" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191833" start="567" end="589" title="University of Manitoba" label="University of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="615" end="617" title="Master of Arts" label="MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="634" end="651" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="668" end="671" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="699" end="730" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887209" start="1021" end="1039" title="Hide Hyodo Shimizu" label="Hide Hyodo Shimizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="2281" end="2302" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624801" start="2396" end="2407" title="Lake George (town), New York" label="Lake George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="2409" end="2417" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q183493" start="2595" end="2604" title="Darwinism" label="Darwinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860557" start="2682" end="2694" title="self-concept" label="self-concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q315059" start="2744" end="2758" title="A. E. van Vogt" label="A. E. van Vogt"/>
<link wikidata="Q957076" start="2787" end="2806" title="The World of Null-A" label="The World of Null-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017697" start="2823" end="2842" title="The Pawns of Null-A" label="The Pawns of Null-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256981" start="3141" end="3168" title="San Francisco State University" label="San Francisco State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809117" start="3372" end="3396" title="telephone exchange names" label="telephone exchange names"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498551" start="3448" end="3462" title="Stephen Gaskin" label="Stephen Gaskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549227" start="3474" end="3487" title="Gerald Haslam" label="Gerald Haslam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="3602" end="3615" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q887010" start="3620" end="3642" title="governor of California" label="governor of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6280974" start="3647" end="3660" title="Joseph Alioto" label="Joseph Alioto"/>
<link wikidata="Q795295" start="3665" end="3687" title="mayor of San Francisco" label="mayor of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q815352" start="3710" end="3735" title="California State University" label="California State Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976512" start="3885" end="3915" title="Register and Tribune Syndicate" label="Register and Tribune Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="3996" end="4012" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="4020" end="4036" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864239" start="4213" end="4227" title="Third World Liberation Front strikes of 1968" label="student strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q41870" start="4284" end="4298" title="ethnic studies" label="ethnic studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4388" end="4401" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q21593114" start="4467" end="4495" title="Third World Liberation Front" label="Third World Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250103" start="4509" end="4542" title="Students for a Democratic Society (1960 organization)" label="Students for a Democratic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="4548" end="4562" title="Black Panthers" label="Black Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q383968" start="4678" end="4691" title="Black Studies" label="Black Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969110" start="4726" end="4737" title="Nathan Hare" label="Nathan Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="4903" end="4917" title="War in Vietnam" label="War in Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313779" start="5536" end="5548" title="Robert Finch (American politician)" label="Robert Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q120699" start="5580" end="5593" title="Alphonzo E. Bell Jr." label="Alphonzo Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243594" start="5636" end="5650" title="John L. Harmer" label="John L. Harmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="5662" end="5674" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701992" start="5768" end="5779" title="John V. Tunney" label="John Tunney"/>
<link wikidata="Q352953" start="5851" end="5861" title="Tom Hayden" label="Tom Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="6256" end="6273" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891407" start="6529" end="6589" title="1976 United States Senate election in California" label="ultimately defeated him by just over three percentage points"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="6683" end="6695" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q498979" start="6700" end="6710" title="Panama Canal Zone" label="Canal Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="6737" end="6743" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q277343" start="6881" end="6905" title="Torrijos–Carter Treaties" label="Torrijos–Carter Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152745" start="7023" end="7083" title="Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians" label="Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="7130" end="7165" title="Internment of Japanese Americans" label="incarceration of Japanese Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7173" end="7185" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="7244" end="7262" title="Japanese Americans" label="Japanese Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q312845" start="7299" end="7312" title="Daniel Inouye" label="Daniel Inouye"/>
<link wikidata="Q977134" start="7317" end="7332" title="Spark Matsunaga" label="Spark Matsunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="7342" end="7348" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="7692" end="7701" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535739" start="7702" end="7707" title="Mayor of San Diego" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q714909" start="7708" end="7719" title="Pete Wilson" label="Pete Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260233" start="7823" end="7834" title="John Tanton" label="John Tanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260233" start="7879" end="7891" title="U.S. English (organization)" label="U.S. English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="7922" end="7929" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="7934" end="7951" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="8096" end="8103" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="8203" end="8235" title="internment of Japanese Americans" label="internment of Japanese Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159918" start="8356" end="8376" title="Executive Order 9066" label="Executive Order 9066"/>
<link wikidata="Q846413" start="8426" end="8449" title="Mill Valley, California" label="Mill Valley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q492643" start="8526" end="8542" title="traditional jazz" label="traditional jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263757" start="8622" end="8633" title="liner notes" label="liner notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403364" start="8718" end="8730" title="jazz piano" label="jazz pianist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239110" start="8731" end="8740" title="Don Ewell" label="Don Ewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116127" start="8882" end="8903" title="Greenbrae, California" label="Greenbrae, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562391" start="9007" end="9090" title="List of Asian Americans and Pacific Islands Americans in the United States Congress" label="List of Asian Americans and Pacific Islands Americans in the United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601949" start="9092" end="9153" title="List of United States senators born outside the United States" label="List of United States senators born outside the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663419" start="9296" end="9313" title="Perennial Library" label="Perennial Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486744" start="9604" end="9634" title="Language in Thought and Action" label="Language in Thought and Action"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416846" wikidata="Q6034982" url="?curid=416846" title="Inline skating">
<text>Inline skating is a multi-disciplinary sport and can refer to a number of activities practiced using inline skates. Inline skates typically have two to five polyurethane wheels depending on the style of practice, arranged in a single line by a metal or plastic frame on the underside of a boot. The in-line design allows for greater speed and maneuverability than traditional (or &quot;quad&quot;) roller skates. Following this basic design principle, inline skates can be modified to varying degrees to accommodate niche disciplines.

Inline skating is commonly referred to as &quot;rollerblading&quot;, or just &quot;blading&quot;, due to the popular brand of inline skates, Rollerblade.

==History of skating==
An inline skate appeared in a Paris patent in 1819, but were overtaken in popularity by quad skates.

The German branch of SKF developed and produced inline skates in 1978 with wheels designed for hockey rinks and streets. The product was discontinued after one year as the management did not want a consumer product in its portfolio.

Other inline skates were developed as a substitute for ice skates. In 1980, a group of ice hockey players in Minneapolis, Minnesota, were looking for a way to practice during the summer. Scott and Brennan Olson formed the company Rollerblade, Inc., to sell skates with four polyurethane wheels arranged in a straight line on the bottom of a padded boot. They sold the company in 1984 to Bob Naegele jr., who advertised to the general public and sold millions. &quot;Life&quot; magazine published a photo of American skater Eric Heiden, training for the 1980 Olympics, using such skates on a Wisconsin road.

The sport became popular in the United States in the 1980s and 1990s, with tens of millions of participants. In 1996, Jason Lewis completed the first solo crossing of the United States on inline skates, part of Expedition 360, a successful attempt to circumnavigate the globe using only human power. En route he was hit by a car in Colorado, breaking both legs. After nine months he completed the journey from Fort Lauderdale to San Francisco. In 2012, Kacie Fischer became the first woman, and the fastest person, to inline skate across the United States; she skated from California to Florida in 47 days. Aggressive inline skating events were featured in the X Games from 1995 to 2005. Popularity waned in the 2000s, with parental concerns over injuries and the rising popularity of soccer, lacrosse, and skateboarding. There was a revival sparked by the need for socially distanced recreation during the COVID-19 pandemic.

==Disciplines==


===Aggressive inline===
Aggressive inline skating (referred to by participants as rollerblading, blading, skating or rolling) is a sub-discipline primarily focused on the execution of tricks in the action sports canon. Aggressive inline skates are specially modified to accommodate grinds and the jumping of large gaps. Aggressive skates are identifiable by a prominent gap in between the second and third wheels (known as the H-block) which allows for grinds perpendicular to the direction of the wheels. A hard plastic surface on the sole of the boot known as a &quot;sole plate&quot; or &quot;soul plate&quot; allows for grinds parallel to the wheels. From these grind surfaces comes a lexicon of well-known grind stances, though sliding can occur on any surface of the boot or wheels. Aggressive skates typically have much smaller wheels than regular inline skates. The small size allows for more freedom when grinding as there is less risk of catching on obstacles. These smaller wheels feature a flat profile to accommodate the impact from jumping tall heights.

===Alpine skating===
Alpine skating on roller skis owes its existence to skiing, enabling skiers to train in the off-season despite a lack of snow. Skaters complete a course marked by gates while descending at high speeds. Its basic movements are therefore similar to those of downhill skiing and many athletes regularly practice both modalities.

===Artistic/figure skating===

Artistic roller skaters use either quad or inline skates. The sport looks very similar to its counterpart on ice, but it is more affordable in warmer climates. Inline figure skating has been included in the world championships since 2002.

===Fitness/recreational skating===
Recreational skaters usually skate on roads, bike lanes, or paved trails. They might be skating solo for transportation, fitness, skating with friends, or participating in an organized event. Because urban areas tend to have more hazards from traffic, many cities have organized social groups to make skating safer.

Fitness skaters tend to skate more frequently and go longer distances. Fitness skates typically have faster bearings and larger wheels to generate speed and cover ground more efficiently. Skaters in this category tend to skate on average. Some challenge themselves to feats of endurance skating for over .

===Freestyle skating===

Freestyle skating is a form of inline skating performed on flat ground and refers collectively to the disciplines for which competitions are organized by the International Freestyle Skaters Association. Currently IFSA has defined three disciplines which must be offered by any competition they sanction: freestyle slalom, speed slalom, and free jump. Two additional disciplines, high jump and jam, are also defined, but are at present considered optional.

===Hockey===

Roller in-line hockey is performed in a special rink on inline skates and was originally thought of by ice hockey players who wanted to continue training in their off season. Hockey rollerblades have wheel sizes generally between 72–80mm. The toe end of the boot is characteristically squared off. The feel of the boot is generally the same as ice skates, so the switch off between hockey skates and hockey is diminished, leading to better in-training simulations of ice hockey.

===Off-road skating===
===Roller soccer===

Similar to soccer, roller soccer involves five players with skates on each side and takes place in an indoor sports hall or outside space with appropriate boundaries. Players need to score as many goals as possible with a soccer ball, and the team with the most goals wins the match.

=== Speed skating ===
Also known as inline racing, speed skating is the sport of skating (usually on flat surfaces, such as roller rinks) with the intent to beat the opponent&#x27;s time score or get to the finish line first.

===Wizard Skating=== 
Wizard Skating is a progressive style of inline skating that emphasizes fluidity, edge control, and creative movement. Unlike traditional aggressive or urban skating, which focuses on grinds, jumps, and rigid tricks, wizard skating incorporates deep carving, edge transitions, and dynamic footwork to create a smooth, flowing style.

The discipline was pioneered by Leon Basin, the founder of Wizard Skating and Wizard style frames, a specialized rockered frame system that enhances maneuverability and control. Wizard skating blends elements of freestyle slalom, artistic skating, and urban exploration, allowing skaters to navigate open spaces with seamless, dance-like motions.

Since its rise in the early 2010s, wizard skating has gained popularity worldwide, attracting skaters from various backgrounds, including aggressive, urban, and freestyle disciplines. Its emphasis on edge control and fluid motion has made it a distinct and evolving art form within the broader inline skating community.

===Vert skating===

A term used to refer to inline skates on a vert ramp–a half pipe with some vertical in it–usually between . Vert skating is a form of gymnastics performed with skates. The purpose of vert skating is to ride higher than the coping (which is the metal pipe on top of the ramp) and perform spins or flips. It focuses on complicated hard aerial maneuvers, such as spins and flips. The intent of the skater is to build speed until they are of sufficient height above the edge of the ramp to perform various aerial acrobatics. In competitions, skaters have limited time, often less than a minute, to impress the judges by landing numerous difficult tricks. Vert skating may occur in competition and was once part of the X Games. Vert ramps are also present in many skateparks.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6034982" start="0" end="14" title="Inline skating" label="Inline skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="39" end="44" title="sport" label="sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q616765" start="101" end="114" title="inline skates" label="inline skates"/>
<link wikidata="Q146322" start="157" end="169" title="polyurethane" label="polyurethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031639" start="398" end="411" title="roller skates" label="roller skates"/>
<link wikidata="Q640754" start="677" end="688" title="Rollerblade" label="Rollerblade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031639" start="802" end="813" title="quad skates" label="quad skates"/>
<link wikidata="Q52846" start="837" end="840" title="SKF" label="SKF"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="1159" end="1170" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="1172" end="1181" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="1516" end="1520" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q311289" start="1573" end="1584" title="Eric Heiden" label="Eric Heiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683941" start="1776" end="1787" title="Jason Lewis (adventurer)" label="Jason Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420888" start="1869" end="1883" title="Expedition 360" label="Expedition 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q6344759" start="2111" end="2124" title="Kacie Fischer" label="Kacie Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13949" start="2265" end="2290" title="Aggressive inline skating" label="Aggressive inline skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q527512" start="2319" end="2326" title="X Games" label="X Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="2565" end="2582" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609392" start="3056" end="3062" title="Grind (sport)" label="grinds"/>
<link wikidata="Q453778" start="3711" end="3722" title="Roller skiing" label="roller skis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093430" start="4355" end="4369" title="Road skating" label="skate on roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453712" start="5279" end="5295" title="freestyle slalom skating" label="freestyle slalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q616765" start="5502" end="5515" title="inline skates" label="inline skates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361066" start="6379" end="6390" title="roller rink" label="roller rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q616765" start="7551" end="7564" title="inline skates" label="inline skates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239045" start="7570" end="7579" title="vert ramp" label="vert ramp"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131150" start="7635" end="7647" title="Vert skating" label="Vert skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q43450" start="7661" end="7671" title="gymnastics" label="gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q527512" start="8241" end="8248" title="X Games" label="X Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239045" start="8250" end="8259" title="Vert ramp" label="Vert ramp"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416849" wikidata="Q4600597" url="?curid=416849" title="2002 United States steel tariff">
<text>On March 5, 2002, U.S. President George W. Bush placed tariffs on imported steel. The tariffs took effect March 20 and were lifted by Bush on December 4, 2003. Research shows that &quot;the costs of the Safeguard Measures [steel tariffs] outweighed their benefits in terms of aggregate GDP and employment&quot;.

==The tariff==
The temporary tariffs of 8–30% were originally scheduled to remain in effect until 2005. They were imposed to give U.S. steel makers protection from what a U.S. probe determined was a detrimental surge in steel imports. More than 30 steel makers had filed for bankruptcy in recent years. Steel producers had originally sought up to a 40% tariff. Canada and Mexico were exempt from the tariffs because of penalties the United States would face under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Additionally, some other countries such as Argentina, Thailand, and Turkey were also exempt. The typical steel tariff at the time was usually between zero and one percent, making the 8–30% rates seem exceptionally high. These rates, though, are comparable to the standard permanent U.S. tariff rates on many kinds of clothes and shoes.

The Bush administration justified the tariffs as a safeguarding response, namely that the US steel industry had to be protected against sudden surges of imports of steel.

==Political response in the United States==
Both the issuing and the lifting of the tariffs caused controversy in the United States. Some of the president&#x27;s political opponents, such as Democratic House Representative Dick Gephardt, criticized the plan for not going far enough. For some of the president&#x27;s conservative allies, imposing the tariff was a step away from Bush&#x27;s commitment to free trade. Critics also contended that the tariffs would harm consumers and U.S. businesses that relied on steel imports, and would cut more jobs than it would save in the steel industry. Supporters of the tariffs believed that U.S. steel producers were being harmed by a &quot;surge&quot; of steel imports endangering the viability of American steel companies.

There was a widespread belief on all sides of the debate, confirmed by top Bush administration officials, that politics played a role in the decision to impose tariffs. Namely, the steel-producing swing states of Pennsylvania, Ohio and West Virginia would benefit from the tariffs. However, steel-using states, such as Tennessee and Michigan were harmed by the tariffs. The placement of the tariffs was an odd one for Bush, who had signed numerous free trade agreements during his term in office. This was widely believed to be a calculated political decision, insofar as the localities that stood to benefit were marginal ones. Both the George H. W. Bush administration and the Reagan administration also imposed import limits on steel.

A 2005 study found that in coverage of the tariffs in the &quot;New York Times&quot; and &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;, there were more sentences devoted to the negative impacts of steel tariffs than sentences on the benefits. The authors argue that this is consistent with a model whereby &quot;more newspaper space would be devoted to the costs of steel tariffs—which are widely dispersed—than to their benefits—which are narrowly targeted.&quot;

==International response==
The tariffs ignited international controversy as well. Immediately after they were filed, the European Union announced that it would impose retaliatory tariffs on the United States, thus risking the start of a major trade war. To decide whether or not the steel tariffs were fair, a case was filed at the Dispute Settlement Body of the World Trade Organization (WTO). Japan, Korea, China, Taiwan, Switzerland, Brazil and others joined with similar cases.

On November 11, 2003, the WTO came out against the steel tariffs, saying that they had not been imposed during a period of import surge—steel imports had actually dropped a bit during 2001 and 2002—and that the tariffs therefore were a violation of America&#x27;s WTO tariff-rate commitments. The ruling authorized more than $2 billion in sanctions, the largest penalty ever imposed by the WTO against a member state, if the United States did not quickly remove the tariffs. After receiving the verdict, Bush declared that he would preserve the tariffs. In retaliation, the European Union threatened to counter with tariffs of its own on products ranging from Florida oranges to cars produced in Michigan, with each tariff calculated to likewise hurt the President in a key marginal state. The United States backed down and withdrew the tariffs on December 4.

The early withdrawal of the tariffs also drew political criticism from steel producers and supporters of protectionism. The move was cheered by proponents of free trade and steel importers. When he lifted the tariffs, Bush said, &quot;I took action to give the industry a chance to adjust to the surge in foreign imports and to give relief to the workers and communities that depend on steel for their jobs and livelihoods. These safeguard measures have now achieved their purpose, and as a result of changed economic circumstances it is time to lift them&quot;.

==Impact==
In September 2003, the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC) examined the economic effects of the Bush 2002 steel tariffs. The economy-wide analysis was designed to focus on the impacts that arose from the relative price changes resulting from the imposition of the tariffs, and estimated that the impact of the tariffs on the U.S. welfare ranged between a gain of $65.6 million (0.0006% of GDP) to a loss of $110.0 million (0.0011% of GDP), &quot;with a central estimate of a welfare loss of $41.6 million.&quot; A majority of steel-consuming businesses reported that neither continuing nor ending the tariffs would change employment, international competitiveness, or capital investment.

According to a 2005 review of existing research, all studies on the tariffs &quot;find that the costs of the Safeguard Measures outweighed their benefits in terms of aggregate GDP and employment as well as having an important redistributive impact.&quot;

Steel production rose slightly during the period of the tariff.
The protection of the steel industry in the United States may have had unintended consequences and perverse effects. A study from 2003 that was paid for by CITAC (Consuming Industries Trade Action Coalition), a trade association of businesses that use raw materials, found that around 200,000 jobs were lost as a result.

The U.S. International Trade Commission noted that although the CITAC study did estimate the impact of changing steel prices, it did not specify how much of the impact was attributable directly to the steel tariffs. The study reported estimated impact, relying on specific assumptions made to make analysis simpler. The ITC also noted that, within the broad definition of &quot;steel-consuming industries&quot; used in the CITAC study, employment actually increased by almost 53,000 between March 2002 and December 2002, and that employment in the same industries had fallen by 281,000 from March to December 2001, prior to the tariffs. On the other hand, the ITC admitted that the authors of the CITAC study had controlled for changes in overall manufacturing employment, and also admitted that the CITAC study&#x27;s estimate of job loss in the steel-consuming sector was only half that reported by steel-consuming firms themselves in answers to questionnaires sent by the ITC, and only one-fifth that reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for the sector during the same period.

==See also==
* First Trump tariffs beginning 2018
*China–United States trade war
==References==
==External links==
* White House statement announcing tariff
* White House statement announcing end of tariff</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="18" end="32" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="33" end="47" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="75" end="80" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="588" end="598" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="674" end="680" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="685" end="691" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="781" end="816" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="869" end="878" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="880" end="888" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="894" end="900" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="1537" end="1557" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209677" start="1558" end="1571" title="Dick Gephardt" label="Dick Gephardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="1652" end="1664" title="conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="1740" end="1750" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="2301" end="2312" title="swing state" label="swing state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="2317" end="2329" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="2340" end="2353" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719914" start="2742" end="2774" title="George H. W. Bush administration" label="George H. W. Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="2783" end="2804" title="Reagan administration" label="Reagan administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="3416" end="3430" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q692412" start="3538" end="3547" title="trade war" label="trade war"/>
<link wikidata="Q751082" start="3627" end="3650" title="WTO Dispute Settlement Body" label="Dispute Settlement Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="3658" end="3682" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="4744" end="4757" title="protectionism" label="protectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135789" start="6300" end="6323" title="unintended consequences" label="unintended consequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q50335907" start="7653" end="7672" title="First Trump tariffs" label="First Trump tariffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q51557538" start="7689" end="7718" title="China–United States trade war" label="China–United States trade war"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416850" wikidata="Q7316244" url="?curid=416850" title="Restored Church of Jesus Christ">
<text>The Restored Church of Jesus Christ is a small Latter Day Saint church headquartered in Independence, Missouri. It was founded in 1980 by Eugene Oliver Walton (November 6, 1927 – May 28, 2010), who had previously been an Elder in the Church of Jesus Christ (Cutlerite), and who claimed to be the &quot;One Mighty and Strong&quot; prophesied in Mormon scripture. When the Cutlerites rejected his claims to leadership of their movement, Walton left to found his own church.

Walton&#x27;s organization disavows the label &quot;Mormon&quot;, but claims to be the original church established in 1830 by Joseph Smith. His church denies the authority of Brigham Young, who led the majority of Latter Day Saints to Utah after Smith&#x27;s death, together with that of Joseph Smith III, who became the leader of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. The church also disavows plural marriage, and is unique in the Latter Day Saint movement in that it teaches the existence of a god (God the Father and Jesus Christ), as opposed to the usual three part godhead of Mormonism (God the Father, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit).

==Notes==

==References==
*&quot;Introducing the...Restored Church of Jesus Christ&quot; (pamphlet available from The Restored Church of Jesus Christ, PO Box 1651, Independence MO 64055)
*Melton, J. Gordon, ed. &quot;The Encyclopedia of American Religions:Religious Creeds.&quot; Detroit:Gale Research Company, 1988. .
*Walton, Eugene O. God is alive. Independence, MO, c1970.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7316244" start="4" end="35" title="Restored Church of Jesus Christ" label="Restored Church of Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="47" end="63" title="Latter Day Saint" label="Latter Day Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q24603" start="88" end="110" title="Independence, Missouri" label="Independence, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316244" start="138" end="158" title="Restored Church of Jesus Christ" label="Eugene Oliver Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629163" start="221" end="226" title="Elder (Latter Day Saints)" label="Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742590" start="234" end="268" title="Church of Jesus Christ (Cutlerite)" label="Church of Jesus Christ (Cutlerite)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092894" start="302" end="323" title="One Mighty and Strong" label="One Mighty and Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177118" start="525" end="531" title="Mormon" label="Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="599" end="611" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q203559" start="648" end="661" title="Brigham Young" label="Brigham Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="708" end="712" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048224" start="761" end="777" title="Joseph Smith III" label="Joseph Smith III"/>
<link wikidata="Q625363" start="808" end="863" title="Community of Christ" label="Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459202" start="890" end="905" title="plural marriage" label="plural marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="928" end="953" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q186350" start="997" end="1011" title="God the Father" label="God the Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="1016" end="1028" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354479" start="1066" end="1073" title="Godhead (Latter Day Saints)" label="godhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q747802" start="1077" end="1086" title="Mormonism" label="Mormonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37302" start="1126" end="1137" title="Holy Spirit" label="Holy Spirit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416853" wikidata="Q903810" url="?curid=416853" title="Magnate">
<text>The term magnate, from the late Latin &quot;magnas&quot;, a great man, itself from Latin &quot;magnus&quot;, &quot;great&quot;, means a man from the higher nobility, a man who belongs to the high office-holders or a man in a high social position, by birth, wealth or other qualities in Western Christian countries since the medieval period. It also includes the members of the higher clergy, such as bishops, archbishops and cardinals. In reference to the medieval, the term is often used to distinguish higher territorial landowners and warlords, such as counts, earls, dukes, and territorial-princes from the baronage. In Poland the &quot;szlachta&quot; (nobles) constituted one of the largest proportions of the population (around 10-12%) and &#x27;magnat&#x27; refers to the richest nobles, or nobles of the nobility - even though they had equal voting rights in Poland&#x27;s electoral monarchy.

==England==
In England, the magnate class went through a change in the later Middle Ages. It had previously consisted of all tenants-in-chief of the crown, a group of more than a hundred families. The emergence of Parliament led to the establishment of a parliamentary peerage that received personal summons, rarely more than sixty families. A similar class in the Gaelic world were the Flatha. In the Middle Ages, a bishop sometimes held territory as a magnate, collecting the revenue of the manors and the associated knights&#x27; fees.

In the Tudor period, after Henry VII defeated Richard III at Bosworth Field, Henry made a point of executing or neutralising as many magnates as possible. Henry would make parliament attaint undesirable nobles and magnates, thereby stripping them of their wealth, protection from torture, and power. Henry also used the Court of the Star Chamber to have powerful nobles executed. Henry VIII continued this approach in his reign; he inherited a survivalistic mistrust of nobles from his father. Henry VIII ennobled very few men, and the ones he did were all &quot;new men&quot;: &quot;novi homines&quot;, greatly indebted to him and with very limited power.

==Hungary==
The term was specifically applied to the members of the Upper House of the in the , the &quot;Főrendiház&quot;, that can be translated as the , an equivalent to the British Peers.

== Japan ==

In feudal Japan, the most powerful landholding magnates were known as &quot;daimyo&quot;. In the 11th and 12th centuries, the daimyo became military lords of samurai clans with territorial and proprietary control over private estates.

== Poland and Lithuania ==
Magnates were a social class of wealthy and influential nobility in the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland and Grand Duchy of Lithuania, and later the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.

== Serbia and Croatia ==

&quot;Velikaš&quot; is the Serbo-Croatian word for &#x27;magnate&#x27;, derived from veliko (&#x27;great, large, grand&#x27;). It was used to refer to the highest nobility of Serbia in the Middle Ages and Croatia in the Middle Ages.

== Spain ==
In Spain, since the late Middle Ages, the highest class of nobility hold the appellation of Grandee of Spain and was known earlier as ricohombres.

== Sweden ==

In Sweden, the wealthiest medieval lords were known as &quot;storman&quot; (plural &quot;stormän&quot;), &quot;great men&quot;, a similar description and meaning as the English term magnate.

==See also==
* Aristocracy
* Boyar, in Eastern Europe
* &quot;Magnat&quot; (film)
* Szlachta, in Poland

==References==
==Sources==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q903810" start="9" end="16" title="Magnate" label="magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="27" end="37" title="late Latin" label="late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="83" end="88" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="286" end="303" title="Western Christian" label="Western Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="400" end="406" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="409" end="419" title="archbishop" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="425" end="433" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="456" end="464" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493932" start="523" end="532" title="landowner" label="landowner"/>
<link wikidata="Q220098" start="538" end="545" title="warlord" label="warlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="556" end="561" title="count" label="count"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="564" end="568" title="earl" label="earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="571" end="575" title="duke" label="duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747456" start="594" end="600" title="prince" label="prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862967" start="611" end="619" title="baronage" label="baronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="641" end="649" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="917" end="924" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518201" start="1027" end="1043" title="tenants-in-chief" label="tenants-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="1116" end="1126" title="English Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="1267" end="1273" title="Gaels" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457058" start="1289" end="1295" title="Flatha" label="Flatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="1319" end="1325" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="1395" end="1401" title="Manorialism" label="manors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777157" start="1421" end="1439" title="knight&amp;#x27;s fee" label="knights&amp;#x27; fees"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="1469" end="1478" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="1488" end="1499" title="Richard III of England" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q222013" start="1503" end="1517" title="Battle of Bosworth Field" label="Bosworth Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818067" start="1625" end="1632" title="attainder" label="attaint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329062" start="1762" end="1787" title="Court of the Star Chamber" label="Court of the Star Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="1822" end="1832" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016462" start="2005" end="2012" title="new men" label="new men"/>
<link wikidata="Q303593" start="2026" end="2038" title="novus homo" label="novi homines"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="2464" end="2471" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="2585" end="2597" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="2625" end="2633" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="2641" end="2671" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="2676" end="2700" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="2716" end="2746" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907844" start="3113" end="3129" title="Grandee of Spain" label="Grandee of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q838260" start="3155" end="3165" title="ricohombre" label="ricohombre"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="3390" end="3401" title="Aristocracy" label="Aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q203563" start="3404" end="3409" title="Boyar" label="Boyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731319" start="3431" end="3456" title="Magnat (film)" label="&amp;quot;Magnat&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="3459" end="3467" title="Szlachta" label="Szlachta"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416857" wikidata="Q16951388" url="?curid=416857" title="2nd Northern Ireland Assembly">
<text>The [[Northern Ireland Assembly]] elected in November 2003 never met as such: Northern Ireland&#x27;s devolved government and representative institutions had been suspended with the re-introduction of direct rule by the United Kingdom government on 14 October 2002. However, the persons (Members of the Legislative Assembly, MLAs) elected to the Assembly at the 2003 assembly election were called together in a non-legislative capacity, initially under the Northern Ireland Act 2006 and then under the St Andrews Agreement. These bodies failed to form a government before the 2007 election.

The following is a list of the members of that second [[Northern Ireland Assembly|Assembly]], including members co-opted after the election to replace those who had resigned or died, and changes in party affiliation.

==Party strengths==
Notes
===Graphical representation===
== MLAs by party==
This is a list of MLAs elected to the Northern Ireland Assembly in the 2003 Northern Ireland Assembly election, sorted by party.



==MLAs by constituency==
The list is given in alphabetical order by constituency.


==Changes since the election==
===† Co-options ===
=== ‡ Changes in affiliation ===
== See also ==
* Members of the Northern Ireland Assembly elected in 1998
* Members of the Northern Ireland Forum elected in 1996
* Northern Ireland MPs
* 2007 Northern Ireland Assembly election

== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16951388" start="4" end="58" title="2nd Northern Ireland Assembly" label="[[Northern Ireland Assembly]] elected in November 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="78" end="94" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="220" end="234" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230427" start="288" end="323" title="Member of the Legislative Assembly" label="Members of the Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="346" end="354" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076187" start="362" end="384" title="2003 Northern Ireland Assembly election" label="2003 assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562399" start="576" end="589" title="2007 Northern Ireland Assembly election" label="2007 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951388" start="623" end="684" title="2nd Northern Ireland Assembly" label="members of that second [[Northern Ireland Assembly|Assembly]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q966818" start="704" end="712" title="Co-option" label="co-opted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076187" start="957" end="996" title="2003 Northern Ireland Assembly election" label="2003 Northern Ireland Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814603" start="1203" end="1259" title="Members of the Northern Ireland Assembly elected in 1998" label="Members of the Northern Ireland Assembly elected in 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814608" start="1262" end="1299" title="Members of the Northern Ireland Forum" label="Members of the Northern Ireland Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q85777984" start="1318" end="1338" title="Northern Ireland MPs" label="Northern Ireland MPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562399" start="1341" end="1380" title="2007 Northern Ireland Assembly election" label="2007 Northern Ireland Assembly election"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416858" wikidata="Q5914639" url="?curid=416858" title="House of Aaron">
<text>The House of Aaron, less commonly known as the Aaronic Order or The Order of Aaron, is an American religious sect that believes they are descendants of Aaron and believe in the Aaronic writings. The sect is centered in Eskdale, Utah, a small farming community in Millard County, with additional branches in Partoun and Murray, Utah. The House of Aaron was founded in 1943 by Maurice L. Glendenning and has an estimated membership between 1,500 and 2,000.

== Background ==
Glendenning was born 15 February 1891 in Randolph, Kansas. He and his family were unfamiliar with the Latter Day Saint movement and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church). However, as a boy, he confided in his father that he could &quot;hear heavenly music even when wide-awake&quot;. As a young teen, the heavenly music became interspersed with angelic voices uttering poetry, which he began to write down in notes he kept private out of fear of ridicule. As a young man, the &quot;angelic poetry&quot; evolved into doctrinal and philosophical statements, and he gradually began sharing the text of his messages with more and more friends and relatives.

In 1928, Glendenning and his family moved to Provo, Utah, looking for employment. Counseled by LDS missionaries, Glendenning began to feel that a number of LDS doctrines, including the priesthood and proper authority, helped him understand his experiences and writings. Glendenning and his wife were baptized into the LDS Church on August 14, 1929.

On January 15, 1945, he was excommunicated as the &quot;Instigator of the Aaronic Order&quot;. LDS Church General Authorities asserted that Glendenning was an apostate or heretic. While LDS members could receive divine inspiration for themselves, no one could receive authentic divine messages for the church as a whole, except the President of the Church. However, Glendenning claims not to have received divine messages for the LDS church as a whole; rather, he was accused of wrongdoing presumably because he had claimed to receive divine inspiration that, if true, would affect the validity of some of the teachings of the LDS Church.

Glendenning died October 5, 1969, in Utah.

== Sect classification ==
The House of Aaron does not consider itself to be part of the Latter Day Saint movement. However, religious researchers have categorized it as part of the Latter Day Saint movement, due to Glendenning&#x27;s membership and excommunication from the LDS Church, the LDS roots of most of its founding members, the similarities between Glendenning&#x27;s claims and those of Mormonism&#x27;s founder Joseph Smith, and the Utah location of its commune and branches.

==Current ministry and beliefs==
The House of Aaron ministry is currently under the leadership of John M. Conrad, who states, &quot;Our passion and mission is to assist in the gathering of Israel into a Holy Nation with Yeshua as King and the Torah (Word) as its constitution. Our focus is on Yeshua (Jesus).&quot; The House of Aaron website states its mission is &quot;to participate in and hasten the preparation of the Body of Jesus Christ for His second coming.&quot; Its vision is to &quot;restore the Biblical, Levitical ministry to its prophesied fullness in Jesus Christ and to reconcile individuals, families, and fellowships to their places in the Body of Christ.&quot;

The following statement comes from the official House of Aaron website:

The House of Aaron is the Biblical name of the family of Israelite priests ordained by God to serve Him at the Tabernacle in the wilderness and, later, at the temple in Jerusalem. Aaronites were a family within the tribe of Levi. This entire tribe was called by God to minister to him and then to the people. The specific duties of the Levites were to assist Aaron in the work of the Tabernacle, in teaching, ministering in music and judging all the tribes of Israel. God made clear that Levi was to have no inheritance in the land but Him. (Deuteronomy 18:1–2) Thus, no territory was identified as Levi and Aaron&#x27;s home. Instead, 48 Levitical cities were scattered about the land, some in each tribe to remind Levi that his ministry extended to all the tribes of Israel.

===Scripture===
The House of Aaron considers its beliefs to be strictly Biblical and part of the broader messianic movement united under the Alliance of Redeemed Israel (ARI). Its basic beliefs have never included the Book of Mormon, nor any other LDS scriptures.

In 1978 the &quot;Levitical Writings&quot; was published. This book was a compilation of 1944&#x27;s &quot;Book of Elias, or the Record of John&quot;, 1948&#x27;s &quot;New Revelations for the Book of Elias, or the Record of John&quot;, and 1955&#x27;s &quot;Disciple Book&quot;.

Currently, House of Aaron says that the &quot;Levitical Writings&quot; is only mentioned and studied on occasion but is not used for doctrine. House of Aaron leader John Conrad states unequivocally that the Bible is &quot;the undisputed basis of our doctrine and teaching.&quot;

The Aaronic Order teaches that Christ is seen as having a Heavenly Father, but also
is to be thought of as the Father and that the Holy Ghost is the spirit of God and Jesus Christ resumed after his resurrection.

===Priesthood===
The Aaronic Order believes that members given the Aaronic Priesthood in the pre-mortal existence, and need not be ordained. Members therefore believe that they are Biblical leaders who were predestined to come to the earth and fulfill their responsibilities.

=== Communal settlement===
In 1955 the church established a communal settlement called Eskdale, Utah, named after Eskdale, Scotland. Eskdale has become a small unincorporated farming area in Millard County, Utah, located just east of the Nevada border.

In its early years, Eskdale community was isolationist, and a uniform was worn: the men in blue slacks and shirts with &quot;Aaron&quot; embroidered in gold over the pocket; women in blue and white dresses with &quot;Levi&quot; embroidered on their small, white caps. However, over the past several decades, the community has slowly become an open, integral part of the local valley, and the dress code has been relaxed.

===Sabbath===
Since 1958 they have observed the Seventh Day Sabbath because of a revelation from Glendenning.

===Plural marriage===
In 2005, due to numerous publications which claimed the House of Aaron practiced plural marriage, the House of Aaron was included in the Utah Attorney General&#x27;s Office and the Arizona Attorney General&#x27;s Office publication titled &quot;The Primer&quot;. It was included within the list of &quot;Fundamentalist Groups&quot; that are practitioners of plural marriage. However, in 2011 the House of Aaron was removed from the publication. The House of Aaron states that they have never believed in or practiced polygamy and House of Aaron leader John M. Conrad has described polygamy as &quot;abhorrent and disgusting.&quot;

== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* House of Aaron website
* Messianic Israel Alliance website
* Excerpts from Levitical Writings</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5914639" start="4" end="18" title="House of Aaron" label="House of Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914639" start="47" end="60" title="House of Aaron" label="Aaronic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914639" start="64" end="82" title="House of Aaron" label="The Order of Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q51676" start="152" end="157" title="Aaron" label="Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397973" start="219" end="232" title="Eskdale, Utah" label="Eskdale, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q26760" start="263" end="277" title="Millard County, Utah" label="Millard County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140806" start="307" end="314" title="Partoun, Utah" label="Partoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q482822" start="319" end="331" title="Murray, Utah" label="Murray, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q568069" start="514" end="522" title="Randolph, Kansas" label="Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="575" end="600" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="605" end="652" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q23443" start="1196" end="1207" title="Provo, Utah" label="Provo, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1336" end="1346" title="Beliefs and practices of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints#Priesthood" label="priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1351" end="1367" title="Mormonism and authority" label="proper authority"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1529" end="1543" title="Excommunication#The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532323" start="1607" end="1626" title="General Authorities" label="General Authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000892" start="1833" end="1856" title="President of the Church (LDS Church)" label="President of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="2178" end="2182" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="2273" end="2298" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="2607" end="2619" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="2629" end="2633" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q459842" start="4423" end="4437" title="Book of Mormon" label="Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847515" start="4453" end="4467" title="Standard Works" label="LDS scriptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293300" start="5110" end="5148" title="Sabellianism" label="also
is to be thought of as the Father"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5337" end="5357" title="Plan of salvation (Latter Day Saints)#Pre-mortal existence" label="pre-mortal existence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5375" end="5383" title="Ordination#The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="ordained"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397973" start="5608" end="5621" title="Eskdale, Utah" label="Eskdale, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398045" start="5635" end="5642" title="Eskdale (Scotland)" label="Eskdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="5644" end="5652" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26760" start="5712" end="5732" title="Millard County, Utah" label="Millard County, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="5759" end="5765" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q15110606" start="6467" end="6502" title="Utah Attorney General" label="Utah Attorney General&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791244" start="6511" end="6549" title="Arizona Attorney General" label="Arizona Attorney General&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q965093" start="6634" end="6655" title="Mormon fundamentalism" label="Fundamentalist Groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459202" start="6847" end="6855" title="Mormonism and polygamy" label="polygamy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416862" wikidata="Q4998733" url="?curid=416862" title="The Prison of Migration">
<text>The Prison of Migration () is an artistic Albanian film that treats the real situation of the 1990s Albania. It shows the suffering of Albanians away from their country, and trying to stay away from foreign jails of ex-Yugoslavia.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="42" end="49" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="51" end="55" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="135" end="144" title="Albanians" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="219" end="229" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416863" wikidata="Q3245440" url="?curid=416863" title="List of parliaments of the United Kingdom">
<text>This is a list of parliaments of the [[United Kingdom]], tabulated with the elections to the House of Commons and the list of members of the House.

The parliaments are numbered from the formation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. For previous Westminster parliaments, see the list of parliaments of Great Britain and list of parliaments of England. For pre-Union Dublin parliaments, see the list of parliaments of Ireland. For pre-1707 Scottish parliaments, see the list of parliaments of Scotland.

==List of parliaments==
==Notes==
==See also==
*Duration of English parliaments before 1660
*Duration of English, British and United Kingdom parliaments from 1660
*List of parliaments of England
*List of parliaments of Scotland
*List of parliaments of Great Britain
*List of British governments

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3245440" start="10" end="55" title="List of parliaments of the United Kingdom" label="list of parliaments of the [[United Kingdom]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="93" end="109" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="204" end="247" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="262" end="285" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Westminster parliaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593623" start="295" end="331" title="list of parliaments of Great Britain" label="list of parliaments of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887914" start="336" end="366" title="list of parliaments of England" label="list of parliaments of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="382" end="388" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593624" start="410" end="440" title="list of parliaments of Ireland" label="list of parliaments of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="455" end="463" title="Scotland" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q21068160" start="485" end="516" title="list of parliaments of Scotland" label="list of parliaments of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316268" start="567" end="610" title="Duration of English parliaments before 1660" label="Duration of English parliaments before 1660"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316267" start="612" end="681" title="Duration of English, British and United Kingdom parliaments from 1660" label="Duration of English, British and United Kingdom parliaments from 1660"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887914" start="683" end="713" title="List of parliaments of England" label="List of parliaments of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q21068160" start="715" end="746" title="List of parliaments of Scotland" label="List of parliaments of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593623" start="748" end="784" title="List of parliaments of Great Britain" label="List of parliaments of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249904" start="786" end="813" title="List of British governments" label="List of British governments"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416865" wikidata="Q1352339" url="?curid=416865" title="Danny Rolling">
<text>Danny Harold Rolling (May 26, 1954 – October 25, 2006), known as the Gainesville Ripper, was an American serial killer who murdered five college students in Gainesville, Florida over four days in August 1990.

He later confessed to raping several of his victims, committing a triple homicide in his home city of Shreveport, Louisiana, and attempting to murder his father in May 1990. In total, Rolling confessed to killing eight people. He was sentenced to death for the five Gainesville murders in 1994. He was executed by lethal injection in 2006.

His killing spree inspired the slasher film franchise &quot;Scream&quot;.

== Early years ==
Daniel &quot;Danny&quot; Rolling was one of two sons born to James Harold Rolling and Claudia Beatrice. James was a Korean War veteran in the U.S. Navy and a Shreveport police officer. He often abused his wife and sons for frivolous things, such as breathing in a way that displeased him; he also told his son that he was unwanted from birth. In one incident, Rolling&#x27;s mother went to the hospital after claiming her husband tried to make her cut herself with a razor blade. She made repeated attempts to leave her husband but always returned shortly after. James once pinned Rolling to the ground, handcuffed him, and had police take his son away because he was embarrassed by him. In another story, Rolling had a dog, but James beat the dog so often that it died in his son&#x27;s arms.

As a teenager and young adult, Rolling was arrested several times for robberies in Georgia and Alabama and was caught spying on a woman getting dressed. As an adult, he had trouble trying to assimilate into society and holding down a steady job. At one point, Rolling worked as a waiter at Pancho&#x27;s restaurant in Bossier City, Louisiana.

== Gainesville Murders ==
In August 1990, Rolling murdered five students (one student from Santa Fe College and four from the University of Florida) during a burglary and robbery spree in Gainesville, Florida. He mutilated his victims&#x27; bodies, decapitating one. He then posed them, sometimes using mirrors.

=== August 24, 1990 ===
In the early morning hours, Rolling broke into the apartment shared by two university freshmen, 18-year-old Sonja Larson and 17-year-old Christina Powell. Finding Powell asleep on the downstairs couch, he stood over her briefly but did not wake her up, choosing instead to go to the upstairs bedroom where Larson was also asleep. Rolling murdered Larson, first taping her mouth shut to stifle her screams, and then stabbing her to death with a Ka-Bar knife. She died trying to fend him off.

Rolling then went back downstairs, taped Powell&#x27;s mouth shut, bound her wrists together behind her back and threatened her with the knife as he cut her clothes off. He then raped her and forced her face-down onto the floor, where he killed her by stabbing her five times in the back. After killing Powell, Rolling went back upstairs and raped Larson&#x27;s corpse. He posed the bodies in sexually provocative positions and took a shower before leaving the apartment.

=== August 25, 1990 ===
Rolling broke into the apartment of Christa Hoyt, an 18-year-old chemistry honors student at Santa Fe College, prying open a sliding glass door with a screwdriver. Finding she was not home, he waited in the living room for her to return. At 11 a.m., Hoyt entered the apartment and was surprised by Rolling, who placed her in a chokehold. After she had been subdued, he used duct tape to gag her mouth and bind her wrists together behind her back and led her into the bedroom, where he cut the clothes from her body and raped her. As in the Powell murder, he forced her to lie face-down onto the bed and stabbed her in the back, rupturing her aorta. He then flipped her body over and sliced her abdomen open from her pubic bone to her breastbone. After arriving back at his campsite, Rolling could not find his wallet. Thinking he may have lost it at the murder scene, he returned there, at which time he decapitated Hoyt, posed her body in a sitting position at the edge of her bed and placed her head on a shelf facing the corpse. He later claimed his intent was to add to the shock of whoever discovered her.

By this point, the murders had attracted widespread media attention. Many students had begun taking extra precautions, such as changing their daily routines and sleeping together in groups. Because the spree was happening so early in the fall semester, some students withdrew their enrollment or transferred to other schools. 

=== August 27, 1990 ===
Tracy Paules, who was 23 years old, was living with her roommate Manny Taboada, also 23. Rolling broke into their apartment by prying open their sliding glass door with the same tools he had used previously. Rolling found Taboada asleep in one of the bedrooms and killed him after a struggle.

Hearing the commotion, Paules went down the hall to Taboada&#x27;s bedroom and saw Rolling. She attempted to barricade herself in her bedroom but Rolling broke through the door. Rolling taped her mouth and wrists, cut off her clothing, and raped her before turning her over and stabbing her three times in the back. Rolling posed Paules&#x27; body but left Taboada&#x27;s in the same position in which he had died.

With the exception of Taboada, all of the victims were petite white brunettes with brown eyes, like Rolling&#x27;s mother.

Although law enforcement initially had very few leads, police did identify two suspects. One suspect was Edward Lewis Humphrey, a 20-year-old University of Florida student who had a history of mental illness and had previously been convicted of felony assault against his grandmother; he was held in custody for five months until a grand jury refused to indict him on the murder charges, citing insufficient evidence. Humphrey&#x27;s photo was shown repeatedly by media outlets. Authorities publicly cleared him of all charges after Rolling&#x27;s arrest; he started taking medication for his manic depression, graduating in 1994 from a local college, then worked while studying part-time, graduating &quot;magna cum laude&quot; in 2000 from University of Central Florida. The other suspect was also later cleared.

== Shreveport murders and tip about Rolling ==
Louisiana police alerted Florida authorities to an unsolved triple murder in Shreveport on November 4, 1989. Detectives noted that there were similarities between the Gainesville murders and those of 55-year-old Tom Grissom, his 24-year-old daughter Julie, and his 8-year-old grandson Sean. The family had been attacked in their home as they were preparing for dinner. Afterwards, Julie Grissom&#x27;s body had been mutilated, cleaned, and posed.

Don Maines, an investigator on the case with the Florida Department of Law Enforcement, traveled to Shreveport in November 1990 because of similarities between the murders committed in Gainesville and murders committed in Shreveport; these included posing of the victims, tape residue on the victims&#x27; bodies, and vinegar used to cleanse the bodies. Maines said they tested the body fluids from the perpetrator in Shreveport and found that this person also had type B blood. He called the match to the evidence in Gainesville a &quot;revelation&quot; in the case.

Shortly after Maines&#x27; trip to Shreveport, a Shreveport resident, Cindy Juracich, called Crime Stoppers and reported that Danny Rolling was possibly connected to the murders in both cities. Three months earlier, in August 1990, Juracich heard a news report about a string of murders as she traveled through the Florida Panhandle. The report made her think about Rolling, whom she had met at her Louisiana hometown church, and his possible link to the murder of the Grissoms in Shreveport. Rolling had said deeply disturbing things to both her and her then-husband, Steven Dobbin. &quot;He&#x27;d come over every night for a while, and then one night, Steven came in and he goes, &#x27;He&#x27;s got to go, Juracich said. She also said that Dobbin told her that Rolling had told him he had a problem. &quot;I said, &#x27;What kind of problem, Juracich said, &quot;[and Steven said], &#x27;He likes to stick knives into people. Juracich said she dismissed these comments when she heard about them because she didn&#x27;t want to believe Rolling could be responsible for the murders in Shreveport. Rolling had also told her, One day, I&#x27;m going to leave this town and I&#x27;m going to go where the girls are beautiful and I can just lay in the sun and watch beautiful women all day.

News of the Gainesville murders haunted Juracich, so she finally contacted police in November, based on her hunch about Rolling&#x27;s connection to the murders in both cities. &quot;It would not let me rest,&quot; she said. &quot;One day, I picked up the phone, I called Crime Stoppers, and I said, &#x27;I think there&#x27;s one guy y&#x27;all need to Danny Rolling.

Investigators responded to the tip and quickly found Rolling, who had been arrested on September 7, 1990, for an Ocala, Florida, supermarket robbery. The robbery had been committed ten days after the bodies of Paules and Taboada were found. Rolling was being held in the Marion County Jail 40 miles south of Gainesville. Investigators determined that Rolling had type B blood, like the suspect in both the Gainesville and Shreveport murders.

Once Florida investigators realized that Rolling had multiple convictions for armed robbery, they realized he could have also been responsible for the bank robbery that occurred on the day Christa Hoyt&#x27;s body was found. They returned to the evidence locker, where the gun, screwdriver, bag of money, and cassette player had been stored, and listened to the tape. They also found tools matching marks left at the Gainesville murder scenes. The small camp where he had been living was in a wooded area near apartment complexes frequented by students; investigators discovered audio diaries he had made there alluding to the crimes.

Later it was discovered that on August 5, 1990, Rolling broke into the home of Janet Frake in Sarasota, Florida. He bound and gagged her with duct tape while he sexually assaulted her, but did not kill her.

== Charges and trial ==
In November 1991, Rolling was charged with five counts of murder. He was brought to trial nearly four years after the murders. He claimed his motive was to become a &quot;superstar&quot; similar to Ted Bundy. In 1994, before his trial could get underway, Rolling unexpectedly pleaded guilty to all charges. Subsequently, State Attorney Rod Smith presented the penalty phase of the prosecution. During his trial, Court TV conducted an interview with Rolling&#x27;s mother from her home, during which his father could be heard shouting off-camera.

On April 20, 1994, Rolling was sentenced to death. Rolling was diagnosed with antisocial personality disorder, borderline personality disorder, and paraphilia.

== Execution==
Shortly before he was executed in Florida for the series of killings in Gainesville, Rolling claimed responsibility for the Shreveport murders, handing his spiritual adviser Reverend Mike Hudspeth and Florida police a handwritten confession and apology. Rolling had a last meal of lobster tail. He sang a gospel hymn, but made no statement immediately before his execution, which was witnessed by many of his victims&#x27; relatives.

Rolling was executed by lethal injection at Florida State Prison on October 25, 2006, after the U.S. Supreme Court rejected a last-ditch appeal. He was pronounced dead at 6:13 p.m EDT.

== In media ==

Rolling has been the subject of several written works. His crime spree inspired screenwriter Kevin Williamson to pen the script of the 1996 slasher film &quot;Scream&quot;, which became a successful horror franchise.

Sondra London collaborated with Rolling on &quot;The Making of a Serial Killer: The True Story of the Gainesville Murders in the Killer&#x27;s Own Words.&quot; Rolling&#x27;s relationship with London, which developed while he was behind bars, was the focus of an episode of Errol Morris&#x27; &quot;First Person&quot;. Rolling and London became romantically involved, eventually even becoming engaged. The series overviewed their romance, his artwork, and his supposed feelings of remorse over the crimes he committed. It also included a segment of Rolling using one of his hearings as an opportunity to publicly display his affection, serenading London in the courtroom.

A 2007 independent feature film titled &quot;The Gainesville Ripper&quot;, based on accounts of the killings, was shot in the Gainesville and Jacksonville, Florida areas. In the film, Rolling is portrayed by Zachary Memos.

Rolling was also the subject of an episode of &quot;Body of Evidence: From the Case Files of Dayle Hinman&quot;, a Court TV show (transmitted as &quot;Crime Scene USA: Body of Evidence&quot; on Discovery Channel in the UK) and an episode of &quot;Forensic Factor&quot; titled &quot;Killing Spree&quot;, which originally aired on Discovery Channel Canada and was rebroadcast in America on the Science Channel.

Rolling was the subject of a 2010 episode of &quot;Cold Blood&quot;, and briefly was mentioned in a 2012 episode of &quot;Motives and Murders&quot; titled &quot;Not Again&quot;. He was featured in a 2015 episode of &quot;Nightmare Next Door&quot;.

In 2013, TV documentary series &quot;The Real Story&quot; aired an episode profiling the movie &quot;Scream&quot;. It aired July 28, 2013, and tells the story of Rolling&#x27;s murders in graphic detail.

An episode of &quot;Murder Made Me Famous&quot;, which aired November 24, 2018, chronicled the case.

The premiere episode of &quot;Mark of a Killer&quot;, titled &quot;Posed to Kill&quot;, documented the case.

In 2020, WUFT News released a television special and podcast special chronicling thoughts on the case 30 years later, titled Four Days, Five Murders.

In 2021, an episode of the ABC primetime true crime television series &quot;20/20&quot; aired the murder case.

On January 14, 2022, Discovery+ premiered the paranormal documentary &quot;Scream: The True Story&quot;, starring Steve Shippy and Cindy Kaza. Shippy and Kaza conduct a paranormal investigation in Rolling&#x27;s childhood home in Shreveport, Louisiana.

== See also ==
* 2022 University of Idaho killings, four university roommates killed in Idaho
*Ted Bundy, killed university sorority house roommates in Florida
*Ma Jiajue, killed four university roommates in China
*Elliot Rodger, stabbed to death roommates near university in California
*Nathaniel Code, another serial killer from Shreveport with eight victims
* List of people executed in Florida
* List of people executed in the United States in 2006
* List of serial killers in the United States

== References ==

== External links ==

*Danny Rolling, Gainesville Ripper. &quot;Crime Library&quot;. Retrieved on November 14, 2007.
*Profile of Daniel Harold Rolling at About.com
*Inmate Release Information Detail - Inmate 521178. &quot;Florida Department of Corrections&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1352339" start="0" end="20" title="Danny Rolling" label="Danny Harold Rolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352339" start="65" end="87" title="Danny Rolling" label="the Gainesville Ripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q484188" start="105" end="118" title="serial killer" label="serial killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q487999" start="157" end="177" title="Gainesville, Florida" label="Gainesville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q149086" start="283" end="291" title="homicide" label="homicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q80517" start="312" end="322" title="Shreveport, Louisiana" label="Shreveport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="324" end="333" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q210035" start="524" end="540" title="lethal injection" label="lethal injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q853630" start="582" end="594" title="slasher film" label="slasher film"/>
<link wikidata="Q388659" start="611" end="617" title="Scream (franchise)" label="Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="760" end="770" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="786" end="795" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="1522" end="1529" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="1534" end="1541" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130348" start="1729" end="1742" title="Pancho&amp;#x27;s" label="Pancho&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q877897" start="1757" end="1780" title="Bossier City, Louisiana" label="Bossier City, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419511" start="1874" end="1890" title="Santa Fe College" label="Santa Fe College"/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="1909" end="1930" title="University of Florida" label="University of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q487999" start="1971" end="1982" title="Gainesville, Florida" label="Gainesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718354" start="2564" end="2570" title="Ka-Bar" label="Ka-Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="2790" end="2794" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q181843" start="2954" end="2980" title="Necrophilia" label="raped Larson&amp;#x27;s corpse"/>
<link wikidata="Q172336" start="3436" end="3445" title="chokehold" label="chokehold"/>
<link wikidata="Q101004" start="3751" end="3756" title="aorta" label="aorta"/>
<link wikidata="Q220815" start="3825" end="3835" title="pubic bone" label="pubic bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8481" start="3843" end="3853" title="breastbone" label="breastbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367101" start="5351" end="5360" title="Brown hair" label="brunettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="5549" end="5570" title="University of Florida" label="University of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="5739" end="5749" title="grand jury" label="grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q14685856" start="6042" end="6057" title="Eastern Florida State College" label="a local college"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581478" start="6114" end="6129" title="magna cum laude" label="magna cum laude"/>
<link wikidata="Q143451" start="6149" end="6178" title="University of Central Florida" label="University of Central Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461319" start="6767" end="6804" title="Florida Department of Law Enforcement" label="Florida Department of Law Enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q47657" start="7183" end="7195" title="Blood type" label="type B blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115816" start="7380" end="7394" title="Crime Stoppers" label="Crime Stoppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430068" start="7602" end="7619" title="Florida Panhandle" label="Florida Panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q918195" start="9060" end="9074" title="Ocala, Florida" label="Ocala, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q501014" start="9218" end="9231" title="Marion County, Florida" label="Marion County"/>
<link wikidata="Q53706" start="9468" end="9481" title="armed robbery" label="armed robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q491540" start="10120" end="10137" title="Sarasota, Florida" label="Sarasota, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q192218" start="10456" end="10465" title="Ted Bundy" label="Ted Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60656247" start="10670" end="10678" title="Court TV" label="Court TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q118418" start="10883" end="10914" title="antisocial personality disorder" label="antisocial personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q208166" start="10916" end="10947" title="borderline personality disorder" label="borderline personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q178059" start="10953" end="10963" title="paraphilia" label="paraphilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605306" start="11249" end="11258" title="last meal" label="last meal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="11286" end="11297" title="gospel hymn" label="gospel hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q210035" start="11440" end="11456" title="lethal injection" label="lethal injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q258932" start="11460" end="11480" title="Florida State Prison" label="Florida State Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q360642" start="11711" end="11727" title="Kevin Williamson (screenwriter)" label="Kevin Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q853630" start="11758" end="11770" title="slasher film" label="slasher film"/>
<link wikidata="Q27411" start="11777" end="11783" title="Scream (1996 film)" label="Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q388659" start="11824" end="11833" title="Scream (franchise)" label="franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560904" start="11836" end="11849" title="Sondra London" label="Sondra London"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="12651" end="12663" title="Jacksonville" label="Jacksonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243168" start="12826" end="12838" title="Dayle Hinman" label="Dayle Hinman"/>
<link wikidata="Q60656247" start="12848" end="12856" title="Court TV" label="Court TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="12927" end="12944" title="Discovery Channel" label="Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468666" start="12980" end="12995" title="Forensic Factor" label="Forensic Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621783" start="13062" end="13086" title="Discovery Channel Canada" label="Discovery Channel Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q845056" start="13125" end="13140" title="Science Channel" label="Science Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142188" start="13194" end="13204" title="Cold Blood (TV series)" label="Cold Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q55625237" start="13364" end="13383" title="Nightmare Next Door" label="Nightmare Next Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027753" start="13429" end="13443" title="The Real Story (TV series)" label="The Real Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q109254609" start="13729" end="13745" title="Mark of a Killer" label="Mark of a Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956583" start="13818" end="13822" title="WUFT (TV)" label="WUFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="13987" end="13990" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q197867" start="14036" end="14041" title="20/20 (American TV program)" label="20/20"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353377" start="14186" end="14198" title="Prozak (rapper)" label="Steve Shippy"/>
<link wikidata="Q115288121" start="14343" end="14376" title="2022 University of Idaho killings" label="2022 University of Idaho killings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14421" end="14430" title="Ted Bundy#Florida" label="Ted Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15898324" start="14487" end="14496" title="Ma Jiajue" label="Ma Jiajue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938335" start="14541" end="14554" title="2014 Isla Vista killings" label="Elliot Rodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q111711255" start="14614" end="14628" title="Nathaniel Code" label="Nathaniel Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q24961997" start="14689" end="14723" title="List of people executed in Florida" label="List of people executed in Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q111629839" start="14726" end="14778" title="List of people executed in the United States in 2006" label="List of people executed in the United States in 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638171" start="14781" end="14824" title="List of serial killers in the United States" label="List of serial killers in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q124250582" start="14998" end="15007" title="About.com" label="About.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461316" start="15066" end="15099" title="Florida Department of Corrections" label="Florida Department of Corrections"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416866" wikidata="Q281467" url="?curid=416866" title="Batman (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Batman]] is a superhero appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics.

Batman or The Batman may also refer to:

==Art, entertainment, and media==

===Characters===
* Batman (Terry McGinnis)
* Batman (Thomas Wayne)
* Batman (Earth-Two)
* Batman of Zur-En-Arrh
* Batman (&quot;Gotham&quot; television series character)
* Batman (DC Extended Universe character)
* Batman (&quot;Dark Knight&quot; trilogy character)
* Batman (1989 film series character)
* Batman (Jace Fox)

=== Print media ===

* &quot;Batman&quot; (comic book), a comic book published from 1940 to the present, focusing on the mainstream version of the character
* &quot;Batman&quot; (comic strip), in newspapers from 1943 to 1991
* &quot;Batman&quot; (manga), several comic series published in Japan

=== Films ===

* &quot;Batman&quot; (1966 film), based on the 1966 television series
* &quot;Batman&quot; (1989 film) 
* &quot;Batman&quot; (serial), a 1943 film serial
* &quot;The Batman&quot; (film), a 2022 film

===Television===
* &quot;Batman&quot; (TV series), 1966–1968 series
* &quot;The Adventures of Batman&quot;, a 1968–1969 animated series (aka: &quot;The Batman/Superman Hour&quot; and &quot;Batman with Robin the Boy Wonder&quot;)
* &quot;&quot;, a 1992–1995 animated series
* &quot;The Batman&quot; (TV series), a 2000s animated series
* &quot;&quot;, a 2008–2011 animated series
* &quot;&quot;, a 2024 animated series 

=== Video games ===

* &quot;Batman&quot; (1986 video game), for Amstrad CPC, MSX, and ZX Spectrum
* &quot;Batman&quot; (1989 video game), for Amiga, Amstrad CPC, Atari ST, Commodore 64, MS-DOS, MSX, and ZX Spectrum
* &quot;&quot;, released in 1989 for NES and Game Boy
* &quot;Batman&quot; (Sega Genesis video game), released in 1990
* &quot;Batman&quot; (1990 arcade game), released by Atari
* &quot;Batman&quot; (2013 arcade game), released by Raw Thrills
* &quot;&quot;, released by Telltale Games in 2016
** &quot;&quot;, the sequel released by Telltale Games in 2017
* , a series that as of now has been serialized from 2009-2024 with the inclusion of
* Suicide Squad: Kill the Justice League

=== Music ===
* &quot;Batman Theme&quot;, by Neal Hefti for the 1960s television show, and recorded by many artists since
** &quot;Batman!&quot; (Jan and Dean song), based on the theme by Neal Hefti
* &quot;Batman&quot; (album), an album by Prince
* &quot;Batman&quot; (score), the film score by Danny Elfman for the 1989 film
** &quot;The Batman Theme&quot;, theme to the 1989 film, appearing on &quot;Batman&quot; (score)
* &quot;Batman&quot;, a 2017 song by Jaden Smith from the album &quot;Syre&quot;
* &quot;The Batman&quot; (soundtrack), the film score by Michael Giacchino for the 2022 film
** &quot;The Batman&quot;, theme to the 2022 film, appearing on &quot;The Batman&quot; (soundtrack)

===Toy line===
* Batman (2003 toy line), six-inch model figures

== Places ==
=== Australia ===
* Division of Batman, a former electoral district in Melbourne, Victoria, named after one of the city&#x27;s founders, John Batman
** Batman railway station

===Iran===
* Batman, Iran, a village in Kermanshah Province, Iran

=== Turkey ===
* Batman, Turkey, a city in the Southeastern Anatolia Region
** Batman Province
** Batman District
** Batman, Tunceli
** Batman (electoral district)
** Batman River

==People==
* Batman (surname), a surname (and list of people with the name)

===As nickname or stage name===
* Antonis Fotsis (born 1981), Greek basketball player also known as Batman
* Haim Gozali (born 1973), Israeli mixed martial artist also known as Batman
* Marques Houston (born 1981), American entertainer also known as Batman
* Bershawn Jackson (born 1983), American athlete also known as Batman
* The Batman rapist, a UK murderer and rapist

== Other uses ==
* Batman (military), a soldier assigned as a personal valet to a commissioned officer
* Batman (truck), a monster truck that debuted in 2006
* Batman (unit), a historical unit of measure
* , a steel inverted roller coaster 
* B.A.T.M.A.N., a mesh network routing protocol
* Bayesian tool for methylation analysis, also known as BATMAN
* Batman&#x27;s Treaty, a historical Australian treaty
* &quot;Batman&quot;, a junior synonym of the fish genus &quot;Cryptocentrus&quot;

== See also ==
*
* Man-Bat, a DC Comics character
* List of DC Comics characters named Batman, other superheroes who adopted the identity
* Batman franchise media, for the DC Comics franchise
* Batman and Robin
* Batman&#x27;s Treaty, a treaty between John Batman and a group of Wurundjeri elders for the rental of Aboriginal lands
* Bathmen, a municipality in the Netherlands
* Batsman, in stick-and-ball sports
* Battman (Tony Silipini, 1931–2021), American wrestler
* Batter (disambiguation)
* Bruce Wayne (disambiguation)
* Vampire (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q281467" start="0" end="10" title="Batman (disambiguation)" label="[[Batman]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q281467" start="85" end="91" title="Batman (disambiguation)" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q281467" start="95" end="105" title="Batman (disambiguation)" label="The Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601118" start="180" end="203" title="Batman (Terry McGinnis)" label="Batman (Terry McGinnis)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25442668" start="206" end="227" title="Batman (Thomas Wayne)" label="Batman (Thomas Wayne)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636199" start="230" end="248" title="Batman (Earth-Two)" label="Batman (Earth-Two)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636202" start="251" end="272" title="Batman of Zur-En-Arrh" label="Batman of Zur-En-Arrh"/>
<link wikidata="Q39075549" start="275" end="330" title="Bruce Wayne (Gotham)" label="Batman (&amp;quot;Gotham&amp;quot; television series character)"/>
<link wikidata="Q57394119" start="333" end="372" title="Bruce Wayne (DC Extended Universe)" label="Batman (DC Extended Universe character)"/>
<link wikidata="Q78607187" start="375" end="425" title="Bruce Wayne (Dark Knight trilogy)" label="Batman (&amp;quot;Dark Knight&amp;quot; trilogy character)"/>
<link wikidata="Q94496874" start="428" end="463" title="Bruce Wayne (1989 film series character)" label="Batman (1989 film series character)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115818132" start="466" end="483" title="Batman (Jace Fox)" label="Batman (Jace Fox)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633138" start="508" end="539" title="Batman (comic book)" label="&amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot; (comic book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869387" start="644" end="676" title="Batman (comic strip)" label="&amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot; (comic strip)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16479459" start="712" end="738" title="Batman (manga)" label="&amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot; (manga)"/>
<link wikidata="Q810857" start="798" end="828" title="Batman (1966 film)" label="&amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot; (1966 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q116852" start="868" end="898" title="Batman (1989 film)" label="&amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot; (1989 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q205575" start="902" end="929" title="Batman (serial)" label="&amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot; (serial)"/>
<link wikidata="Q61117344" start="952" end="981" title="The Batman (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Batman&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247201" start="1015" end="1045" title="Batman (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q810856" start="1072" end="1096" title="The Adventures of Batman" label="The Adventures of Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280006" start="1144" end="1168" title="The Batman/Superman Hour" label="The Batman/Superman Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q635933" start="1271" end="1305" title="The Batman (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Batman&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703636" start="1439" end="1475" title="Batman (1986 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot; (1986 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q245863" start="1517" end="1553" title="Batman (1989 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot; (1989 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891476" start="1688" end="1732" title="Batman (Sega Genesis video game)" label="&amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot; (Sega Genesis video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q596699" start="1753" end="1790" title="Batman (1990 arcade game)" label="&amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot; (1990 arcade game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155090" start="1812" end="1849" title="Batman (2013 arcade game)" label="&amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot; (2013 arcade game)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2076" end="2114" title="Suicide Squad: Kill the Justice League" label="Suicide Squad: Kill the Justice League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869416" start="2138" end="2150" title="Batman Theme" label="Batman Theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q25045550" start="2241" end="2280" title="Batman! (Jan and Dean song)" label="&amp;quot;Batman!&amp;quot; (Jan and Dean song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q540890" start="2317" end="2343" title="Batman (album)" label="&amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q626995" start="2366" end="2392" title="Batman (score)" label="&amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot; (score)"/>
<link wikidata="Q626995" start="2513" end="2539" title="Batman (score)" label="&amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot; (score)"/>
<link wikidata="Q46080402" start="2610" end="2614" title="Syre (album)" label="Syre"/>
<link wikidata="Q111365083" start="2623" end="2658" title="The Batman (soundtrack)" label="&amp;quot;The Batman&amp;quot; (soundtrack)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111365083" start="2778" end="2813" title="The Batman (soundtrack)" label="&amp;quot;The Batman&amp;quot; (soundtrack)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869385" start="2832" end="2854" title="Batman (2003 toy line)" label="Batman (2003 toy line)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973440" start="2913" end="2931" title="Division of Batman" label="Division of Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869423" start="3045" end="3067" title="Batman railway station" label="Batman railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739666" start="3082" end="3094" title="Batman, Iran" label="Batman, Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q159835" start="3153" end="3167" title="Batman, Turkey" label="Batman, Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q80370" start="3215" end="3230" title="Batman Province" label="Batman Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902897" start="3234" end="3249" title="Batman District" label="Batman District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859856" start="3253" end="3268" title="Batman, Tunceli" label="Batman, Tunceli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094903" start="3272" end="3299" title="Batman (electoral district)" label="Batman (electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004311" start="3303" end="3315" title="Batman River" label="Batman River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16479466" start="3330" end="3346" title="Batman (surname)" label="Batman (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q471572" start="3428" end="3442" title="Antonis Fotsis" label="Antonis Fotsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43301959" start="3503" end="3514" title="Haim Gozali" label="Haim Gozali"/>
<link wikidata="Q187107" start="3580" end="3595" title="Marques Houston" label="Marques Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q15512" start="3653" end="3669" title="Bershawn Jackson" label="Bershawn Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869424" start="3727" end="3740" title="Batman rapist" label="Batman rapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q683414" start="3787" end="3804" title="Batman (military)" label="Batman (military)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257198" start="3873" end="3887" title="Batman (truck)" label="Batman (truck)"/>
<link wikidata="Q359587" start="3928" end="3941" title="Batman (unit)" label="Batman (unit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q430601" start="4011" end="4023" title="B.A.T.M.A.N." label="B.A.T.M.A.N."/>
<link wikidata="Q4874479" start="4059" end="4097" title="Bayesian tool for methylation analysis" label="Bayesian tool for methylation analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q810862" start="4122" end="4142" title="Batman&amp;#x27;s Treaty" label="Batman&amp;#x27;s Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q870074" start="4238" end="4251" title="Cryptocentrus" label="Cryptocentrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471053" start="4278" end="4285" title="Man-Bat" label="Man-Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="4311" end="4352" title="List of DC Comics characters named Batman" label="List of DC Comics characters named Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869422" start="4399" end="4421" title="Batman franchise media" label="Batman franchise media"/>
<link wikidata="Q117075312" start="4453" end="4469" title="Batman and Robin" label="Batman and Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q810862" start="4472" end="4492" title="Batman&amp;#x27;s Treaty" label="Batman&amp;#x27;s Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q810795" start="4593" end="4600" title="Bathmen" label="Bathmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q810903" start="4638" end="4645" title="Batsman" label="Batsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822875" start="4674" end="4681" title="Battman" label="Battman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247545" start="4730" end="4753" title="Batter (disambiguation)" label="Batter (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920368" start="4756" end="4784" title="Bruce Wayne (disambiguation)" label="Bruce Wayne (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10712520" start="4787" end="4811" title="Vampire (disambiguation)" label="Vampire (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416867" wikidata="Q13307" url="?curid=416867" title="Nauruan language">
<text>Nauruan or Nauru&lt;ref name=&quot;ISO 639-2/RA&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=&quot;ISO 639-3/RA&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; () is an Austronesian language, spoken natively in the island country of Nauru. Its relationship to the other Micronesian languages is not well understood.

==Phonology==

===Consonants===
Nauruan has 16–17 consonant phonemes. Nauruan makes phonemic contrasts between velarized and palatalized labial consonants. Velarization is not apparent before long back vowels and palatalization is not apparent before non-low front vowels.

Voiceless stops are geminated and nasals also contrast in length. Dental stops and become and respectively before high front vowels.

The approximants become fricatives in &quot;emphatic pronunciation.&quot; transcribes them as and but also remarks that they contrast with the non-syllabic allophones of the high vowels. can also be heard as a fricative .

Depending on stress, may be a flap or a trill. The precise phonetic nature of is unknown. transcribes it as and speculates that it may pattern like palatalized consonants and be partially devoiced.

Between a vowel and word-final , an epenthetic appears.

===Vowels===
There are 12 phonemic vowels (six long, six short). In addition to the allophony in the following table from , a number of vowels reduce to :


Non-open vowels (that is, all but ) become non-syllabic when preceding another vowel, as in → (&#x27;hide&#x27;).

===Stress===

Stress is on the penultimate syllable when the final syllable ends in a vowel, on the last syllable when it ends in a consonant, and initial with reduplications.

== Writing system ==
In the original writing system for Nauruan, 17 letters were used:
* The five vowels: a, e, i, o, u
* Twelve consonants: b, d, g, j, k, m, n, p, q, r, t, w

The letters c, f, h, l, s, v, x, y, and z were not included. With the growing influence of foreign languages, in particular German, English, Gilbertese, and part of the Pama-Nyungan family, more letters were incorporated into the Nauruan alphabet. In addition, phonetic differences of a few vowels arose, so that umlauts and other similar sounds were indicated with a tilde.

=== Attempt at language reform of 1938 ===
In 1938, there was an attempt by the Nauruan language committee and Timothy Detudamo to make the language easier to read for Europeans and Americans. It was intended to introduce as many diacritical symbols as possible for the different vowel sounds to state the variety of the Nauruan language in writing. It was decided to introduce only a circumflex accent in the place of the former tilde, so that the characters &quot;õ&quot; and &quot;ũ&quot; were replaced by &quot;ô&quot; and &quot;û&quot;. The &quot;ã&quot; was replaced with &quot;e&quot;.

Also, &quot;y&quot; was introduced in order to differentiate words with the English &quot;j&quot; (). Thus, words like were changed to . In addition, &quot;ñ&quot; (which represented the velar nasal) was replaced with &quot;ng&quot;, to avoid confusion with the Spanish Ñ. &quot;bu&quot; and &quot;qu&quot; were replaced with &quot;bw&quot; and &quot;kw&quot;, respectively. &quot;ts&quot; was replaced with &quot;j&quot; (since it represented a sound similar to the English &quot;j&quot;); and the &quot;w&quot; written at the end of words was dropped.

These reforms were only partly carried out: the symbols &quot;õ&quot; and &quot;ũ&quot; are still written as such, with tildes. However, the letters &quot;ã&quot; and &quot;ñ&quot; are now only seldom used, being replaced with &quot;e&quot; and &quot;ng&quot;, as prescribed by the reform. Likewise, use of the digraphs &quot;bw&quot; and &quot;kw&quot; has been implemented. Although &quot;j&quot; took the place of &quot;ts&quot;, certain spellings still use &quot;ts&quot;: e.g., the districts Baiti and Ijuw (according to the reform and ) are still written with the old writing conventions. The &quot;y&quot; has become generally accepted.

Today the following 30 Latin letters are used.
* Vowels: a, ã, e, i, o, õ, u, ũ
* Consonants: b, c, d, f, g, h, j, k, l, m, n, ñ, p, q, r, s, t, v, w, x, y, z

The relationship of the above letters and phonemes is: a [ɑ/a], ã [ɛ], e [e/e̞/ɛ], i [i/ɪ/ɨ], o [o/ɔ], õ [ø], u [ʊ/ʉ], ũ [y], b [b], bw [b͡w], c [k/s], d [d], di [ʤi], f [f], g [g], gw [g͡w], h [h], j [ʤ̊], k [k], kw [k͡w], nng [ŋː], l [l], m [m], n [n], ñ [ŋ], p [p], qu [k͡w], r [ɾ/r], s [s], t [t], ti [ʧi], ts [ʤ̊], v [f/v], w [w/ɣ], x [k͡s], y [j/ʝ], z [z].

== Dialects ==
According to a report published in 1937 in Sydney, Australia, there was a diversity of dialects until Nauru became a colony of Germany in 1888 and the first texts in Nauruan began to be published. The varieties were so divergent that people from different districts often had problems understanding each other completely. With the increasing influence of foreign languages and the rise in the number of Nauruan texts, the dialects blended into a standardized language, which was promoted through dictionaries and translations by Alois Kayser and Philip Delaporte.

Today there is significantly less dialectal variation. In the district of Yaren and the surrounding area there is an eponymous dialect spoken, which is only slightly different from other varieties.

==Delaporte&#x27;s Nauruan dictionary==
In 1907, Philip Delaporte published his pocket German-Nauruan dictionary. The dictionary is small (10.5 × 14 cm), with 65 pages devoted to the glossary and an additional dozen to phrases, arranged alphabetically by the German. Approximately 1650 German words are glossed in Nauruan, often by phrases or synonymous forms. There are some 1300 &#x27;unique&#x27; Nauruan forms in the glosses, including all those occurring in phrases, ignoring diacritical marks. The accents used there are not common; just one accent (the tilde) is in use today.

== Sample text ==
The following example of text is from the Bible (Genesis, 1.1–1.8):

&quot;1&quot; &quot;2&quot; &quot;3&quot; &quot;4&quot; &quot;5&quot; &quot;6&quot; &quot;7&quot; &quot;8&quot;

This text demonstrates a few of the German loanwords (e.g. , &quot;God&quot;; and , &quot;celestial sphere&quot;) in Nauruan, which is traced back to the strong influence of German missionaries.

== Phrases ==
== References ==
==Bibliography==

*&quot;Nauru Grammar&quot;, by Alois Kayser compiled (1936); distributed by the German embassy 1993, 


==Further reading==


==External links==




===Known===
Nauruan language is one of the languages that does not exist yet in Google Translate.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13307" start="0" end="7" title="Nauruan language" label="Nauruan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13307" start="11" end="16" title="Nauruan language" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="132" end="153" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="178" end="192" title="island country" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="196" end="201" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q38035" start="330" end="339" title="consonant" label="consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="340" end="347" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q852201" start="574" end="582" title="geminate" label="geminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="1714" end="1719" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38035" start="1745" end="1754" title="consonant" label="consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1917" end="1923" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1925" end="1932" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q30898" start="1934" end="1944" title="Gilbertese language" label="Gilbertese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33942" start="1962" end="1981" title="Pama–Nyungan languages" label="Pama-Nyungan family"/>
<link wikidata="Q310554" start="2106" end="2112" title="I-mutation" label="umlaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q11167" start="2161" end="2166" title="tilde" label="tilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q563257" start="2280" end="2296" title="Timothy Detudamo" label="Timothy Detudamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="2399" end="2408" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11167" start="2599" end="2604" title="tilde" label="tilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q463515" start="2950" end="2961" title="velar nasal" label="velar nasal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="3025" end="3032" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q476" start="3033" end="3034" title="Ñ" label="Ñ"/>
<link wikidata="Q328727" start="3815" end="3820" title="Baiti" label="Baiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q328738" start="3825" end="3829" title="Ijuw District" label="Ijuw"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="4012" end="4017" title="Vowel" label="Vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38035" start="4045" end="4054" title="Consonant" label="Consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="4545" end="4551" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="4553" end="4562" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="4629" end="4636" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="4758" end="4767" title="Districts of Nauru" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q63496" start="5031" end="5043" title="Alois Kayser" label="Alois Kayser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931808" start="5048" end="5064" title="Philip Delaporte" label="Philip Delaporte"/>
<link wikidata="Q31026" start="5141" end="5146" title="Yaren District" label="Yaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931808" start="5315" end="5331" title="Philip Delaporte" label="Philip Delaporte"/>
<link wikidata="Q23622" start="5368" end="5378" title="dictionary" label="dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="5525" end="5531" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q632346" start="5569" end="5574" title="gloss (transliteration)" label="gloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="5747" end="5758" title="diacritical" label="diacritical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11167" start="5826" end="5831" title="tilde" label="tilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="5911" end="5916" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="5918" end="5925" title="Book of Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q764974" start="6087" end="6102" title="German loanword" label="German loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="6118" end="6121" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="6141" end="6157" title="celestial sphere" label="celestial sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="6225" end="6231" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="6232" end="6244" title="missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q63496" start="6327" end="6339" title="Alois Kayser" label="Alois Kayser"/>
<link wikidata="Q135622" start="6525" end="6541" title="Google Translate" label="Google Translate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416870" wikidata="Q3787431" url="?curid=416870" title="Huemac">
<text>In Mexica legendary tradition, Huemac (fl. c. 11th century), also spelled Hueymac or Huehmac, is described as being the last king of the (equally legendary and semi-mythical) Toltec state before the fall of Tula/Tōllān.

His name is traditionally translated as &quot;Big Hand&quot;, but other scholars maintain the more succinct translation is &quot;Big Gift&quot;.

All information about this figure stems from Aztec literature written centuries later. As with just about everything to do with the &#x27;Toltecs&#x27;, whom the Aztecs and other central Mexican cultures of the Postclassic era held up as their valiant precursors whose legacy and authority they inherited, actual and discernible historical data is scant. A number of contemporary Mesoamerican studies question whether the Toltec existed as a coherent state or group at all, and likewise whether Huemac was an actual figure remains highly debatable.

After the fall of the Toltec capital Huemac traveled for some years with a diminishing band of followers, and then died in a cave at Chapultepec, part of Mexico City. The date of his death, from various accounts and various attempts to correlate the accounts with the Gregorian calendar, range from the 1090s to the 1170s.

==Notes==
==References==

== External links ==
* Huemac and the Legendary Fall of Tollan a look at various accounts by Eric Rosenfield</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3307681" start="3" end="9" title="Mexica" label="Mexica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787431" start="31" end="37" title="Huemac" label="Huemac"/>
<link wikidata="Q36424" start="39" end="42" title="floruit" label="fl."/>
<link wikidata="Q3787431" start="74" end="81" title="Huemac" label="Hueymac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787431" start="85" end="92" title="Huemac" label="Huehmac"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="125" end="129" title="monarch" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q187897" start="175" end="181" title="Toltec" label="Toltec"/>
<link wikidata="Q568672" start="207" end="211" title="Tula (Mesoamerican site)" label="Tula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368626" start="212" end="218" title="Tōllān" label="Tōllān"/>
<link wikidata="Q587240" start="412" end="428" title="Aztec codices" label="Aztec literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307681" start="554" end="560" title="Mexica" label="Mexica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964" start="578" end="593" title="Mesoamerican chronology" label="Postclassic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q523194" start="1050" end="1061" title="Chapultepec" label="Chapultepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="1071" end="1082" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="1185" end="1203" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416871" wikidata="Q520917" url="?curid=416871" title="Aristeas">
<text>Aristeas () was a semi-legendary Greek poet and miracle-worker, a native of Proconnesus in Asia Minor, active ca. 7th century BC. The Suda claims that, whenever he wished, his soul could leave his body and return again. In book IV.13-16 of &quot;The Histories&quot;, Herodotus reports:

:The birthplace of Aristeas, the poet who sung of these things, I have already mentioned. I will now relate a tale which I heard concerning him both at Proconnesus and at Cyzicus. Aristeas, they said, who belonged to one of the noblest families in the island, had entered one day into a fuller&#x27;s shop, when he suddenly dropt down dead. Hereupon the fuller shut up his shop, and went to tell Aristeas&#x27; kindred what had happened. The report of the death had just spread through the town, when a certain Cyzicenian, lately arrived from Artaca, contradicted the rumour, affirming that he had met Aristeas on his road to Cyzicus, and had spoken with him. This man, therefore, strenuously denied the rumour; the relations, however, proceeded to the fuller&#x27;s shop with all things necessary for the funeral, intending to carry the body away. But on the shop being opened, no Aristeas was found, either dead or alive. Seven years afterwards he reappeared, they told me, in Proconnesus, and wrote the poem called by the Greeks the &quot;Arimaspeia&quot;, after which he disappeared a second time. This is the tale current in the two cities above-mentioned.

Two hundred and forty years after his death, Aristeas is said to have appeared in Metapontum in southern Italy to command that a statue of himself be set up and a new altar dedicated to Apollo, saying that since his death he had been travelling with Apollo in the form of a sacred raven.

==&quot;Arimaspeia&quot;==
Aristeas was supposed to have authored a poem called the &quot;Arimaspeia&quot;, giving an account of travels in the far North. There he encountered a tribe called the Issedones, who told him of still more fantastic and northerly peoples: the one-eyed Arimaspi, who battle gold-guarding griffins; and the Hyperboreans, among whom Apollo lives during the winter.

Longinus excerpts a portion of the poem:
:A marvel exceeding great is this withal to my soul—
:Men dwell on the water afar from the land, where deep seas roll.
:Wretches are they, for they reap but a harvest of travail and pain,
:Their eyes on the stars ever dwell, while their hearts abide in the main.
:Often, I ween, to the Gods are their hands upraised on high,
:And with hearts in misery heavenward-lifted in prayer do they cry.

Similarly, in his book &quot;Chiliades&quot;, Ioannes Tzetzes quotes the &quot;Arimaspeia&quot;. These two accounts form our entire knowledge of the poem, which is otherwise lost.

==In popular culture==
Neil Gaiman&#x27;s &quot;Sandman&quot; comics refer to this story: Aristeas was a poet who lived around 700 BC, and was transformed into one of many ravens who have acted as both adviser and assistant to the Endless known as Dream. Not to be confused with the raven Matthew, the main raven in the Sandman tale, who existed in human form in the Swamp Thing continuity before his time as a resident of the Dreaming.
One of the three permanent guardians of the Sandman&#x27;s castle-gate is a griffon, who on one occasion tells Matthew that he &quot;was hatched and raised in the mountains of Arimaspia.&quot;.

==See also==

* Dzungarian Gate

==References==

* Bolton, James David Pennington (1962), &quot;Aristeas of Proconnesus&quot;, Clarendon Press, Oxford, </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q520917" start="0" end="8" title="Aristeas" label="Aristeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44342" start="23" end="29" title="legend" label="legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="39" end="43" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874020" start="48" end="62" title="Iatromantis" label="miracle-worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q950908" start="76" end="87" title="Proconnesus" label="Proconnesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="91" end="101" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="134" end="138" title="Suda" label="Suda"/>
<link wikidata="Q818844" start="172" end="180" title="Astral Projection" label="his soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q746583" start="246" end="259" title="Histories (Herodotus)" label="The Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="267" end="276" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16622274" start="439" end="450" title="Proconnesus (city)" label="Proconnesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q615449" start="458" end="465" title="Cyzicus" label="Cyzicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585730" start="574" end="580" title="fulling" label="fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11906714" start="830" end="836" title="Artace (Mysia)" label="Artaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q615449" start="913" end="920" title="Cyzicus" label="Cyzicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16622274" start="1266" end="1277" title="Proconnesus (city)" label="Proconnesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058770" start="1532" end="1542" title="Metapontum" label="Metapontum"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="1546" end="1560" title="Mezzogiorno" label="southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8335" start="1731" end="1736" title="raven" label="raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079061" start="1934" end="1943" title="Issedones" label="Issedones"/>
<link wikidata="Q661584" start="2018" end="2026" title="Arimaspi" label="Arimaspi"/>
<link wikidata="Q130223" start="2053" end="2060" title="griffin" label="griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="2071" end="2083" title="Hyperboreans" label="Hyperboreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="2096" end="2102" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245111" start="2129" end="2137" title="Longinus (literature)" label="Longinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="2575" end="2625" title="John Tzetzes" label="in his book &amp;quot;Chiliades&amp;quot;, Ioannes Tzetzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="2768" end="2779" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q827099" start="2793" end="2800" title="The Sandman (Vertigo)" label="Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528136" start="2993" end="2998" title="Dream (DC Comics)" label="Dream"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3034" end="3041" title="List of The Sandman characters#Matthew" label="Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q130223" start="3258" end="3265" title="griffin" label="griffon"/>
<link wikidata="Q632335" start="3393" end="3408" title="Dzungarian Gate" label="Dzungarian Gate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416875" wikidata="Q105770345" url="?curid=416875" title="Bakis">
<text>Bakis (also Bacis; ) is a general name for the inspired prophets and dispensers of oracles who flourished in Greece from the 8th to the 6th century B.C. Philetas of Ephesus, Aelian and John Tzetzes distinguish between three: a Boeotian, an Arcadian and an Athenian.

==The Boeotian==
The first Bakis, a native of Eleon in Boeotia, who was the most famous, was said to have been inspired by the nymphs of the Corycian Cave. His oracles, of which specimens are extant in Herodotus and Pausanias, were written in hexameter verse, and were considered to have been strikingly fulfilled. Apocryphal oracular pronouncements in dactylic hexameters circulated under his name during times of stress, such as the Persian and Peloponnesian Wars.

==The Arcadian==
The Arcadian Bakis was believed to have originated from Caphyae and to have also been known as Aletes or Cydas. He was said to have cured the women of Sparta of a fit of madness. Many of the oracles which were current under his name have been attributed to Onomacritus.

==The Athenian==
Extant sources provide no information on this Bakis. However, according to Suda, Bakis was also an epithet of Peisistratus. From this one may conclude that oracular poetry was popular at the times of Peisistratus, and that he himself wrote poetry of this kind.

==Evolution of the term &quot;Bakis&quot;==
According to Erwin Rohde, &quot;Bakis&quot; was a title originally applied to any one of a class of ecstatic seers, but later came to be thought of as the proper name of an individual. There was also a verb βακίζω &quot;to prophesy&quot;, secondarily derived from the name Bakis (similar to the case of σιβυλλίζω : Σίβυλλα &quot;Sibyl&quot;).

==Notes==
==References==
* which in turn cites:
**Herodotus, &quot;Histories&quot;, 8. 20, 77, 9. 43
**Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot;, 4. 27, 9. 17, 10. 12
**Scholia on Aristophanes, &quot;Peace&quot;, 1070
**Göttling, &quot;Opuscula Academica&quot; (1869)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105770345" start="0" end="5" title="Bakis" label="Bakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105770345" start="12" end="17" title="Bakis" label="Bacis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="56" end="63" title="prophet" label="prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="83" end="89" title="oracle" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="109" end="115" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="148" end="152" title="Before Christ" label="B.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q313782" start="174" end="180" title="Claudius Aelianus" label="Aelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="185" end="197" title="John Tzetzes" label="John Tzetzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="227" end="234" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898802" start="240" end="247" title="Arcadia (ancient region)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064853" start="256" end="264" title="Ancient Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261709" start="408" end="421" title="Corycian Cave" label="Corycian Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="469" end="478" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="483" end="492" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q109548" start="510" end="519" title="hexameter" label="hexameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254470" start="620" end="638" title="dactylic hexameter" label="dactylic hexameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="702" end="709" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="714" end="731" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365548" start="808" end="815" title="Caphyae" label="Caphyae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="903" end="909" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q537647" start="1009" end="1020" title="Onomacritus" label="Onomacritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q242172" start="1150" end="1162" title="Peisistratos of Athens" label="Peisistratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q65486" start="1359" end="1370" title="Erwin Rohde" label="Erwin Rohde"/>
<link wikidata="Q273320" start="1675" end="1680" title="Sibyl" label="Sibyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="1740" end="1749" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="1793" end="1802" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358144" start="1862" end="1869" title="Scholia" label="Scholia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="1873" end="1885" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q96584" start="1913" end="1921" title="Karl Wilhelm Göttling" label="Göttling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416878" wikidata="Q3867384" url="?curid=416878" title="Murder One">
<text>Murder one usually refers to first-degree murder.

Murder One may also refer to:
==Film and TV==
*&quot;Murder One&quot; (film), a 1988 biographical crime drama film
*&quot;Murder One&quot; (TV series), American legal serial broadcast on ABC in 1995–97
*&quot;Murder 1&quot; (film), first installment, in 2004, of Bollywood film series, &quot;Murder&quot;

== Music ==
* &quot;Murder One&quot;, album by Paul Di&#x27;Anno
* Murder One, former band of a member of Mob Rules
* Murder One, bass amplifier head blown up by Lemmy
* Murder One Records, label for Sean T

=== Songs ===
* &quot;Murder One&quot;, song by 50 Cent from &quot;The Lost Tape&quot;
* &quot;Murder One&quot;, song by Metallica from &quot;Hardwired... to Self-Destruct&quot;
* &quot;Murder One&quot;, song by Sodom from &quot;In War and Pieces&quot;

==Other==
*Murder One (bookshop), book store in London, open from 1988 to 2009
*Heroin (slang)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3867384" start="0" end="10" title="Murder One" label="Murder one"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="29" end="48" title="first-degree murder" label="first-degree murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867384" start="51" end="61" title="Murder One" label="Murder One"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376613" start="98" end="127" title="Murder One (film)" label="&amp;quot;Murder One&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384627" start="167" end="201" title="Murder One (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Murder One&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328063" start="254" end="281" title="Murder 1 (film)" label="&amp;quot;Murder 1&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q313505" start="404" end="421" title="Paul Di&amp;#x27;Anno" label="Paul Di&amp;#x27;Anno"/>
<link wikidata="Q318132" start="463" end="472" title="Mob Rules (band)" label="Mob Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q309926" start="519" end="524" title="Lemmy" label="Lemmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q666872" start="557" end="563" title="Sean T" label="Sean T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946736" start="632" end="645" title="The Lost Tape (mixtape)" label="The Lost Tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q24034571" start="707" end="736" title="Hardwired... to Self-Destruct" label="Hardwired... to Self-Destruct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628551" start="794" end="811" title="In War and Pieces" label="In War and Pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937673" start="830" end="851" title="Murder One (bookshop)" label="Murder One (bookshop)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="899" end="905" title="Heroin" label="Heroin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416879" wikidata="Q246427" url="?curid=416879" title="Grove">
<text>Grove may refer to:

* Grove (nature), a small group of trees

== Places ==

===England===
*Grove, Buckinghamshire, a village
*Grove (ward), an electoral ward of Hammersmith and Fulham London Borough Council that existed from 1964 to 2002, and then was reformed in 2022
*Grove, Nottinghamshire, a village
*Grove, Oxfordshire, a village and civil parish
*Hazel Grove, Stockport, a suburb
*The Grove, County Durham, a village
*The Grove, Dorset

===United States===
* Grove, Maine
* Grove, New York, a town
* Grove, Oklahoma, a city
* Grove, Virginia, an unincorporated community
*Grove, West Virginia
* Grove Township (disambiguation), various townships

===Elsewhere===
* Grove, Tasmania, Australia, a suburb
* Grove, Germany, a municipality in Schleswig-Holstein
* Grove, County Leitrim, a townland in Ireland
* O Grove, Galicia, Spain, a municipality
* Grove (crater), on the Moon

==Schools==
*Grove Primary School (disambiguation)
*Grove Academy

==Other uses==
*Grove (surname)
*, a Second World War destroyer
*Grove Press, American alternative book publisher
*Grove Cranes, crane truck manufacturer acquired by Manitowoc Cranes
*Grove Racing, an Australian motor racing team
*Sacred grove, a grove with religious importance

==See also==
* Groove (disambiguation)
* Grove cell, a type of electric battery
* Grove&#x27;s Dictionary (disambiguation)
* Groves (disambiguation)
* Grove City (disambiguation)
* Grove Park (disambiguation)
* The Grove (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q246427" start="0" end="5" title="Grove" label="Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510380" start="23" end="37" title="Grove (nature)" label="Grove (nature)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611357" start="92" end="114" title="Grove, Buckinghamshire" label="Grove, Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645758" start="162" end="207" title="Hammersmith and Fulham London Borough Council" label="Hammersmith and Fulham London Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611367" start="271" end="293" title="Grove, Nottinghamshire" label="Grove, Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q991626" start="306" end="324" title="Grove, Oxfordshire" label="Grove, Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636" start="354" end="376" title="Hazel Grove" label="Hazel Grove, Stockport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738381" start="388" end="412" title="The Grove, County Durham" label="The Grove, County Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738380" start="425" end="434" title="The Grove, Portland" label="The Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="436" end="442" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476868" start="466" end="478" title="Grove, Maine" label="Grove, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708416" start="481" end="496" title="Grove, New York" label="Grove, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241328" start="507" end="522" title="Grove, Oklahoma" label="Grove, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611365" start="533" end="548" title="Grove, Virginia" label="Grove, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611364" start="579" end="599" title="Grove, West Virginia" label="Grove, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547787" start="602" end="633" title="Grove Township (disambiguation)" label="Grove Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611362" start="672" end="687" title="Grove, Tasmania" label="Grove, Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212501" start="711" end="725" title="Grove, Germany" label="Grove, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="766" end="787" title="List of townlands in County Leitrim#G" label="Grove, County Leitrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q929161" start="813" end="820" title="O Grove" label="O Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547779" start="855" end="869" title="Grove (crater)" label="Grove (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15947013" start="897" end="934" title="Grove Primary School (disambiguation)" label="Grove Primary School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611372" start="936" end="949" title="Grove Academy" label="Grove Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16870334" start="967" end="982" title="Grove (surname)" label="Grove (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777164" start="1016" end="1027" title="Grove Press" label="Grove Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043693" start="1117" end="1133" title="Manitowoc Cranes" label="Manitowoc Cranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030338" start="1135" end="1147" title="Grove Racing" label="Grove Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q811600" start="1182" end="1194" title="Sacred grove" label="Sacred grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q417773" start="1246" end="1269" title="Groove (disambiguation)" label="Groove (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004643" start="1272" end="1282" title="Grove cell" label="Grove cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611356" start="1313" end="1353" title="Grove&amp;#x27;s Dictionary (disambiguation)" label="Grove&amp;#x27;s Dictionary (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q410596" start="1356" end="1379" title="Groves (disambiguation)" label="Groves (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q359406" start="1382" end="1409" title="Grove City (disambiguation)" label="Grove City (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547784" start="1412" end="1439" title="Grove Park (disambiguation)" label="Grove Park (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q653586" start="1442" end="1468" title="The Grove (disambiguation)" label="The Grove (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416880" wikidata="Q3328697" url="?curid=416880" title="Music of Jordan">
<text>The traditional music of [[Jordan]] has a long history. Rural zajal songs, with improvised poetry played with a mijwiz, tablah, arghul, oud, rabab, and reed pipe ensemble accompanying is popular. The transition of old cultural music into hit pop songs known worldwide. Recently, Jordan has seen the rise of prominent DJs and pop stars.
== Traditional Jordanian musical instruments ==
Jordanian music has a diversity and a range of components that make it a popular art. Over the centuries music has evolved and so did its instruments. Jordanian music comes with a variety of instruments.

* Flute/reed pipe known as &quot;Shababa&quot;
* Mizmar
* Mijwiz
* Arghul known as &quot;Yarghul&quot;
* Oud
* Tablah
* Rebab
* Al-Mihbash
* Bagpipes known as &quot;Gerbeh&quot;
* Riq
* Daf
* Simsimiyya, found in the port city of Aqaba and the southern desert
== Popular music ==
Generally, there are two types of Jordanian music, each with unique platforms and various tracks: cheerful/fun/happy cultural songs and strong-meaning patriotic songs. Over the years, new varieties of singers and composers have emerged.

Jordan&#x27;s music formed from the strong Bedouin and sub-Arabian area. It has a diverse variety of elements which creates a unique platform.
Jordanian bands and artists are blending Arab-Western electronic pop to the world stage. Over the years, a new variety of singers and composers have emerged. Over the past decades Diana Karazon and others were the most popular among the mass audience, in mid-2000s indie bands such as JadaL and others emerged and found a moderate amount of success amongst the youth in Jordan and the region. The Bedouin singer Omar Al-Abdallat (known for his patriotic song &quot;Hashemi, Hashemi&quot;), Diana Karazon (winner of the Arab version of &quot;Pop Idol&quot;), Toni Qattan, and singer Hani Mitwasi (the winner of the Jordan Awards 2010) are perhaps Jordan&#x27;s biggest stars. Other well-known Jordanian musicians are Qamar Badwan (who won the golden prize in the 2000 Cairo Song Festival) and percussionist Hani Naser.

A new age group called Rum has gained popularity since its inception in 1998.

The indie rock scene grew thanks to artists such as Jordanian-Canadian singer-songwriter Pinwheel Valley, formerly known as KAIS (2009 - 2012), Ibrahim Baggili, and Hani Mitwasi.

In Amman, the capital of Jordan, there has been a movement of alternative music in the last decades. Rock bands that mix Western and Eastern influences are becoming more popular. Notable local music groups in this spectrum include Hayajan (2013) and Zaed Naes (2014). The local and regional scene also flourished with bands such as JadaL (2003), Autostrad (band) (2007), Akher Zapheer (2007), El Morabba3 (2008), Aziz Maraka, and others.

Rock and underground bands in the late 1990s and early 2000s were known for mixing oriental with rock or jazz music.

Jordan also has an underground heavy metal scene with bands such as Bilocate (doom/death metal), and Ajdath, who currently reside in Poland. Other bands, like Augury (black metal) and Darkcide (doom/death metal) had to stop due to lack of support or band members leaving the country.

Arabic hip hop and Arabic rap artists in Jordan have added to the music scene. These artists include names like El Far3i, Torabyeh and Sotusura. Trailblazers in the local Western hip hop scene include artists such as Last Standing Poet (2012). Newer artists include AceQuared (2016-2023).

Electronic dance music and pop music producers from Jordan have thrived in the last decade. Notable artists include Ayah Marar, known for her global hit &quot;Thinking About You&quot; with Calvin Harris. The Jordanian-Egyptian duo Bedouin has also broken onto the world scene, having collaborated with artists like Virgil Abloh and Black Coffee. In 2022 they recorded a hybrid live set for Cercle in Petra. Other Jordanian electronic and pop music artists include King Deco (also known as Dana Salah), and Llunr. Upcoming Jordanian electronic music artists include the progressive house duo Fairplay

Some of the more ancient musicians in Jordan are the Faqir family, which extends back more than a century.

Jordan&#x27;s western radio stations, Play 99.6, Beat 102.5, and Spin 94.1, have worked towards exposing new local artists, including many Western pop singers. And of various industries and music genres, the number of female musicians and composers of Jordanian nationality is growing. Some are: Hana Malhas, Ruba Saqr, Sahar Khalifeh, Suad Bushnaq, and Zeina Azouqah.

Classical music performers and composers of Jordanian origin include Karim Said, Zade Dirani, Tarek Younis, and Salam Murtada. Karim Said was born in 1988 in Amman and started studying piano when he was five. He came to the public&#x27;s attention in 2009 playing concertos in London with the English Chamber Orchestra. Zade Dirani is an internationally known composer and pianist, known for his release Dime Que No (2020).

== See also ==

*Arabic music
*Arabic pop music
*Tawfiq Al-Nimri

== References ==

* Badley, Bill, and Zein al Jundi. &quot;Europe Meets Asia&quot;. 2000. In Broughton, Simon and Ellingham, Mark with McConnachie, James and Duane, Orla (Ed.), &quot;World Music, Vol. 1: Africa, Europe and the Middle East&quot;, pp 391–395. Rough Guides Ltd, Penguin Books. 
* 

== External links ==
* Sakher Hattar&#x27;s Music From Jordan Playlist on Youtube
* BBC Radio 3 Audio (60 minutes): The Bedouin. Accessed November 25, 2010.
* BBC Radio 3 Audio (60 minutes): Amman: Ilham Al madfai, Toni Qattan and Shou Al Ayam. Accessed November 25, 2010.
* BBC Radio 3 Audio (60 minutes): Jordan – Amman: Ilham Al Madfai. Accessed November 25, 2010.
* Jordanian songs </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3328697" start="16" end="35" title="Music of Jordan" label="music of [[Jordan]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q140222" start="62" end="67" title="zajal" label="zajal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247912" start="112" end="118" title="mijwiz" label="mijwiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q13219842" start="120" end="126" title="tablah" label="tablah"/>
<link wikidata="Q646920" start="128" end="134" title="arghul" label="arghul"/>
<link wikidata="Q191000" start="136" end="139" title="oud" label="oud"/>
<link wikidata="Q623509" start="141" end="146" title="Rebab" label="rabab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178239" start="152" end="161" title="reed pipe" label="reed pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="591" end="596" title="Flute" label="Flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178239" start="597" end="606" title="reed pipe" label="reed pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179086" start="638" end="644" title="Mizmar (instrument)" label="Mizmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247912" start="647" end="653" title="Mijwiz" label="Mijwiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q646920" start="656" end="662" title="Arghul" label="Arghul"/>
<link wikidata="Q191000" start="694" end="697" title="Oud" label="Oud"/>
<link wikidata="Q13219842" start="700" end="706" title="Tablah" label="Tablah"/>
<link wikidata="Q623509" start="709" end="714" title="Rebab" label="Rebab"/>
<link wikidata="Q8347" start="730" end="738" title="Bagpipes" label="Bagpipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084057" start="769" end="772" title="Riq" label="Riq"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084057" start="775" end="778" title="Daf" label="Daf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165850" start="781" end="791" title="Simsimiyya" label="Simsimiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q180522" start="819" end="824" title="Aqaba" label="Aqaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="1150" end="1157" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188450" start="1304" end="1318" title="electronic pop" label="electronic pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q470354" start="1430" end="1443" title="Diana Karazon" label="Diana Karazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6121171" start="1535" end="1540" title="JadaL" label="JadaL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089626" start="1662" end="1678" title="Omar Al-Abdallat" label="Omar Al-Abdallat"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="1694" end="1708" title="national anthem" label="patriotic song"/>
<link wikidata="Q9088382" start="1808" end="1819" title="Toni Qattan" label="Toni Qattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18757418" start="1832" end="1844" title="Hani Mitwasi" label="Hani Mitwasi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1966" end="1978" title="Qamar Badwan" label="Qamar Badwan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2017" end="2036" title="Cairo Song Festival" label="Cairo Song Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="2042" end="2055" title="percussionist" label="percussionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648165" start="2056" end="2066" title="Hani Naser" label="Hani Naser"/>
<link wikidata="Q213121" start="2071" end="2078" title="new-age music" label="new age"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="2152" end="2162" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2237" end="2252" title="Pinwheel Valley (band)" label="Pinwheel Valley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2272" end="2276" title="KAIS (musician)" label="KAIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q108758001" start="2292" end="2307" title="Ibrahim Baggili" label="Ibrahim Baggili"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805" start="2331" end="2336" title="Amman" label="Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="2390" end="2407" title="alternative rock" label="alternative music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="2429" end="2433" title="Rock music" label="Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q61841718" start="2559" end="2566" title="Hayajan" label="Hayajan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2578" end="2587" title="Zaed Naes" label="Zaed Naes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25211994" start="2674" end="2690" title="Autostrad (band)" label="Autostrad (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20990828" start="2699" end="2712" title="Akher Zapheer" label="Akher Zapheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25080702" start="2721" end="2732" title="El Morabba3" label="El Morabba3"/>
<link wikidata="Q12227134" start="2741" end="2752" title="Aziz Maraka" label="Aziz Maraka"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="2916" end="2927" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903775" start="2953" end="2961" title="Bilocate" label="Bilocate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2986" end="2992" title="Ajdath" label="Ajdath"/>
<link wikidata="Q760622" start="3044" end="3050" title="Augury (band)" label="Augury"/>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="3052" end="3063" title="black metal" label="black metal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3069" end="3077" title="Darkcide" label="Darkcide"/>
<link wikidata="Q624221" start="3170" end="3184" title="Arabic hip hop" label="Arabic hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q61819793" start="3282" end="3290" title="El Far3i" label="El Far3i"/>
<link wikidata="Q22948807" start="3292" end="3300" title="Torabyeh" label="Torabyeh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3305" end="3313" title="Sotusura" label="Sotusura"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3387" end="3405" title="Last Standing Poet" label="Last Standing Poet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3436" end="3445" title="AceQuared" label="AceQuared"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="3460" end="3482" title="Electronic dance music" label="Electronic dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="3487" end="3496" title="pop music" label="pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830818" start="3576" end="3586" title="Ayah Marar" label="Ayah Marar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583087" start="3619" end="3637" title="Thinking About You (Calvin Harris song)" label="Thinking About You"/>
<link wikidata="Q81637" start="3649" end="3662" title="Calvin Harris" label="Calvin Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q116788707" start="3691" end="3698" title="Bedouin (DJ)" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26703582" start="3775" end="3787" title="Virgil Abloh" label="Virgil Abloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16215736" start="3792" end="3804" title="Black Coffee (DJ)" label="Black Coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q60836344" start="3850" end="3856" title="Cercle (company)" label="Cercle"/>
<link wikidata="Q113954137" start="3924" end="3933" title="King Deco" label="King Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q113954137" start="3949" end="3959" title="Dana Salah" label="Dana Salah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3966" end="3971" title="Llunr" label="Llunr"/>
<link wikidata="Q915152" start="4029" end="4046" title="progressive house" label="progressive house"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4051" end="4059" title="Fairplay (duo)" label="Fairplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q491656" start="4114" end="4119" title="Faqir" label="Faqir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203000" start="4207" end="4216" title="Play 99.6" label="Play 99.6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4218" end="4228" title="Beat 102.5" label="Beat 102.5"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4234" end="4243" title="Spin 94.1" label="Spin 94.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973229" start="4465" end="4476" title="Hana Malhas" label="Hana Malhas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4478" end="4487" title="Ruba Saqr" label="Ruba Saqr"/>
<link wikidata="Q441194" start="4489" end="4503" title="Sahar Khalifeh" label="Sahar Khalifeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q56600016" start="4505" end="4517" title="Suad Bushnaq" label="Suad Bushnaq"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4523" end="4536" title="Zeina Azouqah" label="Zeina Azouqah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4608" end="4619" title="Karim Said" label="Karim Said,"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064147" start="4620" end="4631" title="Zade Dirani" label="Zade Dirani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4633" end="4645" title="Tarek Younis" label="Tarek Younis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132774570" start="4651" end="4664" title="Salam Murtada" label="Salam Murtada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146465" start="4832" end="4857" title="English Chamber Orchestra" label="English Chamber Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q624044" start="4981" end="4993" title="Arabic music" label="Arabic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q624081" start="4995" end="5011" title="Arabic pop music" label="Arabic pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689264" start="5013" end="5028" title="Tawfiq Al-Nimri" label="Tawfiq Al-Nimri"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416881" wikidata="Q3328710" url="?curid=416881" title="Music of Lebanon">
<text>The music of Lebanon has a long history. Beirut, the capital city of Lebanon, has long been known, especially in a period immediately following World War II, for its art and intellectualism. Several singers emerged in this period, among the most famous Fairuz, Sabah, Zaki Nassif, Wadih El Safi, and Melhem Barakat.

During the fifteen-year civil war and the Israeli occupation of Lebanon, most of the Lebanese music stars moved to Cairo or Paris, with a large music scene in Beirut only returning after 1992. Modern pop stars include Najwa Karam, Diana Haddad, Nawal Al Zoghbi, Elissa, Ragheb Alama, Haifa Wehbe, Nancy Ajram, Myriam Fares, Wael Jassar, and more. Genres such as rock, house and electronic music have gained popularity in Lebanon with the rise of Arabic influence in these music styles. The annual Fête de la Musique, held in late June, brings the whole country out for organized and spontaneous underground concerts.

Music has also been used as a tool in Lebanon&#x27;s revolutions. 

==Influence of international popular music in Lebanon==
Rock is very popular in Lebanon and during the Lebanese Civil War, Ziad Rahbani, a Lebanese composer (and Fairuz’s son) worked with different types of music groups in Beirut including rock, jazz and funk. Rock was a popular genre of music played by radio stations in Beirut, with The Rolling Stones, The Beatles and The Kinks being especially popular at the time. Local rock bands were also created such as The Force, which performed despite political tension. 

The underground music scene became vibrant in Lebanon after the end of the civil war in 1990, spearheaded by the rock-pop duo Zeid Hamdan and Yasmine Hamdan who together were known as Soap Kills. This duo was considered revolutionary for their time as they used grooveboxes, synthesisers and vocals in their pieces while blending Western and Arab influences. 

In 2011, Lebanese rock band The Kordz released their debut album &quot;Beauty and the East&quot;, to widespread critical acclaim. The band has performed as the opening act for high-profile artists including Placebo, Robert Plant and Deep Purple and has toured internationally, performing concerts in England (at Musexpo Europe 2009), Dubai, Canada, the Czech Republic and Germany. The mid 2010&#x27;s featured a new emergence of artists such as those in indie or alternative rock including Mashrou&#x27; Leila who has an openly gay lead singer and discusses sexuality as well politics in the lyrics of their songs. IJK (singer songwriter) is another Lebanese rock singer increasingly recording in the West and releasing material in English. 

Beirut has also been known for its club culture which has featured electronic and house music since the 1990s. Typically, it was more European inspired music but musicians such as Jessika Khazrik, a Berlin based Lebanese DJ, have been combining sounds from Lebanon into their music. Arabic-inspired house music is described to have started in the early 2000s with Said Mrad being one of the first through his remix of Umm Kulthum’s, Alf Laila wa Laila. The popularity of Afro-house has also entered the Lebanese music scene. International DJs such as Keinmusik&#x27;s remix of Arabic songs like Nour el Ein have continued to popularize this type of music in Lebanon. 

==Lebanese record labels==

Baidaphon is a Lebanese record company, established by the Baida family in the 20th century.
It was founded in Berlin, where Michel Baida alongside his two cousins Butrus, Jibran, and Farajallah, a Lebanese recording artist, had sealed a business deal with a German company. 
Baidaphon recordings were made in Berlin and were then marketed and sold in Beirut. With the help of European engineers, the label began recording in Lebanon in 1907. By the mid 1920s Baidaphon had offices across the Arab world, becoming a Middle Eastern record company. Mail-order businesses, located in Berlin, sold items to European markets and reached North and South American markets as well. In the early 1930s, the partners split apart after the death of Butrus Baida. The Egyptian singer and composer Mohammed Abdel Wahab became the new partner and helped transform the Egyptian branch of the company, by naming it “Cairophone Records” in the 1940s. Meanwhile, Baidaphon had expanded its influence in the Levant and North African regions.

Forward Music is an independent record label. The Lebanese electronic music label, Thawra Records was developed by Red Bull Music Academy and producer Etyen in 2019 with the mission of giving voices to local artists. 

== Music in revolution ==
Before the Civil War music was popularized through musical theater and music festivals or events. However, approaching the Lebanese civil war, music was used as a tool in revolution and distributed through cassettes for wider reach. Different political sects even used music to rally supporters. 

During the 2019 protests, revolutionary music was used as a tool to resist the government. DJ Madi Karimeh, was one of the artists who performed in Tripoli while protesters were in the streets transforming these revolutions into party-like events. He combined nationalist songs with techno beats attracting attention from the youth and Lebanese diaspora to these protests. El Rass is another Lebanese musician who produced Arabic rap often played in protests and wrote new songs criticizing the Lebanese government while outlining the protesters&#x27; hopes. 

==Instruments of Lebanon==

===Lute (Oud/ud)===
The lute is a word which comes from the Spanish &quot;laud&quot;, which came from the Arabic word for the instrument, &quot;al-ud&quot; (meaning the branch of a tree). The lute is shaped like a half pear with a short fretted neck.

===Mijwiz===
The mijwiz, which literally means &quot;double 
njjayrah&quot; is similar to the mijwiz, an open ended reed flute played in the same style. It is very popular among mountain villagers of Lebanon.

===Tablah===
The tablah is a small hand-drum, also known as the durbakke. Most tablahs are beautifully decorated, some with wood, tile or bone inlay, etched metal, or paintings in designs typical of the Near East. One of the most commonly played percussion instrument, the tablah is a membranophone of goat or fish skin stretched over a vase-shaped drum with a wide neck. Usually made of earthenware or metal, it is placed either under the left arm or between the legs and struck in the middle for the strong beats and on the edge for the sharp in-between beats.

===Daf===
The daf, also known as the rikk, is a popular instrument corresponding to the tambourine. It consists of a round frame, covered on one side with goat or fish skin. Pairs of metal discs are set into the frame to produce the jingle when struck by the hand. The sounds of this percussion instrument sets the rhythm of a lot of Arab music, particularly in classical performances.

===Buzuq===
The origin of the word buzuq is debated but boils down to Turkish &amp; Persian. The buzuq, which is an essential instrument in the Rahbani repertoire, is a hybrid instrument that is not classified among the classical instruments of Arab music or among those of Turkish music. However, this instrument may be looked upon as a larger and deeper-toned relative of the Turkish &quot;saz&quot;, to which it could be compared in the same way that the viola is compared to the violin in Western music. Before the Rahbanis popularized the use of this instrument, the buzaq had been associated with the gypsy music of Lebanon. A long-necked fretted string instrument, the buzuq is furnished with two metal strings which are played with a plectrum.

=== Qanun ===
The qanun, kanun, ganoun or kanoon is a string instrument played either solo, or more often as part of an ensemble. Qanun is played on the lap while sitting or squatting, or sometimes on trestle support, by plucking the strings with two tortoise-shell picks (one for each hand) or with fingernails, and has a standard range of three and a half octaves from A2 to E6 that can be extended down to F2 and up to G6 in the case of Arabic designs.

==See also==
*Culture of Lebanon
*Chalga
*Pop-folk
*Arabic music
*Arabic pop music
*Mizrahi music
*Laiko
*Coma Dance Festival
*Beirut Jam Sessions

==References==
==Notes==

*Badley, Bill and Zein al Jundi. &quot;Europe Meets Asia&quot;. 2000. In Broughton, Simon and Ellingham, Mark with McConnachie, James and Duane, Orla (Ed.), &quot;World Music, Vol. 1: Africa, Europe and the Middle East&quot;, pp 391–395. Rough Guides Ltd, Penguin Books.
==External links==
* The Official Lebanese Top 20 - compiled by Ipsos
* Baidaphon (Lebanon)
* Baidaphon
* Baidaphon Records is a Lebanese label
* Baidaphon - Source: Discogs
* Cairophon 
* The House Of Arab World Music website
* The Kordz - official website of Lebanese rock band
* World Music from Lebanon written by Ghazi Abdel Baki
* Forward Music - last edited on 27 April 2020</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3328710" start="4" end="20" title="Music of Lebanon" label="music of Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="41" end="47" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="69" end="76" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="144" end="156" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247658" start="253" end="259" title="Fairuz" label="Fairuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600118" start="261" end="266" title="Sabah (singer)" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117922" start="268" end="279" title="Zaki Nassif" label="Zaki Nassif"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115951" start="281" end="294" title="Wadih El Safi" label="Wadih El Safi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827292" start="300" end="314" title="Melhem Barakat" label="Melhem Barakat"/>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="328" end="350" title="Lebanese Civil War" label="fifteen-year civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="432" end="437" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="441" end="446" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197287" start="535" end="546" title="Najwa Karam" label="Najwa Karam"/>
<link wikidata="Q469901" start="548" end="560" title="Diana Haddad" label="Diana Haddad"/>
<link wikidata="Q588092" start="562" end="577" title="Nawal Al Zoghbi" label="Nawal Al Zoghbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118831" start="579" end="585" title="Elissa (Lebanese singer)" label="Elissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237110" start="587" end="599" title="Ragheb Alama" label="Ragheb Alama"/>
<link wikidata="Q651785" start="601" end="612" title="Haifa Wehbe" label="Haifa Wehbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q774155" start="614" end="625" title="Nancy Ajram" label="Nancy Ajram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395526" start="627" end="639" title="Myriam Fares" label="Myriam Fares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891280" start="641" end="652" title="Wael Jassar" label="Wael Jassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129327" start="814" end="832" title="Fête de la Musique" label="Fête de la Musique"/>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="1106" end="1124" title="Lebanese Civil War" label="Lebanese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575465" start="1126" end="1138" title="Ziad Rahbani" label="Ziad Rahbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247658" start="1165" end="1173" title="Fairuz" label="Fairuz’s"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="1243" end="1247" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="1249" end="1253" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="1258" end="1262" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="1339" end="1357" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="1359" end="1370" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q188713" start="1375" end="1384" title="The Kinks" label="The Kinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q773629" start="1706" end="1716" title="Soap Kills" label="Soap Kills"/>
<link wikidata="Q484839" start="2090" end="2097" title="Placebo (band)" label="Placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="2099" end="2111" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="2116" end="2127" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021609" start="2195" end="2202" title="Musexpo" label="Musexpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619999" start="2373" end="2392" title="Mashrou&amp;#x27; Leila" label="Mashrou&amp;#x27; Leila"/>
<link wikidata="Q27832754" start="2498" end="2521" title="IJK (singer songwriter)" label="IJK (singer songwriter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110560" start="3044" end="3057" title="Umm Kulthum" label="Umm Kulthum’s"/>
<link wikidata="Q111292358" start="3177" end="3193" title="Keinemusik" label="Keinmusik&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q467895" start="4108" end="4128" title="Mohammed Abdel Wahab" label="Mohammed Abdel Wahab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473211" start="4347" end="4360" title="Forward Music" label="Forward Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="4603" end="4612" title="Lebanese Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q71443275" start="4901" end="4914" title="17 October Revolution" label="2019 protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="5503" end="5507" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247912" start="5748" end="5754" title="mijwiz" label="mijwiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q13219842" start="5958" end="5964" title="tablah" label="tablah"/>
<link wikidata="Q212892" start="6226" end="6239" title="membranophone" label="membranophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084057" start="6519" end="6522" title="daf" label="daf"/>
<link wikidata="Q193666" start="6593" end="6603" title="tambourine" label="tambourine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299793" start="6927" end="6932" title="buzuq" label="buzuq"/>
<link wikidata="Q717773" start="7284" end="7287" title="Saz (musical instrument)" label="saz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7411" end="7418" title="The Rahbani Brothers" label="Rahbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q181890" start="7634" end="7642" title="plectrum" label="plectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q904646" start="7663" end="7668" title="Qanun (instrument)" label="qanun"/>
<link wikidata="Q46360" start="7896" end="7904" title="tortoise" label="tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="8003" end="8010" title="Octave" label="octaves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8116" end="8134" title="Culture of Lebanon#Music" label="Culture of Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q870340" start="8136" end="8142" title="Chalga" label="Chalga"/>
<link wikidata="Q11700058" start="8144" end="8152" title="Pop-folk" label="Pop-folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q624044" start="8154" end="8166" title="Arabic music" label="Arabic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q624081" start="8168" end="8184" title="Arabic pop music" label="Arabic pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738544" start="8186" end="8199" title="Mizrahi music" label="Mizrahi music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087267" start="8201" end="8206" title="Laiko" label="Laiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907371" start="8208" end="8227" title="Coma Dance Festival" label="Coma Dance Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903476" start="8229" end="8248" title="Beirut Jam Sessions" label="Beirut Jam Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672300" start="8611" end="8616" title="Ipsos" label="Ipsos"/>
<link wikidata="Q504063" start="8713" end="8720" title="Discogs" label="Discogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148373" start="8865" end="8881" title="Ghazi Abdel Baki" label="Ghazi Abdel Baki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473211" start="8884" end="8897" title="Forward Music" label="Forward Music"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416882" wikidata="Q2562237" url="?curid=416882" title="Music of Syria">
<text>Regarding the music of Syria, there are certain musical traditions and practices that have been present in Syria longer than others. There have been musical influences introduced into Syria through multiple eras of conquest and influences from surrounding cultures in modern-day Syria (as opposed to the region of Syria). Lying near Egypt and Israel, and connected to southern Europe by the Mediterranean, Syria became host to many distinct cultural musics through trade and route. The music present in Syria is related greatly to poetry, influenced greatly by the Bedouin nomadic tribes, the maqam system in Arabic classical music, as well as influenced greatly by the geopolitical movement and conflict in the Middle East. Syrian music generally has a singer who is accompanied by three or four instruments. The texture is usually thin but can become denser depending on the use of each instrument. Music is tightly linked to poetry in Syria.

The classical music of Syria is part of the greater Arabic music world. The main components are a maqam and an iqa (rhythm/metre). A maqam is a set of scales made of up of three or four notes. A maqam will have two or three of these scales put together which is then played over the iqa (rhythm). Both the maqam and iqa can be advanced or simple to play. Both the maqam and iqa are to be thought of as a structure that the musicians would then ornament with the playing. Syria and the Middle East have a long history of conquest and conflict that have led to a diaspora, and modern diaspora has led to refugee camps. Music has become a means of consolation and preservation of culture in the refugee camps.

== Characteristics of Syrian music ==
Syria borders the Mediterranean sea and is located in the Levant. This area has been culturally influenced by many conquests and geopolitical activity. The multiple influences and sweeping conquests have created many of the cultures to share particular practices or traditions. Music of the Middle East has a predominantly monophonic nature. This is more clearly understood as the music not having multiple melodies or harmonies playing. There can be a rich texture created if multiple instruments playing the same melody with slight variations or rhythmic ornamentations. Ethnomusicologist Bruno Nettl describes this as more common style of music texture known as another style of texture which he calls parallel polyphony which consists of a singer improvising a melody and an instrument following behind with the that same melody. Many of the tones played are played as an interpretation of the music from the player, rather than the music notation or song. This gives the player the freedom to bend or mold the notes causing an improvisational effect on the structure of the music. This results in a personal interpretation of the players feelings towards the song. This causes an effect that connects the performer with the audience which can create a feeling of ecstasy in the listener. Compared to western music, this may be similar to a solo produced by a player during a song or a rendition of a song that keeps the same form but is changed slightly creating an effect that is predictable enough to the listener while revealing new variations of the song. This style of song in Syrian music creates a feeling of excitement for how the musician will play the upcoming sections.

=== Music and poetry ===

A significant part of Syrian music is sung in prose that participates in the distinctness of the Middle Eastern sound. There is an intersection of elements in Syrian music that give it a distinct sound as well as being a driving force in many of the music traditions found in Syria. These elements are:

* the music being played predominantly as a monophonic texture; 
* the music is near-inseparable to poetry; 
* although the music follows particular maqam&#x27;at (the plural of maqam which is the music mode system used in the Middle East), there is melodic improvisation that is to be expected; 
* last, the music is highly ornamented with quartertone&#x27;s and microtones that provide the player with the necessary tones to accurately account for every possible emotion that may be drawn from the music.

Throughout time, history, and cultural amalgamation, the Syrian musical style has been constructed as a platform to create the perfect sonic environment for the listener to fully emerge in the stories told in the poetry. The story&#x27;s narrative is told in the poetry and then enhanced by the music involving such accuracy in emotional effect from the quarter and microtones that it would provide the listener with the greatest understanding of the story.

A particularly influential group in Syrian music and specifically values, ideologies, folklore, and the poetic customs of the Levant are the Bedouin tribes.

== Bedouin influence on Syrian music ==

Bedouin is a name given to the nomadic tribes that lived in the Levant which have played an important role in shaping the music present in the countries of the Levant. The Bedouin influence can be seen in the ideologies, customs, and musical genres. One such impact of Bedouin culture is in the music genres of rural Syria and Lebanon. Within the encounters of the Bedouin and surroundings regions, there was cultural exchange throughout the many years of these practices. The music genres reflecting the ideologies are as follows.

* Ideologies that were adopted from the Bedouin culture into the musical genres were hospitality, chivalry, bravery, and militancy. These types of ideologies were sung in a song form or genre called shruqi. 
* Ideologies like love, heartache, and sentiment, were sung in a genre called ataba. 
* Nadb is funeral music that honours the departed and war chants are sung when applicable.

The Bedouin culture was transmitted from the travel to places either pillaging or trading with the settled communities for centuries. This ended during the French colonialist era following the treaty of Versailles.

Historic Bedouin cultural music, if sung, was always accompanied with the rababah. Bedouin music is near-inseparable from poetry as is much of the music traditions in the Middle East. Many of the songs are kept in an oral tradition due to the nomadic nature of the Bedouin tribes, however, some songs and stories were written down by al-Atrash (a cultural hero for the Syrian people who was defiant to opposing forces) who transcribed his work while imprisoned by the Ottoman Empire. al-Atrash wrote his work in the Shruqi genre which is used to tell of heroine tales of rebellion to an enemy or of captive poets who have been humiliated by the enemy. This written work had a great effect on southern Syrians bringing Shruqi and other Bedouin ideologies and practices to urban areas. Due to the geopolitical climate of the Middle East, urbanization has caused many of the nomadic cultures and rural regions to cluster or move altogether. This has brought more modernized musical instruments and oral poetry together which collaborate and are currently played throughout regions of the Middle East.

== Instruments ==
* Folk music of Syria is, for the most part, based on the oud, which is a stringed instrument considered to be the ancestor of the European lute. 
* The ney (flute).
* Hand-held percussion instruments, such as the darbouka, daf or riq.
* Other typical instruments are the qanun and kamanjah. 
* In semi-Nomadic regions, Bedouin music is based on the Mizmar, mijwiz and rababah is popular.

== Syrian classical Arabic music ==
=== Institutions ===
Syria&#x27;s capital, Damascus, and the northern metropolis of Aleppo have long been one of the Arab world&#x27;s centers of classical Arab music. In 1947 The Institute for Eastern Music was established, and in 1961 an institute teaching music was opened under the direction of Solhi al-Wadi. In 1963 a local branch of the Institute for Eastern Music was opened in Aleppo that included faculties for Western as well as for Arab music. In 1990, the Higher Institute of Music in Damascus was established as a conservatory for both Western and for Arabic music.

=== Muwashshah ===
A typical Syrian classical genre is the &quot;Muwashshah&quot; that goes back to around the 9th or 10th century. Performed by a lead singer or a choir, it consists of a classical form of Arabic poetry set to music. It usually consists of a multi-lined strophic verse poem written in classical Arabic, mostly consisting of five stanzas, which alternates with a refrain with a running rhyme. The muwashshah is usually opened with one or two lines matching the second part of the poem in rhyme and meter. The Al-Thurath ensemble specializes in this genre.

The city of Aleppo in Northern Syria is considered to be the centre of muwashshah.

=== Maqam ===
The classical music notation style of Syria is shared throughout the Arab world. This is known as maqam music which has first studies dating back to the 9nth century. Maqam&#x27;at (plural of maqam) were first theorized by al-Kindi between 801-873 and al-Farabi 870-950 where the music became more standardized. In the Arab world, as well as Turkey and Iran, there are a multitude of religions and cultures that have been present for centuries. Although there has been influence from empires and colonial forces bringing different musical traditions, countries like Syria and Lebanon have remained with the maqam tradition. Music in the Middle East differs to Eurocentric music in that it is usually played monophonically, that is, as a single melody. The monophic style allows most songs to be sung or played with the expectation that the melodic line will have improvisation or musical ornamentation. Arabic music is made up of small scales called jins/ajnas which are melodic motifs that have three or four pitches attributed to them. A maqam is a musical notation mode which is made of these three or four note jins/ajnas/scales. These tri,three-note, tetra, and four-note, scales are combined with usually two, sometimes three, jins/ajans (scales/modes) to create the maqam.

To understand the notation in maqamat musical style, it is easily understood when compared to the western notational style. The western notation is divided into twelve separate intervals creating a musical octave. The notation used in maqamat systems is divided into twenty-four intervals creating a distinction of the whole-tone, halftone and quarter-tone. Further into this division is the use of microtones which divide the quarter-tone making an even more subtle tone to express emotion through ornamentation. A maqam will use of the tones, half tones and quarter-tones in its construct.

=== Iqa&#x27;at ===
&quot;Iqa&#x27;at&quot;, or the singular iqa, is a particular rhythm that is to be played for every bar of a song. These rhythms are just a structure of what is usually played in the live performance. Ethnomusicologist Bruno Nettl describes &quot;Iqa&#x27;at&quot; as separated by order of stressed and unstressed patterns. Further, musicians will play a song that drifts from nonmetric (free time/metre) to metric (in a metre) and then change in its metre again depending on the song. &quot;Iqa&#x27;at&quot; has even and odd time signatures that go anywhere from no rhythm, to 2/4 time to 32/4 time.

== Syriac Christian music ==
Syria, being one of the countries where Christianity had originated, has a long history of church music. It is the origin of the Christian hymnody, which was entirely developed in Syria. And its style of chant, the Syrian chant which continues to be the liturgical music of some of the various Syrian Christians, is the oldest in the world.

There was formerly a distinctive tradition of Syrian Jewish religious music, which still flourishes in Syrian-Jewish communities around the world, such as New York City, Mexico City and Buenos Aires: see The Weekly Maqam, Baqashot and Pizmonim.

Much of the Syrian chant and other genres of Syrian music has been spread widely across the world due to the continual growth of the Syrian diaspora.

== Music of refugees ==

In contemporary times, Syria has become a country of great conflict. From this conflict has come a great diaspora of refugees leaving to find safety. Many have sought refuge in distant countries from their own, however, a number close to 622,000 Syrians are found in Jordan alone. The majority of the refugees travel to Jordan from Aleppo, Homs, and Dara&#x27;a. These are areas that have been greatly influenced by both Arabic classical music and Bedouin folk music. This is due to the amalgamation of culture that happened from the French mandate rule and its effects on Bedouin nomadic tribes losing their ability to travel freely. Further amalgamation is from the recent conflicts causing rural regions to enter the cities for geopolitical purposes. Through the displacement of their homes, Syrians have been on the move finding new places to seek asylum. 

As the diaspora has increased in recent times due to increasing conflict, neighboring countries have taken in many refugees and provided temporary housing in refugee camps. In the Zaatari refugee camp there are 79,000 people. From the displacement of their homes, Syrians have turned to music for the purpose of mourning and comfort. Also, reporting on the events was made illegal with punishment of jail time making Syrian song the only platform of which to tell any source of information. Syrians have also kept their traditions and culture alive through the ancient practice of music playing.

This use of culture resembles possibly another influence that the Bedouin people have had on Syria as they have turned to ataba music to comfort and mourn their losses. There are many similarities between the Syrian refugee lifestyle and that of the traditional Bedouin culture.

* The first similarity is between the refugee camper and the Bedouin tent. 
* Both are in the Levant desert. 
* The nomadic nature of the recent refugees and the Bedouin people along with the oral culture that Bedouin and refugee people both share.

However, the most direct similarity is between the types of music that the Syrian refugees play and a traditional Bedouin genre. In the YouTube video Songs of Syrian Refugees – Documentary | Recording Earth written about in Alex Petropoulos&#x27;s article in the Guardian, there are two men who sing in a traditional Bedouin genre known as ataba. Ataba music is reserved for the sentimental feelings usually associated with lamentations over loss. The YouTube video plays in this style of music varying only in the musicians use of the oud and not the Bedouin traditional rababah. This subtle difference can be explained by the modern diaspora of culture and the amalgamation of culture in the urban centers of the Middle East.

== Modern amalgamation and diaspora ==
Due to the rise in geopolitical conflict in the Middle East, there has been an amalgamation of cultures in the urban centres of the Levant. This has created a mixture of cultures that have borrowed styles and sounds from one another with a mixture of classical music and instruments, Bedouin genres and poetical traditions, and the more subtle yet distinct differences that each community and region has in the Levant. This amalgamation has been going on for many centuries as a product of the historical conflicts that have happened throughout Middle Eastern history. This has made Syrian traditions change in style while also becoming necessary to practice for the survival of culture and traditions as was/ is the case for Syriac chant. There is now Syrian music played throughout the world due to the historical diaspora and movement by the Syrian people.

As in other countries, modern Syrian music notably contrasts its folk music. It uses an orchestra of mostly European instruments with one lead vocalist and sometimes a backup chorus. This type of music is very popular in the Middle East. Famous singers are Assala Nasri, Farid al-Atrash, Fahd Ballan, Sabah Fakhri, Mayada El Hennawy and George Wassouf.

== Syrian dances ==
One of the most popular dances in Syria is the Dabkeh, a folk dance combining circle dancing and line dancing formed from right to left and headed by a leader which alternates between facing the audience and other dancers. It is mostly performed at weddings and other joyous occasions, but also has accompanied protest meetings during the Syrian Civil War. Other popular folklore dances include the &quot;Arāḍa&quot; (), a dance performed with swords, as well as oriental dance for women.

== See also ==

* Culture of Syria
* Arabic music
* Syrian chant
* Muwashshah
* Contemporary underground music in Syria

== References ==
* Badley, Bill and Zein al Jundi. &quot;Europe Meets Asia&quot;. 2000. In Broughton, Simon and Ellingham, Mark with McConnachie, James and Duane, Orla (Ed.), &quot;World Music, Vol. 1: Africa, Europe and the Middle East&quot;, pp 391–395. Rough Guides Ltd, Penguin Books. 

== Further reading ==

* Shannon, Jonathan H. &quot;Metonyms of Modernity in Contemporary Syrian Music and Painting&quot;. Ethnos 70, no. 3 (2005): 361–86. doi:10.1080/00141840500294466.

== External links ==

* BBC Radio 3 Audio (60 minutes): Damascus. Accessed November 25, 2010.
* BBC Radio 3 Audio (60 minutes): Islamic sufi in Aleppo. Accessed November 25, 2010.
* Sephardic Pizmonim Project. Accessed March 10, 2018.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2562237" start="14" end="28" title="Music of Syria" label="music of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="279" end="284" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="304" end="319" title="Syria (region)" label="region of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="333" end="338" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="343" end="349" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="391" end="404" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="565" end="572" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12826678" start="1044" end="1049" title="Arabic maqam" label="maqam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="1431" end="1442" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="1507" end="1515" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="1548" end="1555" title="refugee" label="refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1710" end="1723" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q56593" start="1750" end="1757" title="Levantine Arabic" label="Levant."/>
<link wikidata="Q1137211" start="2015" end="2025" title="Monophony" label="monophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="2111" end="2120" title="Harmony" label="harmonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q739589" start="2249" end="2263" title="Ornament (music)" label="ornamentations"/>
<link wikidata="Q208365" start="2265" end="2282" title="Ethnomusicology" label="Ethnomusicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="2406" end="2415" title="polyphony" label="polyphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161145" start="3451" end="3456" title="Prose poetry" label="prose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137211" start="3753" end="3763" title="Monophony" label="monophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326914" start="4050" end="4068" title="Quarter tone" label="quartertone&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045756" start="4073" end="4083" title="Microtonal music" label="microtones"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="4817" end="4824" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="4906" end="4911" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="4939" end="4945" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="5192" end="5197" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="5202" end="5209" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="5950" end="5968" title="French colonial empire" label="French colonialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="5987" end="6007" title="treaty of Versailles" label="treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q623509" start="6084" end="6091" title="Rebab" label="rababah"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="6478" end="6492" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q191000" start="7185" end="7188" title="oud" label="oud"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="7267" end="7271" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q743836" start="7280" end="7283" title="ney" label="ney"/>
<link wikidata="Q13219842" start="7341" end="7349" title="Goblet drum" label="darbouka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084057" start="7351" end="7354" title="daf" label="daf"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084057" start="7358" end="7361" title="riq" label="riq"/>
<link wikidata="Q904646" start="7399" end="7404" title="Qanun (instrument)" label="qanun"/>
<link wikidata="Q290951" start="7409" end="7417" title="Kamancheh" label="kamanjah"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="7447" end="7454" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179086" start="7477" end="7483" title="Mizmar (instrument)" label="Mizmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247912" start="7485" end="7491" title="mijwiz" label="mijwiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q623509" start="7496" end="7503" title="Rebab" label="rababah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="7596" end="7604" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="7637" end="7643" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q91841612" start="7699" end="7719" title="classical Arab music" label="classical Arab music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4063334" start="7852" end="7865" title="Solhi al-Wadi" label="Solhi al-Wadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16119173" start="8022" end="8059" title="Higher Institute of Music in Damascus" label="Higher Institute of Music in Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956166" start="8199" end="8209" title="Muwashshah" label="Muwashshah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703300" start="8659" end="8678" title="Al-Turath Ensemble" label="Al-Thurath ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="8719" end="8725" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12826678" start="8903" end="8908" title="Arabic maqam" label="maqam"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051110" start="8997" end="9002" title="MAQAM" label="maqam"/>
<link wikidata="Q179759" start="9028" end="9036" title="al-Kindi" label="al-Kindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q160460" start="9057" end="9066" title="al-Farabi" label="al-Farabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="9147" end="9153" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="9158" end="9162" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137211" start="9512" end="9526" title="Monophony" label="monophonically"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="10292" end="10298" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q17442397" start="10405" end="10415" title="Major second" label="whole-tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q738785" start="10417" end="10425" title="Semitone" label="halftone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326914" start="10430" end="10442" title="Quarter tone" label="quarter-tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045756" start="10485" end="10495" title="Microtonal music" label="microtones"/>
<link wikidata="Q31976" start="10918" end="10929" title="Bruno Nettl" label="Bruno Nettl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="11371" end="11383" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q94730109" start="11470" end="11477" title="hymnody" label="hymnody"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663254" start="11546" end="11558" title="Syrian chant" label="Syrian chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840268" start="11719" end="11732" title="Syrian Jews" label="Syrian Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979507" start="11877" end="11893" title="The Weekly Maqam" label="The Weekly Maqam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880274" start="11895" end="11903" title="Baqashot" label="Baqashot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247353" start="11908" end="11916" title="Pizmonim" label="Pizmonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026402" start="12052" end="12067" title="Syrian diaspora" label="Syrian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="12200" end="12208" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="12212" end="12219" title="refugee" label="refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="12415" end="12421" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="12427" end="12433" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="12435" end="12439" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q238217" start="12445" end="12457" title="Daraa" label="Dara&amp;#x27;a."/>
<link wikidata="Q8063414" start="13137" end="13144" title="Zaatari refugee camp" label="Zaatari"/>
<link wikidata="Q191000" start="14620" end="14623" title="oud" label="oud"/>
<link wikidata="Q623509" start="14656" end="14663" title="Rebab" label="rababah"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="15801" end="15810" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353139" start="15970" end="15982" title="Assala Nasri" label="Assala Nasri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391669" start="15984" end="15999" title="Farid al-Atrash" label="Farid al-Atrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q12231205" start="16001" end="16012" title="Fahd Ballan" label="Fahd Ballan"/>
<link wikidata="Q984486" start="16014" end="16026" title="Sabah Fakhri" label="Sabah Fakhri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875539" start="16028" end="16045" title="Mayada El Hennawy" label="Mayada El Hennawy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009512" start="16050" end="16064" title="George Wassouf" label="George Wassouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156570" start="16134" end="16140" title="Dabkeh" label="Dabkeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080806" start="16165" end="16179" title="Circle dance" label="circle dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q912389" start="16184" end="16196" title="line dancing" label="line dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q49836" start="16336" end="16343" title="wedding" label="wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q178810" start="16426" end="16442" title="Syrian civil war" label="Syrian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791" start="16531" end="16536" title="sword" label="sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q4068392" start="16550" end="16564" title="oriental dance" label="oriental dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007303" start="16595" end="16611" title="Culture of Syria" label="Culture of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q624044" start="16614" end="16626" title="Arabic music" label="Arabic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663254" start="16629" end="16641" title="Syrian chant" label="Syrian chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956166" start="16644" end="16654" title="Muwashshah" label="Muwashshah"/>
<link wikidata="Q120643830" start="16657" end="16696" title="Contemporary underground music in Syria" label="Contemporary underground music in Syria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416883" wikidata="Q2119676" url="?curid=416883" title="Battle of Cynossema">
<text>The naval Battle of Cynossema (Ancient Greek: ) took place in 411 BC during the Second Peloponnesian War. In the battle, an Athenian fleet commanded by Thrasybulus and Thrasyllus, although initially thrown on the defensive by a numerically superior Spartan fleet, won a narrow victory. This victory had an impact out of proportion to its tactical significance, coming when Athens&#x27; traditional democratic government had been replaced by an oligarchy and an Athenian defeat could have ended the war. The newly confident Athenian fleet proceeded to win two more victories in the Hellespont in quick succession, the second being the dramatic rout at Cyzicus, which ended the immediate Spartan threat to Athens&#x27; Black Sea lifeline.

==Prelude==
In the wake of Athens&#x27; defeat in the Sicilian Expedition in 413, a small Spartan fleet commanded by Chalcideus, who was advised and assisted by Alcibiades, succeeded in bringing a number of critical Ionian cities into revolt from the Athenian Empire. After the revolt of the critical city of Miletus, the Persian satrap Tissaphernes concluded an alliance against Athens with Sparta. The Spartans remained unwilling to challenge the Athenians at sea, and an Athenian fleet succeeded in recapturing several cities and besieging Chios during the later months of 412 BC. In 411 BC, however, further rebellions at Rhodes and Euboea, and the capture of Abydos and Lampsacus on the Hellespont by a Peloponnesian army that had marched there overland, forced the Athenians to disperse their forces to meet these various threats. The Spartan fleet could now move freely in the Aegean, and took advantage of its newfound superiority by lifting the blockade of Chios and bottling up the Athenians&#x27; Aegean fleet at Samos.

By withdrawing their ships from the Hellespont to Samos, the Athenians were able to reestablish their naval superiority in the Aegean, but in doing so they opened the door for Sparta to shift the theater of war. Accordingly, in late July, the Spartan commander Clearchus made an attempt to slip 40 ships past the Athenian fleet to the Hellespont. These were turned back by a storm, but shortly afterwards 10 ships under the Megarian general Helixus reached the Hellespont, where they triggered revolts in Byzantium, Chalcedon and other important cities. Several months later, the new Spartan navarch Mindarus, deciding that the promises of support made by Pharnabazus, the Persian satrap of Hellespontine Phrygia, were more promising than those of Tissaphernes in Ionia, slipped his entire fleet past the Athenians. He joined up with the Peloponnesian ships already operating in the Hellespont and established his base at Abydos, forcing the small Athenian fleet at Sestos to flee, with losses, to Imbros and Lemnos.

==Battle==
With a substantial Peloponnesian fleet operating in the Hellespont, the crucial trade route through which Athens&#x27; grain supply passed, the Athenian fleet had little choice but to pursue Mindarus. Accordingly, Thrasybulus, assuming overall command, led the fleet to Elaeus on the tip of the Gallipoli peninsula, where the Athenians spent five days preparing to challenge the 86 Spartan ships at Abydos with their 76 ships. The Athenian fleet sailed in column into the Hellespont, following the northern shore, while the Spartans put out from Abydos on the southern shore. When the Athenian left had rounded the point of Cynossema, the Spartans attacked, planning to outflank the Athenian right and trap the fleet in the Hellespont while driving the center aground on Cynossema. The Athenian center was quickly driven aground, and the left under Thrasyllus, beset by Syracusan ships and unable to see the rest of the fleet around the sharp point, was unable to come to its aid. Thrasybulus on the right, meanwhile, was able to avoid encirclement by extending his line westward, but in doing so lost touch with the center. With the Athenians divided and a substantial portion of their fleet incapacitated, a Spartan victory seemed assured.

At this critical juncture, however, the Peloponnesian line began to fall into disorder as ships broke line to pursue individual Athenian vessels. Seeing this, Thrasybulus turned his ships abruptly and attacked the Spartan left. After routing these ships, the Athenian right bore down on the Peloponnesian center, and, catching them in a state of disorganization, quickly routed them as well. The Syracusans on the right, seeing the rest of their fleet in flight, abandoned their attack on the Athenian left and fled as well. The narrowness of the straits, which ensured that the Peloponnesians had only a short way to go to safety, limited the damage the Athenians could inflict, but by day&#x27;s end they had captured 21 Spartan ships to the 15 of theirs that the Spartans had taken in the early fighting. The Athenians set up a trophy on Cynossema and put in at Sestos, while the Peloponnesians made their way back to Abydos.

==Aftermath==
In the days after the battle, the Athenians refitted their ships at Sestos and dispatched a small detachment to Cyzicus, recapturing that town and seizing 8 triremes encountered along the way. A trireme was dispatched to Athens, where the unexpected good news restored the people&#x27;s confidence in the war effort. Historian Donald Kagan has emphasized the effect this victory had on the Athenians. Forced to fight on terms chosen by their enemies, at a time when the city lacked the resources to build another fleet, the Athenians could have lost the war on that day at Cynossema. Instead, they won a victory that allowed them to continue fighting, with victory still seeming possible.

==References==
==Sources==
*Kagan, Donald. &quot;The Peloponnesian War&quot; (Penguin Books, 2003). </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2119676" start="10" end="29" title="Battle of Cynossema" label="Battle of Cynossema"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="31" end="44" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="80" end="104" title="Second Peloponnesian War" label="Second Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="124" end="132" title="Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q354403" start="152" end="163" title="Thrasybulus" label="Thrasybulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2244996" start="168" end="178" title="Thrasyllus" label="Thrasyllus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="249" end="255" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="398" end="408" title="democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="444" end="453" title="oligarchy" label="oligarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q524871" start="651" end="658" title="Battle of Cyzicus" label="Cyzicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q844289" start="792" end="811" title="Sicilian Expedition" label="Sicilian Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="855" end="865" title="Chalcideus" label="Chalcideus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187982" start="899" end="909" title="Alcibiades" label="Alcibiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="954" end="959" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193235" start="989" end="1004" title="Athenian Empire" label="Athenian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q169460" start="1047" end="1054" title="Miletus" label="Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="1060" end="1067" title="Achaemenid Dynasty" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="1068" end="1074" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q355727" start="1075" end="1087" title="Tissaphernes" label="Tissaphernes"/>
<link wikidata="Q160483" start="1281" end="1286" title="Chios" label="Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="1364" end="1370" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q173096" start="1375" end="1381" title="Euboea" label="Euboea"/>
<link wikidata="Q336446" start="1402" end="1408" title="Abydos, Hellespont" label="Abydos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229422" start="1413" end="1422" title="Lampsacus" label="Lampsacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156882" start="1762" end="1767" title="Samos" label="Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="2275" end="2284" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q337381" start="2286" end="2295" title="Chalcedon" label="Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185878" start="2362" end="2369" title="navarch" label="navarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476333" start="2370" end="2378" title="Mindarus" label="Mindarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q458256" start="2426" end="2437" title="Pharnabazus (5th century BC)" label="Pharnabazus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273852" start="2461" end="2482" title="Hellespontine Phrygia" label="Hellespontine Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q355727" start="2518" end="2530" title="Tissaphernes" label="Tissaphernes"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="2534" end="2539" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q593737" start="2736" end="2742" title="Sestos" label="Sestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q658437" start="2768" end="2774" title="Imbros" label="Imbros"/>
<link wikidata="Q192483" start="2779" end="2785" title="Lemnos" label="Lemnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q354403" start="3013" end="3024" title="Thrasybulus" label="Thrasybulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234913" start="3069" end="3075" title="Elaeus" label="Elaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2244996" start="3648" end="3658" title="Thrasyllus" label="Thrasyllus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208420" start="5181" end="5188" title="trireme" label="trireme"/>
<link wikidata="Q469761" start="5313" end="5325" title="Donald Kagan" label="Donald Kagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q469761" start="5704" end="5717" title="Donald Kagan" label="Kagan, Donald"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416887" wikidata="Q442950" url="?curid=416887" title="Vanceboro">
<text>Vanceboro is the name of several places in the United States of America:

* Vanceboro, Maine, a town
** Vanceboro (CDP), Maine, the main village in the town
* Vanceboro, North Carolina, a town</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2990309" start="76" end="92" title="Vanceboro, Maine" label="Vanceboro, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q107056905" start="104" end="126" title="Vanceboro (CDP), Maine" label="Vanceboro (CDP), Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025269" start="159" end="184" title="Vanceboro, North Carolina" label="Vanceboro, North Carolina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416888" wikidata="Q15061637" url="?curid=416888" title="Denny Party">
<text>The Denny Party was a group of American pioneers credited with founding Seattle, Washington. They settled at Alki Point on November 13, 1851.

==History==
On April 10, 1851, a wagon party headed by Arthur A. Denny left Cherry Grove, Illinois and headed west. The party included Arthur Denny&#x27;s father John Denny, his stepmother, two of his older brothers who ultimately settled in the Willamette Valley of Oregon, his younger brother David Denny, his wife, Mary Ann Boren, Mary&#x27;s younger sister Louisa, and their brother Carson Boren. Mary Ann Denny and was pregnant throughout the journey and Mary Ann&#x27;s sister Louisa Boren ultimately married David Denny in 1861.

On July 6, 1851, the party battled Native Americans at American Falls, Idaho on the Snake River, but escaped unharmed. The following day they met John Low, and he joined the party. Late in July 1851 they reached the Burnt River in eastern Oregon where they encountered a man named Brock who suggested to Denny that Puget Sound would be a good place to create a town.

The Denny Party arrived in Portland, Oregon on August 22, 1851. Arthur Denny was ill and Mary Ann was about to give birth so the party convalesced in Portland. On September 2, Mary gave birth to a son, Rolland H. Denny.

John Low and David Denny headed north to scout the possibilities. Along the way they were joined by Leander &quot;Lee&quot; Terry. In newly founded Olympia, Washington, they met Michael Simmons, the wealthy founder of Tumwater. He guided them to Alki to scout as a possible site for a settlement. On September 28, 1851, at Alki, Terry and Low began building a cabin with help from the local Native Americans, and then staked claims to the land. They decided to name their new village New York. Low returned to Portland to alert the others, Terry looked for a froe to make redcedar shake shingles, and David Denny stayed on in the unfinished cabin. David Denny hurt his leg and was unable to complete the roof of the cabin.

In Portland, Arthur Denny recruited Illinois farmer William Nathaniel Bell and his wife, and, by coincidence, Charlie Terry, Leander&#x27;s younger brother. The Terry brothers, from Waterville, New York, had come west as part of the California Gold Rush, but had not liked the rough and tumble of San Francisco.

On November 5, 1851, the Denny Party left Portland on the schooner &quot;Exact&quot;, bound for Puget Sound and Haida Gwaii. The &quot;Exact&quot; carried a number of settlers bound for Puget Sound in addition to the Denny Party, including Daniel Bigelow who settled in Olympia. After a difficult passage, particularly hard on the still-ill Denny, they arrived at Alki on November 13, where David greeted them with the words, &quot;I wish you hadn&#x27;t come.&quot;

Denny was bitterly disappointed that Low and Lee Terry had already staked the relevant claims for Alki. However, he had no choice but to pitch in, finish the cabin and settle in for the winter. Denny convinced Bell and Boren that they needed to scout a different location. Once the worst of winter cleared, Denny and other party members explored as far as Commencement Bay (now the site of Tacoma), Port Orchard, Smith Cove, and up the Duwamish River to the present site of Puyallup, before settling on an island in the mudflats near the east shore of Elliott Bay, now the site of Pioneer Square.

For the next three years Alki Point and Elliott Bay sites competed as rival townsites. Charlie Terry bought out his brother&#x27;s and Low&#x27;s Alki holdings, and led this community. Arthur Denny settled at Elliott Bay and, along with his rival D.S. &quot;Doc&quot; Maynard, led the development of Seattle. Terry and Low could not attract settlers to their townsite and people facetiously began calling the smaller village &quot;New York Alki&quot; or &quot;New York bye and bye&quot; in Chinook Jargon.

==Monument==

The Birthplace of Seattle Monument at Alki Beach is inscribed with the names of all members of the Denny Party.

==References==
== External links ==
* William C. (&quot;Bill&quot;) Speidel, &quot;Sons of the Profits&quot;, Nettle Creek Publishing Company, Seattle, 1967. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15061637" start="4" end="15" title="Denny Party" label="Denny Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981922" start="31" end="47" title="American pioneer" label="American pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="72" end="79" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196540" start="109" end="119" title="Alki Point, Seattle" label="Alki Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595543" start="198" end="213" title="Arthur A. Denny" label="Arthur A. Denny"/>
<link wikidata="Q954144" start="219" end="241" title="Cherry Grove-Shannon Township, Carroll County, Illinois" label="Cherry Grove, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q27956947" start="305" end="315" title="John Denny (politician)" label="John Denny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703681" start="389" end="406" title="Willamette Valley" label="Willamette Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="410" end="416" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232928" start="438" end="449" title="David Denny" label="David Denny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046912" start="530" end="542" title="Carson Boren" label="Carson Boren"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="715" end="731" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q385233" start="735" end="749" title="American Falls, Idaho" label="American Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="751" end="756" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q272074" start="764" end="775" title="Snake River" label="Snake River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4101613" start="896" end="907" title="Burnt River (Oregon)" label="Burnt River"/>
<link wikidata="Q604141" start="995" end="1006" title="Puget Sound" label="Puget Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="1075" end="1091" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42735" start="1417" end="1436" title="Olympia, Washington" label="Olympia, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834401" start="1447" end="1462" title="Michael Simmons (American pioneer)" label="Michael Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507493" start="1487" end="1495" title="Tumwater, Washington" label="Tumwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196540" start="1515" end="1519" title="Alki Point, Seattle" label="Alki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236083" start="1828" end="1832" title="froe" label="froe"/>
<link wikidata="Q147417" start="1841" end="1849" title="Western Redcedar" label="redcedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="2029" end="2037" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016047" start="2045" end="2067" title="William Nathaniel Bell" label="William Nathaniel Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452971" start="2175" end="2195" title="Waterville, New York" label="Waterville, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="2226" end="2246" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2290" end="2303" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q112683042" start="2364" end="2390" title="schooner Exact" label="schooner &amp;quot;Exact&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q604141" start="2402" end="2413" title="Puget Sound" label="Puget Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q210907" start="2418" end="2429" title="Haida Gwaii" label="Haida Gwaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216564" start="2546" end="2560" title="Daniel Bigelow" label="Daniel Bigelow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879783" start="3130" end="3146" title="Commencement Bay" label="Commencement Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q199797" start="3164" end="3170" title="Tacoma, Washington" label="Tacoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q935482" start="3173" end="3185" title="Port Orchard, Washington" label="Port Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545112" start="3187" end="3197" title="Smith Cove (Seattle)" label="Smith Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q751663" start="3210" end="3224" title="Duwamish River" label="Duwamish River"/>
<link wikidata="Q179336" start="3248" end="3256" title="Puyallup, Washington" label="Puyallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051501" start="3326" end="3337" title="Elliott Bay" label="Elliott Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388921" start="3355" end="3369" title="Pioneer Square, Seattle, Washington" label="Pioneer Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q464506" start="3619" end="3647" title="David Swinson Maynard" label="D.S. &amp;quot;Doc&amp;quot; Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q35173" start="3862" end="3876" title="Chinook Jargon" label="Chinook Jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q116846165" start="3897" end="3927" title="Birthplace of Seattle Monument" label="Birthplace of Seattle Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727699" start="3931" end="3941" title="Alki Beach" label="Alki Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910957" start="4044" end="4081" title="Bill Speidel" label="William C. (&amp;quot;Bill&amp;quot;) Speidel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416890" wikidata="Q381769" url="?curid=416890" title="Chris Coleman (footballer)">
<text>Christopher Patrick Coleman (born 10 June 1970) is a Welsh professional football coach and former player. He is currently managing OH Leuven in the Belgian Pro League.

As a player, Coleman usually played in defence, while also occasionally appearing as a forward. He began his career at Manchester City, leaving as a teenager to make his debut for hometown team Swansea City in 1987. In 1991, he joined Crystal Palace, whom he represented in the Premier League. He spent a year-and-a-half at league champions Blackburn Rovers before signing for Fulham in 1997, helping the team to two promotions from the third tier to the top flight. He won 32 caps playing for Wales. Coleman&#x27;s playing career ended at the age of 32, when his leg was broken in a car crash.
Following this, he started his coaching career at Fulham. In his first full season as manager, he guided the club to ninth place in the 2003–04 Premier League. After leaving Fulham, Coleman was appointed manager of Real Sociedad, where he resigned in January 2008 due to differences with the incoming president. He returned to England to manage Coventry City, but was dismissed in May 2010 following a poor run of results. Coleman then managed Greek side AEL for the first half of the 2011–12 season before resigning due to financial troubles at the club. In 2012, he took over as Wales national team manager after the death of Gary Speed, and led Wales to UEFA Euro 2016, their first major tournament since the 1958 FIFA World Cup, where they made the semi-finals.

==Early life==
Coleman was born in Swansea. His Irish father was from Dublin.

Coleman was educated at St Joseph&#x27;s Roman Catholic Primary School and Bishop Vaughan Catholic School. Coleman has been nicknamed &quot;Cookie&quot; since childhood, as friends likened his eating habits to the Cookie Monster from &quot;Sesame Street&quot;.

==Playing career==
===Club===
====Swansea City====
The first professional team Coleman was contracted to was Manchester City, aged 16, although he later left them, citing homesickness as the major reason. He then joined his hometown club Swansea City.

He made his first professional appearance for them aged 17, in the autumn of 1987. He made nearly 200 appearances for the south Wales club and helped win the Welsh Cup in 1989 and 1991.

====Crystal Palace====
After spending four years with Swansea, Coleman was signed by Crystal Palace in 1991 for a transfer fee set by a Football League tribunal at around £270,000, plus a percentage of any future sale. After making 143 appearances, scoring 16 goals in that period – a 1 in 9 record explained by the fact that manager Steve Coppell often used Coleman as a makeshift centre forward. Palace finished 10th in Coleman&#x27;s first season at Selhurst Park, but they were relegated from the new FA Premier League in his second season (although they did reach the semi-finals of the League Cup). They won promotion as Division One champions at the first attempt, but went straight back down again despite reaching the semi-finals of both cups that season. Coleman was sold to Blackburn Rovers, the defending league champions, for £2.8 million in December 1995. While at Palace, he was capped for Wales at senior level for the first time.

In 2005, Palace supporters voted Coleman into their Centenary XI.

====Blackburn Rovers====
Coleman joined Premier League champions Blackburn Rovers for a fee of £2.8 million. Blackburn did not retain the Premier League title they had won in 1995, and finished seventh, just missing out on a UEFA Cup place. Coleman made 28 league appearances over his season-and-a-half at the club, and when he found himself out of the starting line-up too often (not helped by a persistent Achilles injury), he took the gamble to further his career by dropping two divisions to join Fulham.

====Fulham====
Fulham, at the time in the third tier, were financed by wealthy businessman Mohamed Al-Fayed, and were able to spend a record transfer fee for the division and club, of £2.1 million for Coleman in late 1997. He quickly became club captain, and led Fulham to promotion under manager Kevin Keegan in 1998–99 to the First Division.

He remained captain and a regular in the team under new manager Jean Tigana in the 2000–01 season as Fulham made a successful start to the campaign. However, Coleman&#x27;s career was effectively ended midway through the season, after he broke his leg in a car crash near Bletchingley in Surrey on 2 January 2001, just days before an FA Cup tie against Manchester United. He never recovered from this injury despite playing a reserve fixture in March 2002, a game that only served as an indication that he would never again play at the highest level of English football. He announced his retirement as a player in October 2002, but stayed at the West London club as a member of the coaching staff.

===International===
Coleman was capped by Wales at school, youth, under-21 and senior levels. His only competitive football appearance after his leg injuries came for Wales on 14 May 2002, when he was called up to the squad as a replacement for Danny Gabbidon, and then came on as a late substitute for goalscorer Robert Earnshaw in the 1–0 win over Germany at the Millennium Stadium.

Coleman was also eligible to play for Ireland, through his father.

==Managerial career==
===Fulham===
Coleman joined Fulham&#x27;s coaching staff in October 2002 under Tigana. He later succeeded the Frenchman as caretaker manager in April 2003, and steered Fulham away from relegation danger. He was named as Fulham&#x27;s permanent manager in May 2003, beating the more experienced Klaus Toppmöller and George Burley to the post, and also became the youngest manager in the Premier League.

His first full season in charge saw Fulham finish a surprise ninth place, as many pundits tipped them to struggle and for Coleman to be sacked. Many of Fulham&#x27;s key players, such as Edwin van der Sar, Louis Saha, Steed Malbranque and Luís Boa Morte, were sold in the following years and Fulham did not repeat their earlier successes under Coleman though he kept them clear of relegation. He was sacked on 10 April 2007 in a move that caught some observers by surprise, after a seven-game winless run that left the club four points above the relegation zone.

===Real Sociedad===
Coleman moved abroad to manage recently relegated Segunda División side Real Sociedad on 4 July 2007, after being recommended to the club by fellow Welshman and former Real Sociedad manager John Toshack. He was linked with Bolton Wanderers in October 2007 though nothing came of it. With the club in 5th place and having only lost once in its previous eleven games, Coleman resigned as manager on 16 January 2008, citing a divergence in vision for the club with newly elected President Iñaki Badiola.

===Coventry City===
Coleman was appointed manager of Championship club Coventry City on 19 February 2008, signing a three-and-a-half-year contract. He replaced Iain Dowie, who had been sacked by new owner Ray Ranson.

On 26 August 2008, the BBC reported that Coleman was no longer interested in the Wales national team. He later said that his words had been misinterpreted; when answering a question on whether Coventry striker Freddy Eastwood was fit to play for Wales, he meant to say that he wanted Eastwood fit for club before returning to international duty. On 4 May 2010, Coleman was sacked following Coventry&#x27;s 19th-place finish during the 2009–10 season, their lowest league finish in more than 45 years. They would be relegated two years later.

===AEL===
On 26 May 2011, Coleman was appointed as manager of Greek side AEL. In January 2012, Coleman announced that because of financial troubles at the club he would be quitting from his position as manager.

===Wales===
On 19 January 2012, Coleman was appointed team manager of the Wales national team, as successor to his friend Gary Speed, who had died the previous November. After letting his assistant Osian Roberts take charge in Speed&#x27;s memorial match against Costa Rica in February, his first game in charge was a 2–0 defeat against Mexico at the MetLife Stadium in New Jersey on 27 May.

Wales&#x27; first match in 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification was on 7 September at home to Belgium, with centre back James Collins sent off for a late lunge on Guillaume Gillet in the 25th minute of an eventual 2–0 loss. Four days later in Novi Sad, the team lost 6–1 to Serbia; Coleman said in October 2015 that he considered leaving his post after the defeat. After becoming the first Welsh manager to lose his first five games, Coleman got his first win on 12 October 2012, a 2–1 victory against Scotland. On 26 March 2013, in a qualifier against Croatia at the Liberty Stadium, Wales led 1–0 for the majority of the game through a Gareth Bale penalty, but two late goals from the opponents ended any hopes of qualification.

In October 2015, Coleman led Wales to their best ever position on the FIFA World Rankings, 8th. On 10 October, their qualification for the UEFA Euro 2016 tournament was confirmed, a first tournament qualification since 1958. The team came first in their group in France, and eliminated Northern Ireland and Belgium to reach the semi-finals, losing to eventual champions Portugal. Coleman received interest from other teams due to his management of the Welsh team at the tournament.

On 23 May 2016, it was announced at a Football Association of Wales press conference that Coleman had signed a two-year contract extension to take in the 2018 World Cup qualifying campaign. Wales&#x27;s 1–0 home loss to the Republic of Ireland on 9 October 2017 meant that they were eliminated from qualification. Coleman resigned as Wales manager on 17 November.

===Sunderland===
On 19 November 2017, Coleman was appointed as the new manager of under-performing Championship club Sunderland. He replaced the dismissed Simon Grayson, who had left the Black Cats third from bottom of the league table in twenty-second place and within the relegation drop zone. Coleman&#x27;s first game in charge was a 2–1 defeat at Aston Villa, two days after his appointment. By the conclusion of 2017, Sunderland had collected eleven points, out of a possible twenty-four, under Coleman&#x27;s guidance, briefly lifting out of the relegation zone into twenty-first place, following a satisfactory run of form.

During the winter transfer window, Coleman was informed that club chairman Ellis Short had refused to invest any more money into player transfers, with the American businessman announcing his intentions to sell the club. Joining the club for free of charge included the loan signings of Jake Clarke-Salter from Chelsea, Ovie Ejaria from Liverpool, Lee Camp from Cardiff City and Ashley Fletcher from fierce rivals Middlesbrough; Kazenga LuaLua was the only permanent transfer that window, joining from Brighton &amp; Hove Albion on a free transfer.

After their transfer window nightmare, Sunderland went on a nine-game winless run, ending when they defeated Derby County 4–1 at Pride Park. This was Coleman&#x27;s final victory in charge of Sunderland; his final six games saw the Black Cats record three draws and three defeats. Relegation to League One was confirmed following a 2–1 defeat against Burton Albion at the Stadium of Light. His final game in charge was a 2–1 defeat to Fulham. On 29 April 2018, Coleman was dismissed shortly following the club&#x27;s sale.

=== Hebei China Fortune ===
On 10 June 2018, Coleman was appointed as the head coach of Chinese club Hebei China Fortune, as successor to Manuel Pellegrini, who left the side to return to the Premier League with West Ham United. The club had become notable during the year for completing the high-profile signing of Javier Mascherano from Spanish La Liga giants Barcelona. His side finished the 2018 Super League season in sixth position, two places and fourteen points adrift from qualification to the 2019 AFC Champions League.

Coleman&#x27;s side struggled to adapt in the 2019 league campaign, with the club sat in fifteenth place, in the relegation zone, following nine games. Having only won one game that league season, a 2–1 victory over Shanghai Greenland Shenhua, he was sacked on 15 May due to poor performance.

==Personal life==
He is married to TV presenter Charlotte Jackson. They had a son at the end of 2014. Coleman&#x27;s godson is Republic of Ireland international Ronan Curtis, who plays as a forward for AFC Wimbledon.

In June 2010, Coleman worked as a commentator for ITV at the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa. He has also worked as a commentator and pundit for Sky Sports. For Euro 2020, he worked for ESPN.

On 20 October 2016 he was awarded the Freedom of the City of Swansea. Coleman was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2017 New Year Honours for services to football. In 2017, he was awarded an honorary degree from his hometown&#x27;s University of Swansea, and fellowships at both Bangor University and University of Wales Trinity Saint David. In July 2017, he endorsed the Welsh Government&#x27;s project to double the number of speakers of Welsh by 2050.

==Career statistics==


==Managerial statistics==


==Honours==
===Player===
Swansea City
*Welsh Cup: 1988–89, 1990–91

Crystal Palace
*Football League First Division: 1993–94

Fulham
*Football League First Division: 2000–01
*Football League Second Division: 1998–99

Individual
*PFA Team of the Year: 1988–89 Third Division, 1990–91 Third Division, 1997–98 Second Division, 1998–99 Second Division, 1999–2000 First Division, 2000–01 First Division
*Crystal Palace Player of the Year: 1994

===Manager===

Individual
*Football League Championship Manager of the Month: February 2009

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q381769" start="0" end="27" title="Chris Coleman (footballer)" label="Christopher Patrick Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="72" end="80" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q117321337" start="98" end="104" title="Football player" label="player"/>
<link wikidata="Q916199" start="131" end="140" title="Oud-Heverlee Leuven" label="OH Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q216022" start="148" end="166" title="Belgian Pro League" label="Belgian Pro League"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="208" end="215" title="Defender (association football)" label="defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="288" end="303" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="363" end="375" title="Swansea City A.F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="404" end="418" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="447" end="461" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="510" end="526" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="546" end="552" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="646" end="650" title="Caps (sport)" label="caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="663" end="668" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q817262" start="900" end="922" title="2003–04 Premier League" label="2003–04 Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q10315" start="979" end="992" title="Real Sociedad" label="Real Sociedad"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="1109" end="1122" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry City"/>
<link wikidata="Q275626" start="1219" end="1222" title="Athlitiki Enosi Larissa F.C." label="AEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="1345" end="1364" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q202153" start="1392" end="1402" title="Gary Speed" label="Gary Speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q189571" start="1421" end="1435" title="UEFA Euro 2016" label="UEFA Euro 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q132533" start="1476" end="1495" title="1958 FIFA World Cup" label="1958 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="1566" end="1573" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="1601" end="1607" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917736" start="1685" end="1715" title="Bishop Vaughan Catholic School" label="Bishop Vaughan Catholic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754267" start="1824" end="1838" title="Cookie Monster" label="Cookie Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q155629" start="1850" end="1863" title="Sesame Street" label="Sesame Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="1981" end="1996" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="2110" end="2122" title="Swansea City A.F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="2283" end="2292" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="2397" end="2411" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q438005" start="2646" end="2659" title="Steve Coppell" label="Steve Coppell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066373" start="2765" end="2778" title="Selhurst Park" label="Selhurst Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="2817" end="2834" title="FA Premier League" label="FA Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="3097" end="3113" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3312" end="3324" title="Crystal Palace F.C.#Crystal Palace &amp;quot;Centenary XI&amp;quot;" label="Centenary XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="3367" end="3381" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="3392" end="3408" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q225273" start="3502" end="3506" title="1994–95 Premier League" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="3552" end="3560" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q223172" start="3735" end="3743" title="Achilles&amp;#x27; tendon" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="3828" end="3834" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="3879" end="3889" title="Football League Second Division" label="third tier"/>
<link wikidata="Q365913" start="3928" end="3944" title="Mohamed Al-Fayed" label="Mohamed Al-Fayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q715772" start="4083" end="4090" title="captain (association football)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q152832" start="4134" end="4146" title="Kevin Keegan" label="Kevin Keegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556033" start="4150" end="4157" title="1998–99 in English football" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="4165" end="4179" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q295559" start="4246" end="4257" title="Jean Tigana" label="Jean Tigana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930669" start="4265" end="4279" title="2000–01 in English football" label="2000–01 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476851" start="4454" end="4466" title="Bletchingley" label="Bletchingley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="4516" end="4522" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="4535" end="4552" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734390" start="4828" end="4839" title="West London (sub region)" label="West London"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="4913" end="4919" title="Cap (sport)" label="capped"/>
<link wikidata="Q946297" start="4947" end="4955" title="Wales national under-21 football team" label="under-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="4960" end="4966" title="Wales national football team" label="senior"/>
<link wikidata="Q312067" start="5126" end="5140" title="Danny Gabbidon" label="Danny Gabbidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q342770" start="5195" end="5210" title="Robert Earnshaw" label="Robert Earnshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="5231" end="5238" title="Germany national football team" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q204496" start="5246" end="5264" title="Millennium Stadium" label="Millennium Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q508529" start="5651" end="5667" title="Klaus Toppmöller" label="Klaus Toppmöller"/>
<link wikidata="Q712997" start="5672" end="5685" title="George Burley" label="George Burley"/>
<link wikidata="Q482955" start="5947" end="5964" title="Edwin van der Sar" label="Edwin van der Sar"/>
<link wikidata="Q484968" start="5966" end="5976" title="Louis Saha" label="Louis Saha"/>
<link wikidata="Q13054" start="5978" end="5994" title="Steed Malbranque" label="Steed Malbranque"/>
<link wikidata="Q316512" start="5999" end="6013" title="Luís Boa Morte" label="Luís Boa Morte"/>
<link wikidata="Q35615" start="6394" end="6410" title="Segunda División" label="Segunda División"/>
<link wikidata="Q10315" start="6416" end="6429" title="Real Sociedad" label="Real Sociedad"/>
<link wikidata="Q342989" start="6534" end="6546" title="John Toshack" label="John Toshack"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="6567" end="6583" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="6899" end="6911" title="EFL Championship" label="Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="6917" end="6930" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361221" start="7006" end="7016" title="Iain Dowie" label="Iain Dowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q10393314" start="7051" end="7061" title="Ray Ranson" label="Ray Ranson"/>
<link wikidata="Q574436" start="7274" end="7289" title="Freddy Eastwood" label="Freddy Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q275626" start="7680" end="7683" title="Athlitiki Enosi Larissa F.C." label="AEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="7893" end="7912" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q202153" start="7941" end="7951" title="Gary Speed" label="Gary Speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199536" start="8017" end="8030" title="Osian Roberts" label="Osian Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q194387" start="8082" end="8092" title="Costa Rica national football team" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="8156" end="8162" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862290" start="8170" end="8185" title="MetLife Stadium" label="MetLife Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q317077" start="8239" end="8272" title="2014 FIFA World Cup qualification" label="2014 FIFA World Cup qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="8303" end="8310" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q158980" start="8329" end="8342" title="James Collins (footballer born 1983)" label="James Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q219360" start="8372" end="8388" title="Guillaume Gillet" label="Guillaume Gillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630" start="8452" end="8460" title="Novi Sad" label="Novi Sad"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="8711" end="8719" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q134479" start="8762" end="8769" title="Croatia national football team" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q580480" start="8777" end="8792" title="Liberty Stadium" label="Liberty Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q184586" start="8847" end="8858" title="Gareth Bale" label="Gareth Bale"/>
<link wikidata="Q125351662" start="9011" end="9030" title="FIFA World Rankings" label="FIFA World Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q189571" start="9080" end="9094" title="UEFA Euro 2016" label="UEFA Euro 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q275173" start="9462" end="9491" title="Football Association of Wales" label="Football Association of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="9888" end="9900" title="EFL Championship" label="Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="9906" end="9916" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q971981" start="9944" end="9957" title="Simon Grayson" label="Simon Grayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="10141" end="10152" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q622822" start="10433" end="10455" title="Transfer window" label="winter transfer window"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365995" start="10497" end="10508" title="Ellis Short" label="Ellis Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q23688811" start="10709" end="10727" title="Jake Clarke-Salter" label="Jake Clarke-Salter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="10733" end="10740" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q26953157" start="10742" end="10753" title="Ovie Ejaria" label="Ovie Ejaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="10759" end="10768" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q455332" start="10770" end="10778" title="Lee Camp (footballer)" label="Lee Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q18662" start="10784" end="10796" title="Cardiff City F.C." label="Cardiff City"/>
<link wikidata="Q22004378" start="10801" end="10816" title="Ashley Fletcher" label="Ashley Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="10836" end="10849" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q513859" start="10851" end="10865" title="Kazenga LuaLua" label="Kazenga LuaLua"/>
<link wikidata="Q19453" start="10924" end="10950" title="Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion F.C." label="Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19470" start="11081" end="11093" title="Derby County F.C." label="Derby County"/>
<link wikidata="Q201612" start="11101" end="11111" title="Pride Park Stadium" label="Pride Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19565" start="11267" end="11277" title="EFL League One" label="League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q48929" start="11323" end="11336" title="Burton Albion F.C." label="Burton Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q31969" start="11344" end="11360" title="Stadium of Light" label="Stadium of Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="11407" end="11413" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q402038" start="11597" end="11616" title="Hebei China Fortune F.C." label="Hebei China Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q296036" start="11634" end="11651" title="Manuel Pellegrini" label="Manuel Pellegrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="11688" end="11702" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="11708" end="11723" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q161571" start="11812" end="11829" title="Javier Mascherano" label="Javier Mascherano"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="11843" end="11850" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="11858" end="11867" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q42313965" start="11891" end="11915" title="2018 Chinese Super League" label="2018 Super League season"/>
<link wikidata="Q45037426" start="11999" end="12024" title="2019 AFC Champions League" label="2019 AFC Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q58485692" start="12073" end="12093" title="2019 Chinese Super League" label="2019 league campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q725367" start="12243" end="12269" title="Shanghai Greenland Shenhua F.C." label="Shanghai Greenland Shenhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086021" start="12369" end="12386" title="Charlotte Jackson" label="Charlotte Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="12448" end="12467" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55081288" start="12482" end="12494" title="Ronan Curtis" label="Ronan Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="12573" end="12584" title="sports commentator" label="commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="12589" end="12592" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q176883" start="12600" end="12619" title="2010 FIFA World Cup" label="2010 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340204" start="12688" end="12698" title="Sky Sports" label="Sky Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q373501" start="12704" end="12713" title="UEFA Euro 2020" label="Euro 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="12729" end="12733" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="12828" end="12870" title="Officer of the Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28128497" start="12884" end="12905" title="2017 New Year Honours" label="2017 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420500" start="13000" end="13021" title="University of Swansea" label="University of Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q790029" start="13047" end="13064" title="Bangor University" label="Bangor University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551774" start="13069" end="13108" title="University of Wales Trinity Saint David" label="University of Wales Trinity Saint David"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="13315" end="13324" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585003" start="13326" end="13333" title="1988–89 Welsh Cup" label="1988–89"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586629" start="13335" end="13342" title="1990–91 Welsh Cup" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="13360" end="13390" title="Football League First Division" label="Football League First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q500015" start="13392" end="13399" title="1993–94 Football League First Division" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436291" start="13441" end="13448" title="2000–01 Football League First Division" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="13450" end="13481" title="Football League Second Division" label="Football League Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588860" start="13483" end="13490" title="1998–99 Football League Second Division" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044044" start="13504" end="13524" title="PFA Team of the Year" label="PFA Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13526" end="13548" title="1988–89 Football League#Third Division" label="1988–89 Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13550" end="13572" title="1990–91 Football League#Third Division" label="1990–91 Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13574" end="13597" title="1997–98 Football League#Second Division" label="1997–98 Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13599" end="13622" title="1998–99 Football League#Second Division" label="1998–99 Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13624" end="13648" title="1999–2000 Football League#First Division" label="1999–2000 First Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13650" end="13672" title="2000–01 Football League#First Division" label="2000–01 First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q30512353" start="13674" end="13707" title="Crystal Palace F.C. Player of the Year" label="Crystal Palace Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462398" start="13742" end="13791" title="Football League Championship Manager of the Month" label="Football League Championship Manager of the Month"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416891" wikidata="Q3722280" url="?curid=416891" title="1951 United Kingdom general election">
<text>The 1951 United Kingdom general election was held twenty months after the 1950 general election, which the Labour Party had won with a slim majority of just five seats. The Labour government called a snap election for Thursday 25 October 1951 in the hope of increasing its parliamentary majority. 

This election is remarkable for the fact that despite the Labour Party winning the popular vote (48.8%) and achieving the highest-ever total vote (13,948,385) at the time, the Conservative Party won a majority of 17 seats. This unusual phenomenon can be attributed to the collapse of the Liberal vote, which enabled the Conservatives to win seats by default. 

The Labour Party has never gone on to equal or surpass the voteshare or the total vote that it acquired in this election. The Conservatives, however, would break the record of the highest votes in 1992 and again in 2019. It would also exceed the 48.8% voteshare won by the Labour Party, in the 1955 and 1959 elections winning over 49% in each case. 

The election marked the return of Winston Churchill as Prime Minister and the beginning of Labour&#x27;s 13-year spell in opposition. It was the third and final general election to be held during the reign of King George VI, as he died the following year on 6 February and was succeeded by his daughter, Elizabeth II. It was the last election in which the Conservatives did better in Scotland than in England.

The 1951 election was the second one to be covered on BBC Television. On election night, the results were televised from the BBC Alexandra Palace studio in London. Graham Hutton, David Butler and H. G. Nicholas headed the election night coverage from 10.15pm to 4.00am on the television service. On the following day, television coverage started at 10.00am and continued throughout the day until 5.00pm.
==Background==
King George VI feared since that the government had such a slim majority, and he was to leave the country to go on his planned Commonwealth tour in early 1952, there was a possibility of a change of government in his absence. Clement Attlee decided to call the election to assuage that concern. (In the event, the King became too ill to travel and delegated the tour to his daughter Princess Elizabeth shortly before his death in February 1952.) Parliament was dissolved on 5 October 1951.

The Labour government, which had implemented most of its manifesto from the 1945 election, was beginning to lose cabinet ministers, such as Ernest Bevin (death) and Stafford Cripps (health issues). The Conservative Party, however, had more MPs since the 1950 general election.

==Campaign==
The Labour Party entered the election by being weakened by the emerging schism between Gaitskellites, on the right of the party, and the Bevanites, on its left. The party&#x27;s manifesto stated that the party &quot;proud of its record, sure in its policies—confidently asks the electors to renew its mandate&quot;. It identified four key tasks facing the United Kingdom that it would tackle: the need to work for peace, the need to work to &quot;maintain full employment and to increase production&quot;, the need to reduce cost of living and the need to &quot;build a just society&quot;. The manifesto argued that only a Labour government could achieve those tasks. It also contrasted the Britain of 1951 with that of the interwar years in which there had been largely Conservative-led governments by noting that the interwar period had seen &quot;mass-unemployment; mass fear; mass misery&quot;. It did not promise more nationalisations, unlike in the previous year&#x27;s election, and instead focused on offering more council housing and a pledge to &quot;associate the workers more closely with the administration of public industries and services&quot;. However, it remained opposed to full workers&#x27; control of industries.

While Labour began to have some policy divisions during the election campaign, the Conservatives ran an efficient campaign, which was well-funded and orchestrated. Their manifesto, &quot;Britain Strong and Free&quot;, stressed that safeguarding &quot;our traditional way of life&quot; was integral to the Conservative purpose. Significantly, they did not propose to dismantle the British welfare state or the National Health Service which the Labour government had established. The manifesto, however, promised to &quot;stop all further nationalisation&quot; and to repeal the Steel Act, which had been introduced by the Labour government and was being implemented during the election season. The Conservatives also attacked Labour for ending wartime rationing and price controls too slowly and for the rise of industrial conflicts after the end of the wartime wage freeze and the Defence Regulations bans on strike actions. 

As for the Liberal Party, its poor election result in 1950 only worsened this time. Unable to get the same insurance against losses of deposits of the previous year, it fielded only 109 candidates, as opposed to 478 in 1950, and thus posted the worst general election result in the party&#x27;s history by getting just 2.5% of the vote and winning only six seats. The popular vote of the Liberals and later the Liberal Democrats has not fallen so low since, but their lowest number of six seats would be matched in several future elections. The Liberal Party&#x27;s growing irrelevance weakened the Labour Party since two thirds of potential Liberal voters supported the Conservatives.

Four candidates were returned unopposed, all of them Ulster Unionists in Northern Ireland. It is the most recent general election in which any candidates have been returned unopposed although there have been later unopposed by-elections.

The subsequent Labour defeat was significant for several reasons. The party polled almost a quarter-million votes more than the Conservative Party and its National Liberal Party ally combined; won the most votes that Labour has ever won (as of 2019); and won the most votes of any political party in any election in British political history, a number that would not be surpassed until the Conservative Party&#x27;s victory in 1992.

However, the Conservative Party formed the next government with a majority of 17 seats. It performed much better with male working-class voters than in the elections of 1945 or 1950 and tipped the vote away from Labour in Lancashire, the Home Counties and East Anglia. Under the first-past-the-post electoral system, many Labour votes were &quot;wasted&quot; because they were included in large majorities for MPs in safe seats.

==Results==

&lt;section begin=&quot;UK General Election 1951&quot;/&gt;






Total votes cast: 28,596,594.

&lt;section end=&quot;UK General Election 1951&quot;/&gt;

===Votes summary===

Headline swing: 1.13% to Conservative.

===Seats summary===
== Transfers of seats ==
All comparisons are with the 1950 election.
==See also==
*List of MPs elected in the 1951 United Kingdom general election
*1951 United Kingdom general election in Northern Ireland
*1951 United Kingdom general election in Scotland
*1951 United Kingdom general election in England
*1951 Prime Minister&#x27;s Resignation Honours

==Notes==
==References==
===Sources===

* , The standard study
* 


==External links==
*United Kingdom election results—summary results 1885–1979
*Churchill &amp; the 1951 General Election - UK Parliament Living Heritage

===Manifestos===
*, 1951 Conservative Party manifesto
*Labour Party Election Manifesto, 1951 Labour Party manifesto
*&quot;The Nation&#x27;s Task&quot;, 1951 Liberal Party manifesto</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3722280" start="4" end="40" title="1951 United Kingdom general election" label="1951 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q748667" start="74" end="95" title="1950 United Kingdom general election" label="1950 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="107" end="119" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333366" start="200" end="213" title="snap election" label="snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="475" end="493" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="857" end="861" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="875" end="879" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="1045" end="1062" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="1066" end="1080" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="1225" end="1234" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="1315" end="1327" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q30750649" start="1385" end="1403" title="1951 United Kingdom general election in Scotland" label="better in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="1476" end="1490" title="BBC Television" label="BBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q254650" start="1551" end="1567" title="Alexandra Palace" label="Alexandra Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q23614121" start="1586" end="1599" title="Graham Hutton" label="Graham Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15491632" start="1601" end="1613" title="David Butler (psephologist)" label="David Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="1846" end="1855" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1968" end="1980" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="2067" end="2081" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="2224" end="2242" title="Elizabeth II" label="Princess Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="2336" end="2342" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="2408" end="2421" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="1945 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q332365" start="2472" end="2484" title="Ernest Bevin" label="Ernest Bevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q332405" start="2497" end="2512" title="Stafford Cripps" label="Stafford Cripps"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="2534" end="2552" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q748667" start="2586" end="2607" title="1950 United Kingdom general election" label="1950 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517397" start="2710" end="2723" title="Gaitskellites" label="Gaitskellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900370" start="2760" end="2769" title="Bevanites" label="Bevanites"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224721" start="3347" end="3361" title="interwar Britain" label="interwar years"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057447" start="3473" end="3490" title="Interwar unemployment and poverty in the United Kingdom" label="mass-unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="3546" end="3562" title="nationalisations" label="nationalisations"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585398" start="3646" end="3661" title="council housing" label="council housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673073" start="3821" end="3842" title="workers&amp;#x27; control" label="workers&amp;#x27; control"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155290" start="4239" end="4260" title="British welfare state" label="British welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="4268" end="4291" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072904" start="4436" end="4445" title="Iron and Steel Corporation of Great Britain" label="Steel Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q535297" start="4602" end="4619" title="Rationing in the United Kingdom" label="wartime rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218843" start="4624" end="4638" title="price controls" label="price controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308177" start="4720" end="4731" title="wage freeze" label="wage freeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370631" start="4740" end="4759" title="Defence Regulations" label="Defence Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="4768" end="4781" title="strike action" label="strike action"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="4797" end="4810" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q748667" start="4840" end="4844" title="1950 United Kingdom general election" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063826" start="4921" end="4929" title="election deposit" label="deposits"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="5197" end="5214" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="5526" end="5542" title="Ulster Unionists" label="Ulster Unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="5697" end="5708" title="by-election" label="by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354368" start="5867" end="5889" title="National Liberal Party (UK, 1931)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="6128" end="6143" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="victory in 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="6368" end="6378" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q795172" start="6384" end="6397" title="Home Counties" label="Home Counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="6402" end="6413" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="6425" end="6444" title="first-past-the-post" label="first-past-the-post"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398544" start="6563" end="6572" title="safe seat" label="safe seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577376" start="6909" end="6972" title="List of MPs elected in the 1951 United Kingdom general election" label="List of MPs elected in the 1951 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q60770453" start="6974" end="7030" title="1951 United Kingdom general election in Northern Ireland" label="1951 United Kingdom general election in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30750649" start="7032" end="7080" title="1951 United Kingdom general election in Scotland" label="1951 United Kingdom general election in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130634365" start="7082" end="7129" title="1951 United Kingdom general election in England" label="1951 United Kingdom general election in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567212" start="7131" end="7177" title="1951 Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Resignation Honours" label="1951 Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Resignation Honours"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416892" wikidata="Q70564" url="?curid=416892" title="Marcus Hahnemann">
<text>Marcus Stephen Hahnemann (born June 15, 1972) is an American former professional soccer player who played as a goalkeeper.

Graduating out of Seattle Pacific University, he played for the Seattle Sounders between 1994 and 1996. Between 1997 and 1999 he turned out for the Colorado Rapids, signing with English club Fulham in 1999. Unable to become the first-choice goalkeeper at Fulham, he enjoyed loan spells with Rochdale and Reading, before signing permanently with Reading in 2002. In 2009, following 276 league appearances for the club, he transferred to Wolverhampton Wanderers.

He has won nine caps for the United States, featuring as backup for Kasey Keller and Tim Howard in two World Cups. Following his debut for the U.S. in 1994, he played two further games within the same month; however, he had to wait almost nine years before his next international appearance, making him a player with one of the longest-ever gaps between caps.

==Early years==
Hahnemann grew up in the Seattle area in Kent and attended Kentridge High School where he was named the team&#x27;s MVP his junior season. He transferred to Newport High School in Bellevue, Washington for his senior season. That year, he kept eleven clean sheets en route to being named the All-King County goalkeeper.

He played college soccer for the Seattle Pacific University Falcons. A Division II powerhouse, Hahnemann led SPU to the NCAA Division II National Championship in 1993. Over his four seasons at SPU, Hahnemann had a 64–9–5 record as a starter, with 46 career clean sheets.

==Club career==
===Seattle Sounders===
Hahnemann&#x27;s professional career started when he signed with the Seattle Sounders of the A-League on May 1, 1994. In his first season with the Sounders, Hahnemann registered a .57 GAA in fourteen games to take the league&#x27;s top goalkeeper honors. In 1995, he played 29 games as the Sounders won the league championship. In 1996, the Sounders repeated as champions while Hahnemann kept eleven clean sheets and made 119 saves.

===Colorado Rapids===
Hahnemann waited until 1997 to join Major League Soccer (MLS), signing with the Colorado Rapids. His first appearance was on April 20, 1997, coming on as a substitute for Paul Grafer; Hahneman then started the next 23 MLS league games that season, and he also appeared in the U.S. Open Cup. In his first season in MLS, the Rapids went all the way to the MLS Cup before losing 2–1 to D.C. United. 
During his second season in 1998, he set a club record for the most games and minutes played in a single season by a goalkeeper, playing 2,520 minutes in 28 games and compiling a 16–12 record, and was named their Defender of the Year.

===Fulham===
After two and a half seasons with the Colorado Rapids, he signed with English First Division club Fulham, for £80,000 in June 1999. He failed to displace Maik Taylor in goal though, and only made four appearances (two in the league) in total for the London club (all during their promotion season of 2000–01).

With Edwin van der Sar signed upon promotion by Fulham, Hahnemann slipped further down the pecking order and to gain playing time, he was loaned out to lower league sides Rochdale, and then, Reading during the 2001–02 campaign. He made six appearances for the latter as part of their promotion from the third tier. At the end of the 2001–02 season, Hahnemann was released by the club after spending three years. Hahnemann then signed a one-month contract extension after spending time with the club.

===Reading===
Hahnemann then joined Reading permanently in the Summer of 2002 on a free transfer, becoming their first choice &#x27;keeper. His first full season with the &quot;Royals&quot; saw them miss out on promotion to the Premier League in the play-offs, before two successive seasons saw them narrowly fall short of further play-off finishes.

He missed just one game of the 2005–06 season that saw Reading win promotion to the top flight of English soccer for the first time in their history, as they topped the Championship with a record 106 points. He was named in that season&#x27;s &quot;Championship Team of the Year&quot; by the Professional Footballers&#x27; Association.

His first season in the Premier League saw him keep thirteen clean sheets as the club finished eighth, only one place short of European qualification. He made the most saves (139) in the Premier League during 2007, but could not halt relegation in their second Premier League campaign.

He remained with the club for one further season as they attempted an immediate return to the top level, but Reading ultimately lost out to Burnley in the play-off semi finals. Subsequently, Reading announced that they would not renew Hahnemann&#x27;s contract making him a free agent.

===Wolves===
On June 17, 2009, Hahnemann signed a one-year contract with newly promoted Premier League side Wolverhampton Wanderers. He was back-up to first-choice Wayne Hennessey for the opening four months, until Hennessey conceded forty four goals in two successive games and lost his place to Hahnemann. Hahnemann remained first choice keeper for the remainder of the season, helping the club attain survival. His form ranked him as &quot;the Best Goalkeeper in the World&quot; using the Castrol Performance Index system, helping earn him a one-year contract extension.

However, the 2010–11 season saw the team enter a dismal run of form that left them bottom of the league and in danger of relegation. Hahnemann was dropped after a defeat to relegation rivals Blackpool in late November and did not feature again. He was released at the end of the campaign, after the expiry of his contract.

===Everton===
On September 23, 2011, Hahnemann signed for Everton on a short-term deal. He was released from the club on May 18, 2012, without making a first-team appearance, along with Scottish international James McFadden and four others who also did not feature in the first team.

===Seattle Sounders FC===
On September 14, 2012, Hahnemann made his long-anticipated return to the Sounders. Seattle traded a conditional draft pick to Toronto FC for the number one allocation slot, so they would be able to sign Hahnemann. At Seattle, Hahnemann was a backup behind Michael Gspurning.

On October 24, 2012, he made his debut against Marathón in a CONCACAF Champions League group stage match. On April 2, 2013, Hahnemann started against Santos Laguna in the first leg of the 2012–13 CONCACAF Champions League semifinals because Gspurning had to sit out after a yellow card accumulation, and in doing so at the age of 40 years and 289 days, he became the fourth oldest player in the competition&#x27;s history at the time (currently sixth), but despite his advanced age, he still made four saves in a 1–0 loss.

In 2013, Hahnemann started six MLS Reserve League matches and played 242 minutes in the preseason, but on August 3, he finally made his first MLS appearance for Seattle, keeping a clean sheet in a 3–0 win against FC Dallas. This marked his first MLS game in 14 years and 44 days, the longest lapse in appearances in league history. In total, he made four MLS appearances in his first full season with the club in 2013, winning two and drawing two, and playing his last match on October 19, and in doing so at the age of 41 years and 124 days, Hahnemann became the fourth oldest player in MLS history, only behind Kasey Keller, Preki, and Pat Onstad. In the Knockout round (wild card) of the 2013 MLS Cup Playoffs against Colorado Rapids, Hahnemann came from the bench in the 87th minute after a red card was issued to Gspurning, and with him on the pitch, his side scored a goal to seal a 2–0 win. He then started in the first leg of the Western Conference Semifinals, which ended in a 2–1 loss to the Portland Timbers.

In 2014, Hahnemann only played two matches for Sounders, both in the U.S. Open Cup, first recording a clean sheet in a 5-0 win over PSA Elite, and then denying the San Jose Earthquakes in penalty kicks after a 1–1 draw on 24 June, and in doing so at the age of 42 years and 10 days, he became the oldest player in the competition&#x27;s history, a record that has since been broken by Claudio Muñoz in 2024. On December 8, 2014, he announced his retirement from professional soccer.

==International career==

Hahnemann made his international debut for the United States national team on November 19, 1994, in a 0–1 friendly defeat to Trinidad and Tobago. He played two more games in the rest of the year.

Hahnemann did not play for the U.S. again until June 8, 2003, when he played the first half of a 2–1 friendly win over New Zealand in Richmond, Virginia. The game was a warm-up for the Confederations Cup, for which he was selected.

He won two further caps during 2005 and was then picked for the 2006 World Cup in Germany, and allocated shirt number 19, but was an unused substitute in all of the United States&#x27; matches behind Kasey Keller and Tim Howard as they exited at the group stage. During the group stage, he and teammate Bobby Convey became the first Reading players to be named to a World Cup roster.

Nearing the age of 38, Hahnemann was named by coach Bob Bradley to the United States&#x27; 2010 World Cup squad, as third choice behind Howard and Brad Guzan. Hahnemann made his ninth and final appearance for the U.S. in 2011.

==Personal life==

Marcus Hahnemann is a Republican; his wife Amanda is a Democrat. He keeps hens, and also enjoys mountain biking and hunting. Before matches he listens to heavy metal to psych himself up, and presented Five Finger Death Punch with a Wolves shirt emblazoned with a Remembrance Day poppy. He collaborated with the Reading-based band Malefice in early 2012 to release a song which will debut on Jägermeister UK&#x27;s Facebook page in February 2012. Hahnemann is of German descent, his parents come from Wentorf bei Hamburg.

Although he did not have defective vision, Hahnemann wore special contact lenses to reduce the glare of the sun when he played. At Reading, he gifted every match jersey to fans after games; he also cut his sleeves due to personal preference when the manufacturers no longer provided short sleeves.

In April 2016, Hahnemann and his former USMNT goalkeeper teammate Kasey Keller became coaches of the boys&#x27; soccer team at Newport High School, his former school in Bellevue, Washington.

==Career statistics==
==Bibliography==
*&quot;Marcus Hahnemann&#x27;s Premiership Diary&quot; (2007), Know the Score Books ()

==Honors==
Seattle Sounders
*League Championship: 1995, 1996

Reading
*Football League Championship: 2005–06

United States
*CONCACAF Gold Cup: 2005

Individual
*PFA Team of the Year: 2005–06 Football League Championship

==References==
==External links==

*Official club profile
*
*Marcus Hahnemann profile and career stats at footballdatabase.com
*Marcus Hahnemann profile at ussoccer.com
*Premier League profile </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q70564" start="0" end="24" title="Marcus Hahnemann" label="Marcus Stephen Hahnemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="81" end="87" title="Association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201330" start="111" end="121" title="Goalkeeper (association football)" label="goalkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904851" start="142" end="168" title="Seattle Pacific University" label="Seattle Pacific University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091731" start="188" end="204" title="Seattle Sounders (1994–2008)" label="Seattle Sounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q642408" start="272" end="287" title="Colorado Rapids" label="Colorado Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="315" end="321" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q48949" start="415" end="423" title="Rochdale A.F.C." label="Rochdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q18729" start="428" end="435" title="Reading F.C." label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="560" end="583" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q164134" start="615" end="628" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q356814" start="654" end="666" title="Kasey Keller" label="Kasey Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q200785" start="671" end="681" title="Tim Howard" label="Tim Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="689" end="699" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q844008" start="1004" end="1008" title="Kent, Washington" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392109" start="1022" end="1043" title="Kentridge High School" label="Kentridge High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018885" start="1120" end="1139" title="Newport High School (Bellevue, Washington)" label="Newport High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q214164" start="1143" end="1163" title="Bellevue, Washington" label="Bellevue, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904851" start="1316" end="1342" title="Seattle Pacific University" label="Seattle Pacific University"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="1403" end="1407" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613987" start="1408" end="1441" title="NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s soccer tournament" label="Division II National Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091731" start="1663" end="1679" title="Seattle Sounders (1994–2008)" label="Seattle Sounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646905" start="1687" end="1695" title="A-League (1995–2004)" label="A-League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604309" start="1778" end="1781" title="Goals against average" label="GAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="2086" end="2105" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q642408" start="2130" end="2145" title="Colorado Rapids" label="Colorado Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150974" start="2221" end="2232" title="Paul Grafer" label="Paul Grafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q577698" start="2404" end="2411" title="MLS Cup" label="MLS Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q238593" start="2433" end="2444" title="D.C. United" label="D.C. United"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="2766" end="2788" title="Football League First Division" label="English First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="2794" end="2800" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q76538" start="2850" end="2861" title="Maik Taylor" label="Maik Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2996" end="3003" title="2000–01 in English football#Football League First Division" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q482955" start="3012" end="3029" title="Edwin van der Sar" label="Edwin van der Sar"/>
<link wikidata="Q48949" start="3178" end="3186" title="Rochdale A.F.C." label="Rochdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q18729" start="3198" end="3205" title="Reading F.C." label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3285" end="3300" title="2001–02 in English football#Nationwide League Division Two" label="their promotion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3758" end="3767" title="Football League Championship Play-Offs#2003" label="play-offs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3890" end="3904" title="2005–06 in English football#Football League Championship" label="2005–06 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="4028" end="4040" title="EFL Championship" label="Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276089" start="4151" end="4193" title="Professional Footballers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Professional Footballers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q19458" start="4623" end="4630" title="Burnley F.C." label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="4878" end="4901" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q138839" start="4934" end="4949" title="Wayne Hennessey" label="Wayne Hennessey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035924" start="5262" end="5287" title="Castrol Performance Index" label="Castrol Performance Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q19449" start="5536" end="5545" title="Blackpool F.C." label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="5727" end="5734" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q310700" start="5878" end="5892" title="James McFadden" label="James McFadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371595" start="6092" end="6097" title="MLS SuperDraft" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q327238" start="6106" end="6116" title="Toronto FC" label="Toronto FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q690558" start="6236" end="6253" title="Michael Gspurning" label="Michael Gspurning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023201" start="6303" end="6311" title="C.D. Marathón" label="Marathón"/>
<link wikidata="Q83335" start="6317" end="6342" title="CONCACAF Champions League" label="CONCACAF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q745246" start="6406" end="6419" title="Santos Laguna" label="Santos Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024054" start="6444" end="6477" title="2012–13 CONCACAF Champions League" label="2012–13 CONCACAF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073764" start="6811" end="6829" title="MLS Reserve League" label="MLS Reserve League"/>
<link wikidata="Q642291" start="6993" end="7002" title="FC Dallas" label="FC Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q356814" start="7393" end="7405" title="Kasey Keller" label="Kasey Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q944999" start="7407" end="7412" title="Preki" label="Preki"/>
<link wikidata="Q337801" start="7418" end="7428" title="Pat Onstad" label="Pat Onstad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7437" end="7451" title="2013 MLS Cup Playoffs#Knockout round" label="Knockout round"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629548" start="7471" end="7492" title="2013 MLS Cup Playoffs" label="2013 MLS Cup Playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031200" start="7782" end="7798" title="Portland Timbers" label="Portland Timbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q20017996" start="7933" end="7942" title="PSA Elite" label="PSA Elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129388" start="8186" end="8199" title="Claudio Muñoz (footballer, born 1981)" label="Claudio Muñoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164134" start="8358" end="8385" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="United States national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q192149" start="8436" end="8455" title="Trinidad and Tobago national football team" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="8642" end="8660" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8693" end="8711" title="2003 FIFA Confederations Cup squads#USA" label="Confederations Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="8805" end="8819" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q356814" start="8941" end="8953" title="Kasey Keller" label="Kasey Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q200785" start="8958" end="8968" title="Tim Howard" label="Tim Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q708066" start="9044" end="9056" title="Bobby Convey" label="Bobby Convey"/>
<link wikidata="Q442325" start="9178" end="9189" title="Bob Bradley" label="Bob Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q176883" start="9217" end="9231" title="2010 FIFA World Cup" label="2010 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q219167" start="9273" end="9283" title="Brad Guzan" label="Brad Guzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="9395" end="9405" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="9428" end="9436" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="9447" end="9451" title="Chicken" label="hens"/>
<link wikidata="Q520611" start="9469" end="9484" title="mountain biking" label="mountain biking"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="9489" end="9496" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="9527" end="9538" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q749502" start="9574" end="9597" title="Five Finger Death Punch" label="Five Finger Death Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q27631" start="9636" end="9651" title="Remembrance Day" label="Remembrance Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q967457" start="9652" end="9657" title="poppy" label="poppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887116" start="9703" end="9711" title="Malefice" label="Malefice"/>
<link wikidata="Q661871" start="9764" end="9776" title="Jägermeister" label="Jägermeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q552545" start="9873" end="9892" title="Wentorf bei Hamburg" label="Wentorf bei Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23797" start="9961" end="9975" title="contact lenses" label="contact lenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q356814" start="10260" end="10272" title="Kasey Keller" label="Kasey Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="10584" end="10612" title="Football League Championship" label="Football League Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348105" start="10614" end="10621" title="2005–06 Football League Championship" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q189327" start="10638" end="10655" title="CONCACAF Gold Cup" label="CONCACAF Gold Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q748756" start="10657" end="10661" title="2005 CONCACAF Gold Cup" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044044" start="10675" end="10695" title="PFA Team of the Year" label="PFA Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348105" start="10697" end="10733" title="2005–06 Football League Championship" label="2005–06 Football League Championship"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416893" wikidata="Q659895" url="?curid=416893" title="Dalkey">
<text>Dalkey ( ; ) is a village in Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown county southeast of Dublin, Ireland. It was founded as a Viking settlement and became a port in the Middle Ages. According to chronicler John Clyn (c.1286–c.1349), it was one of the ports through which the plague entered Ireland in the mid-14th century. The village is in a townland and civil parish of the same name, in the barony of Rathdown.

One of Dublin&#x27;s wealthiest districts, it has been home to writers, artists, and celebrities, including George Bernard Shaw, Jane Emily Herbert, Julius Olsson, Maeve Binchy, Robert Fisk, and Hugh Leonard.

== Etymology ==
The district is named after Dalkey Island, just offshore. The name is ultimately derived from the and , with the Old Norse (Viking) version of .

== Geography ==
Dalkey lies by the coast, between Dún Laoghaire (and Sandycove and Glasthule), Glenageary and Killiney. Off the coast are Dalkey Island (up to the 18th century, also &quot;St. Begnet&#x27;s Island&quot;), Malden Rock, Clare Rock, Lamb Island, and, further offshore, The Muglins, which have their own lighthouse. The village core of the area is on fairly level land, but the district rises to Dalkey Hill (140m), the northern peak of a ridge which continues to Killiney Hill to the southwest; the two hills are now contained within the public park known as Killiney Hill Park. Along the coast are a natural harbour at Bullock, a couple of small inlets, Sorrento Point just east of the town proper, and the northern part of Killiney Bay.

Lead mines used to exist on the coast opposite Dalkey Island.

== History ==
One of the patron saints of Dalkey is St. Begnet, a probable seventh-century figure. A ruined church and a holy well on Dalkey Island are named for her, as is another ruined church near the town centre.

The main settlement was founded as a Viking community and became an active port during the Middle Ages.

Dalkey developed increasing strategic value as a port for bulk shipments bound for Dublin during the 15th century. The channel between Dalkey Island and the mainland provided ideal conditions for unloading galleons carrying heavy cargo due to its depth (relative to Dublin Bay) and its sheltered position. The treacherous shallows of Dublin Bay prevented direct shipments into the city centre, making Dalkey an ideal access point for trade.

Although seven 15th–16th-century castles were originally built in the area, by 1837 it was noted (in Samuel Lewis&#x27;s &quot;Topographical Dictionary of Ireland&quot;) that:

Dalkey&#x27;s remaining Norman castle is now in use as a heritage centre and town hall.

== Wildlife ==
Dalkey Island is home to a colony of seals, and a herd of wild goats also lives on the island. Birdwatch Ireland have established a colony of Roseate Terns on Maiden Rock just north of Dalkey Island. A pod of three bottlenose dolphins also frequents the waters around Dalkey Island.

== Local amenities ==
=== Harbours ===
There are several small harbours on the coast of Dalkey. Bulloch Harbour is the biggest; it is towards the northern part of Dalkey at Harbour Road and is a declared seal sanctuary. Coliemore Harbour is smaller and in the southern part of Dalkey at Coliemore Road. In the Middle Ages, Coliemore was the main harbour for Dublin City. Bulloch Harbour is still a working harbour with boats that fish for lobster and crab, and mackerel in season. It is also used by locals and tourists who hire boats for nearby fishing, sightseeing and getting to Dalkey Island.
=== Quarry ===

Dalkey Quarry is a disused granite quarry, stone from which was used during the 19th century to build Dún Laoghaire Harbour, and is now a rock climbing location within Killiney Hill Park. During the building of the harbour, the quarry was connected to Dún Laoghaire via a metal tramway known as &#x27;The Metals&#x27;, some parts of which are still visible in some parts of Dalkey. Dalkey granite was also shipped by sea to Kylemore Abbey in Connemara, County Galway for the facade of the Abbey. 

== Culture and tourism ==

Dalkey&#x27;s main street, Castle Street, has a tenth-century church and two fourteenth-century Norman castles, one of which, Goat&#x27;s Castle, now known as Dalkey Castle, houses the local heritage centre and town hall (the other, Archbold&#x27;s Castle, is private property). There are several scenic and historical walks and tours. Dalkey Hill offers views over Dublin city, Dublin Bay, and towards the Dublin and Wicklow Mountains.

Deilg Inis Living History Theatre Company runs live theatre performances every half-hour at Dalkey Castle and Heritage Centre.

Boats are available to hire at Bulloch Harbour on Harbour Road and Yacht trips around Dalkey Island can be taken from nearby Dún Laoghaire Harbour. Dalkey Quarry is a rock climbing and abseiling venue. Killiney Hill is also used as a launch site for para-gliders.
=== Annual festivals ===
Dalkey Book Festival is a literary festival that takes place over a weekend in mid-June every year. Its directors, David McWilliams and Sian Smyth, run the festival with a group of volunteers and the Dalkey Business Group. Festival contributors have included Salman Rushdie, Amos Oz, Seamus Heaney, Edna O&#x27;Brien, Roddy Doyle, Maeve Binchy, Joseph O&#x27;Connor, Tim Pat Coogan, Derek Landy, Jennifer Johnston, Robert Fisk and Dawn O&#x27;Porter.
The village also hosts the Dalkey Lobster Festival in late August, which &quot;showcases local seafood and global jazz musicians&quot;.

== Education ==
There are 5 schools in Dalkey:
* Loreto Primary School caters for boys from junior infants through first class, and for girls from junior infants through sixth class.
* Loreto Abbey Secondary School caters for girls from first year through sixth year.
* Harold Boys&#x27; National School caters for boys from second class through sixth class.
* Saint Patrick&#x27;s National School caters for boys and girls from junior infants through sixth class.
* Castle Park School is an independent school for boys and girls from Montessori to the end of primary school.

== Sports ==
Cuala CLG, a Gaelic Athletic Association sports club, and Dalkey United, an association football club, are both based at Hyde Park. Early in his soccer career, Paul McGrath played for Dalkey United. In the 1940s, the town produced another international footballer, Peter Farrell. It has set up an athletics club, the Dalkey Dashers. Dalkey Rowing Club is based at Coliemore Harbour and kayaking is taught at Bulloch. Dalkey has two scout groups: the 17th Dalkey Scouts, based in Hyde Park, were founded in 1927, and the 3rd Port Dalkey Sea Scouts keep two old sailing boats at Bulloch Harbour.

=== Swimming and diving ===
The Vico Bathing Place and Whiterock Beach, accessed off Vico Road, have changing shelters for sea swimmers.

Dalkey Sound and the islands beyond are used as scuba diving locations.

== Transport ==

The Dalkey Atmospheric Railway station at Atmospheric Road (29 March 1844 to 12 April 1854) was the terminus for the first commercial application of the atmospheric system of train propulsion.
The current Dalkey railway station was opened on 10 July 1854. The station is served by the DART electric rail system which affords quick access to and from Dublin city centre. Clifftop views of Dalkey Island and Killiney Bay are afforded as the train emerges from a short tunnel just south of Dalkey Station.

Dalkey was also the terminus for the Dublin tramways 8 route until the tram line ceased operations on 9 July 1949. The tram yard is now all that remains.

An Aircoach service with a stop at Hyde Road links the area with Dublin Airport. Go-Ahead Ireland and Dublin Bus services 7D (only operates early morning), 59 and 111 link the area with the nearby seaside town of Dún Laoghaire and the city centre.

== People ==
Dalkey is the original hometown of several Irish writers including novelists Maeve Binchy and playwright Hugh Leonard. George Bernard Shaw also had an association with the area and lived in Torca Cottage on Dalkey Hill from 1866 to 1874. It is also the setting for Flann O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s novel &quot;The Dalkey Archive&quot;. Well-known Irish and international music figures — including Chris de Burgh and Lisa Stansfield — have also had residences in the area..

Pat Kenny, former host of RTÉ&#x27;s flagship chat show &quot;The Late Late Show&quot;, is a resident, while former Formula One drivers Damon Hill and Eddie Irvine are former residents. Film director Neil Jordan lives locally. 

Matt Damon, his wife and their three youngest daughters resided in Dalkey during the COVID-19 pandemic. Damon had arrived in Dalkey to shoot scenes in &quot;The Last Duel&quot; just before production on the film was suspended in March 2020.

Victoria Cross recipient Major William Leet was born in Dalkey.

== King of Dalkey ==
The King of Dalkey, a putative elective monarchy associated with Dalkey Island, is a local tradition which dates to at least 1787. It started when a group of freemen of Dalkey formed a club into which they brought wits, poets and thinkers. They summoned a &quot;Pimlico Parliament&quot;, named after the Pimlico Liberty of Dublin, and &quot;hurled broadsides&quot; at the perceived pomposity of Dublin Castle from an assembly room.

Several thousand people reputedly attended the regal procession and coronation anniversary, on 20 August 1797, of Stephen Armitage (pawnbroker and printer) who was &quot;King Stephen the First, King of Dalkey&quot;. The full title given was &quot;His Facetious Majesty, King of Dalkey, Emperor of the Muglins, Prince of the Holy Island of Magee, Elector of Lambay and Ireland&#x27;s Eye, Defender of his own Faith and Respecter of All Others, Sovereign of the Illustrious Order of the Lobster and Periwinkle&quot;. The coronation ceremony was held, with &quot;mock gravity and ceremony&quot;, in St. Begnet&#x27;s Church on Dalkey Island.

Although the tradition of electing a &quot;mock king of Dalkey&quot; was interrupted around the time of the 1798 Rebellion, it was revived in 1850, 1934, in 1965 and again in 1983. As of 2014, the title was held by the local sacristan, Finbarr Madden.

While the current custom is dated to 1787, local tradition also holds that a Hugh Dempsey had been crowned &quot;King of Dalkey&quot; about 1780.

== Local government ==
Dalkey is recorded as having received a charter of incorporation by 1358. Under the Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898, the Township of Dalkey became an urban district in 1899. The urban district of Dalkey was abolished in 1930, becoming part of the borough of Dún Laoghaire. The borough was abolished in 1994, on the establishment of the county of Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown. The electoral divisions (EDs) of Dalkey–Bullock, Dalkey–Coliemore, Dalkey Hill and Dalkey Upper are in the local electoral area (LEA) of Dún Laoghaire, while the ED of Dalkey–Avondale is the LEA of Killiney–Shankill.

== See also ==
* List of towns and villages in Ireland

== References ==
== External links ==
*
* Dalkey Community Council
* Local website
* Dalkey Castle and Heritage Centre</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q659895" start="0" end="6" title="Dalkey" label="Dalkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q538417" start="29" end="51" title="Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown" label="Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="72" end="78" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="109" end="115" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="152" end="163" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226423" start="189" end="198" title="John Clyn" label="John Clyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="258" end="264" title="Bubonic plague" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151232" start="326" end="334" title="townland" label="townland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910694" start="339" end="351" title="Civil parishes in Ireland" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q853565" start="377" end="383" title="Barony (Ireland)" label="barony"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006630" start="387" end="395" title="Rathdown (County Dublin barony)" label="Rathdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="506" end="525" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q19974724" start="527" end="545" title="Jane Emily Herbert" label="Jane Emily Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q16585843" start="547" end="560" title="Albert Julius Olsson" label="Julius Olsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q152690" start="562" end="574" title="Maeve Binchy" label="Maeve Binchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q310900" start="576" end="587" title="Robert Fisk" label="Robert Fisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634447" start="593" end="605" title="Hugh Leonard" label="Hugh Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776791" start="652" end="665" title="Dalkey Island" label="Dalkey Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="737" end="746" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q745989" start="820" end="833" title="Dún Laoghaire" label="Dún Laoghaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672437" start="839" end="848" title="Sandycove" label="Sandycove"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775768" start="853" end="862" title="Glasthule" label="Glasthule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085756" start="865" end="875" title="Glenageary" label="Glenageary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435120" start="880" end="888" title="Killiney" label="Killiney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211075" start="1178" end="1189" title="Dalkey Hill" label="Dalkey Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741377" start="1246" end="1259" title="Killiney Hill" label="Killiney Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q116455446" start="1638" end="1648" title="Begnet" label="St. Begnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="1841" end="1847" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1895" end="1906" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412007" start="2452" end="2464" title="Samuel Lewis (publisher)" label="Samuel Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915829" start="2727" end="2744" title="BirdWatch Ireland" label="Birdwatch Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q149069" start="2847" end="2866" title="bottlenose dolphins" label="bottlenose dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996986" start="3012" end="3027" title="Bulloch Harbour" label="Bulloch Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776791" start="3498" end="3511" title="Dalkey Island" label="Dalkey Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211074" start="3529" end="3542" title="Dalkey Quarry" label="Dalkey Quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041399" start="3631" end="3652" title="Dún Laoghaire Harbour" label="Dún Laoghaire Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q22857" start="3667" end="3680" title="climbing" label="rock climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741377" start="3697" end="3710" title="Killiney Hill" label="Killiney Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q132220" start="3953" end="3967" title="Kylemore Abbey" label="Kylemore Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q952483" start="3971" end="3980" title="Connemara" label="Connemara"/>
<link wikidata="Q169923" start="3982" end="3995" title="County Galway" label="County Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q30970161" start="4213" end="4226" title="Dalkey Castle" label="Dalkey Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24890788" start="4287" end="4309" title="Archbold&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="Archbold&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567091" start="5024" end="5040" title="David McWilliams (economist)" label="David McWilliams"/>
<link wikidata="Q44306" start="5168" end="5182" title="Salman Rushdie" label="Salman Rushdie"/>
<link wikidata="Q151872" start="5184" end="5191" title="Amos Oz" label="Amos Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q93356" start="5193" end="5206" title="Seamus Heaney" label="Seamus Heaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q178225" start="5208" end="5225" title="Edna O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Edna O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q73506" start="5227" end="5238" title="Roddy Doyle" label="Roddy Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q152690" start="5240" end="5252" title="Maeve Binchy" label="Maeve Binchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q768106" start="5254" end="5274" title="Joseph O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Joseph O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778356" start="5276" end="5290" title="Tim Pat Coogan" label="Tim Pat Coogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200066" start="5292" end="5303" title="Derek Landy" label="Derek Landy"/>
<link wikidata="Q526219" start="5305" end="5322" title="Jennifer Johnston (novelist)" label="Jennifer Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q310900" start="5324" end="5335" title="Robert Fisk" label="Robert Fisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178794" start="5340" end="5358" title="Dawn O&amp;#x27;Porter" label="Dawn O&amp;#x27;Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191815" start="6087" end="6096" title="Cuala CLG" label="Cuala CLG"/>
<link wikidata="Q548520" start="6100" end="6127" title="Gaelic Athletic Association" label="Gaelic Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q380200" start="6247" end="6259" title="Paul McGrath (footballer)" label="Paul McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173936" start="6352" end="6365" title="Peter Farrell (Irish footballer)" label="Peter Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="6384" end="6393" title="sport of athletics" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701059" start="6914" end="6940" title="Dalkey Atmospheric Railway" label="Dalkey Atmospheric Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q757522" start="7063" end="7081" title="atmospheric railway" label="atmospheric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969514" start="7115" end="7137" title="Dalkey railway station" label="Dalkey railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q839815" start="7195" end="7199" title="Dublin Area Rapid Transit" label="DART"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311024" start="7451" end="7466" title="Dublin tramways" label="Dublin tramways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698488" start="7572" end="7580" title="Aircoach" label="Aircoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q178021" start="7634" end="7648" title="Dublin Airport" label="Dublin Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274221" start="7650" end="7666" title="Go-Ahead Ireland" label="Go-Ahead Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263090" start="7671" end="7681" title="Dublin Bus" label="Dublin Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q152690" start="7908" end="7920" title="Maeve Binchy" label="Maeve Binchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634447" start="7936" end="7948" title="Hugh Leonard" label="Hugh Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="7950" end="7969" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q469093" start="8096" end="8114" title="Flann O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Flann O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202294" start="8134" end="8152" title="The Dalkey Archive" label="The Dalkey Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q178237" start="8221" end="8235" title="Chris de Burgh" label="Chris de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q235934" start="8240" end="8255" title="Lisa Stansfield" label="Lisa Stansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646407" start="8298" end="8307" title="Pat Kenny" label="Pat Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612445" start="8360" end="8378" title="The Late Late Show (Irish talk show)" label="The Late Late Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="8414" end="8425" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q10505" start="8434" end="8444" title="Damon Hill" label="Damon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q171397" start="8449" end="8461" title="Eddie Irvine" label="Eddie Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q55428" start="8498" end="8509" title="Neil Jordan" label="Neil Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q175535" start="8527" end="8537" title="Matt Damon" label="Matt Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="8612" end="8629" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q85000980" start="8684" end="8697" title="The Last Duel (2021 film)" label="The Last Duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="8769" end="8783" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059700" start="8800" end="8812" title="William Leet" label="William Leet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776791" start="8920" end="8933" title="Dalkey Island" label="Dalkey Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194650" start="9159" end="9166" title="Pimlico, Dublin" label="Pimlico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776828" start="9167" end="9184" title="The Liberties, Dublin" label="Liberty of Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q742767" start="9250" end="9263" title="Dublin Castle" label="Dublin Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520062" start="9645" end="9651" title="Lambay" label="Lambay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672468" start="9656" end="9674" title="Ireland&amp;#x27;s Eye" label="Ireland&amp;#x27;s Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q944941" start="10036" end="10050" title="Irish Rebellion of 1798" label="1798 Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664026" start="10435" end="10470" title="Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898" label="Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q117481378" start="10505" end="10519" title="urban district (Ireland)" label="urban district"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172536" start="10602" end="10626" title="borough of Dún Laoghaire" label="borough of Dún Laoghaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q538417" start="10701" end="10723" title="Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown" label="Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500304" start="10729" end="10747" title="electoral division (Ireland)" label="electoral division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664352" start="10832" end="10852" title="local electoral area" label="local electoral area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113044" start="10960" end="10997" title="List of towns and villages in the Republic of Ireland" label="List of towns and villages in Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416895" wikidata="Q196089" url="?curid=416895" title="Kit Symons">
<text>Christopher Jerry &quot;Kit&quot; Symons (born 8 March 1971) is a professional association football coach and former player who is assistant manager of Greek Super League side Atromitos.

As a player, he was a defender who began his career with Portsmouth before playing in the Premier League with Manchester City, Fulham and Crystal Palace. He earned 36 international caps for Wales, scoring twice.

Following retirement he has largely worked as a coach, although he was briefly manager of Fulham and had caretaker spells in charge of Crystal Palace and Colchester United. He has predominantly worked as an assistant to his former teammate Chris Coleman with Fulham, Wales, Sunderland, Hebei FC and currently Atromitos.

==Club career==
Symons was born in Basingstoke, Hampshire. He made more than 100 league appearances for each of his first three clubs – Portsmouth, Manchester City and Fulham. He played for Fulham until December 2001, when he was signed by Crystal Palace for £400,000, the club at which he finished his playing career after 60 senior appearances.

==International career==
Symons qualified to play for Wales because his father was from Cardiff.
He won 36 caps for Wales, scoring twice. His first appearance was against the Republic of Ireland on 19 February 1992 and his last appearance was on 6 October 2001 against Belarus.

==Coaching and management==
He became caretaker manager at Palace, and following the subsequent appointment of Iain Dowie he combined the roles of player and assistant manager, as the club gained promotion to the Premier League.

After Peter Taylor was dismissed as Palace manager on 8 October 2007, Symons was confirmed as caretaker manager before the appointment of Neil Warnock three days later. Palace did not play during this time.&lt;ref name=&quot;Results/matches: 2007/08&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Following Warnock&#x27;s appointment, Symons stepped down from his position of assistant manager and left the club on 15 October 2007.

Symons joined Colchester United on 16 January 2008 following Micky Adams&#x27; resignation as assistant manager the previous week. He was appointed as Colchester&#x27;s caretaker manager on 22 September 2008 after the departure of Geraint Williams. He led the club to two wins in five games, in the process becoming the bookie&#x27;s favourite to get the job full-time. However, he left the club after Paul Lambert took over as manager on 9 October 2008.

Symons was subsequently employed by Fulham as Senior Scout and Academy Coach.

In January 2012 Symons was appointed to the Wales national team coaching staff under team manager Chris Coleman.

On 18 September 2014, Symons was confirmed as caretaker manager of Fulham following the departure of Felix Magath. On 29 October 2014, after a string of good results (5 wins in 9 games), Symons was announced as the full-time manager of Fulham. Symons stated that it was &quot;no secret this is a club that is very close to my heart and this is a job I&#x27;ve always really wanted to do.&quot; Khan also stated that Symons&#x27; &quot;passion for everything that Fulham represents came through loud and clear.&quot;

In July 2015, Symons resigned his position with the Wales national team to concentrate on his role with Fulham.

Symons was dismissed by Fulham on 8 November 2015, the day after a 5–2 defeat by Birmingham City at Craven Cottage.

Symons rejoined Wales as coach in August 2016. On 17 November 2017, Symons left his coaching role with Wales following the resignation of Chris Coleman. On 19 November 2017, Symons was announced as assistant manager at Sunderland following Coleman&#x27;s appointment as manager. Both were released from their contracts after Sunderland&#x27;s relegation to League One was confirmed. In June 2018, after Coleman&#x27;s appointment as manager of Hebei China Fortune, Symons again joined him as assistant.

==Managerial statistics==


==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q196089" start="0" end="17" title="Kit Symons" label="Christopher Jerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q196089" start="24" end="27" title="Kit Symons" label="Kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q196089" start="34" end="40" title="Kit Symons" label="Symons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="79" end="99" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q235114" start="152" end="170" title="Greek Super League" label="Greek Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q757754" start="176" end="185" title="Atromitos F.C." label="Atromitos"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="210" end="218" title="Defender (association football)" label="defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="245" end="255" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="278" end="292" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="298" end="313" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="315" end="321" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="326" end="340" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="378" end="383" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q19578" start="555" end="572" title="Colchester United F.C." label="Colchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q381769" start="641" end="654" title="Chris Coleman (footballer)" label="Chris Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="675" end="685" title="Sunderland A.F.C" label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q402038" start="687" end="695" title="Hebei F.C." label="Hebei FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q810196" start="757" end="768" title="Basingstoke" label="Basingstoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="770" end="779" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="858" end="868" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="870" end="885" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="890" end="896" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="962" end="976" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="1158" end="1165" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="1186" end="1191" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="1245" end="1264" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q186252" start="1339" end="1346" title="Belarus national football team" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050607" start="1387" end="1404" title="caretaker manager" label="caretaker manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361221" start="1460" end="1470" title="Iain Dowie" label="Iain Dowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="1562" end="1576" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q403151" start="1585" end="1597" title="Peter Taylor (footballer, born 1953)" label="Peter Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q948505" start="1717" end="1729" title="Neil Warnock" label="Neil Warnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q19578" start="2001" end="2018" title="Colchester United F.C." label="Colchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q604475" start="2048" end="2059" title="Micky Adams" label="Micky Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575731" start="2218" end="2234" title="Geraint Williams" label="Geraint Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q246724" start="2389" end="2401" title="Paul Lambert" label="Paul Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="2479" end="2485" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="2566" end="2585" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q381769" start="2620" end="2633" title="Chris Coleman (footballer)" label="Chris Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q153293" start="2737" end="2749" title="Felix Magath" label="Felix Magath"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="3347" end="3362" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q318043" start="3366" end="3380" title="Craven Cottage" label="Craven Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="3602" end="3612" title="Sunderland A.F.C" label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19565" start="3740" end="3750" title="Football League One" label="League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q402038" start="3827" end="3846" title="Hebei China Fortune F.C." label="Hebei China Fortune"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416898" wikidata="Q918412" url="?curid=416898" title="1955 United Kingdom general election">
<text>The 1955 United Kingdom general election was held on Thursday 26 May 1955. It was a snap election: Anthony Eden called the election after succeeding Churchill in April 1955 to secure a mandate. The government won a 60-seat majority, achieving the highest post-war party vote share. It was the first election under Queen Elizabeth II.

==Results==
The election was fought on new boundaries, with five seats added to the 625 fought in 1951. At the same time, the Conservative Party had returned to power for the first time since World War II and increased its popularity by accepting the mixed economy and welfare state created by the previous Labour Party government. It also was lauded for its economic policy after ending rationing, improving foreign trade, and even outperforming Labour in the construction of public housing. The &quot;giveaway budget&quot; of Chancellor Rab Butler prior to the election also improved the popularity of the Conservative Party. On election day, the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; had printed the front-page headline &quot;Don&#x27;t Let the Tories Cheat Our Children&quot;, urging its readers to elect Labour on the basis that it had &quot;built a better Britain for us all&quot;.

The BBC later described the election as one of the &quot;dullest&quot; after World War II. The &quot;Daily Express&quot; wrote that the British people were more interested in Princess Margaret&#x27;s romance with Peter Townsend. The Labour Party, then in its twentieth year of leadership under Clement Attlee, steadily lost ground owing to infighting between the left-wing (Bevanites) and the right-wing (Gaitskellites), resulting in an unclear election message. It pledged equal pay for women, renationalization of the steel industry and road haulage, comprehensive secondary education, and vague guarantees of greater industrial democracy and workers&#x27; control of nationalized industries as demanded by Bevanites but otherwise offered little new policy. It was the fifth and last general election fought by Labour leader Clement Attlee, who by this time was 72 years old. Eden had only become Leader of the Conservative Party a few weeks before the election, after the retirement of former Prime Minister Winston Churchill, but he had long been considered the heir apparent to the Conservative leadership. Eden called a dissolution of parliament and a new general election as soon as he took office in April 1955. The Conservatives were hoping to take advantage of the end of food rationing and the positive atmosphere created by the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953. Eden himself was telegenic (although not as great a public speaker as Churchill, who was now infirm and 80 years old) and gradual economic growth benefited the party greatly. Parliament was dissolved on 6 May.

The result showed very little change from 1951, with fewer than 25 seats changing hands and only a small swing from Labour to the Conservatives. The only real highlight of the night was in Northern Ireland, where Sinn Féin won two seats at a UK election for the first time since 1918 (before the secession of Southern Ireland). 

The Labour Party suffered at this time from deep internal divisions, yet for it this election was not the disaster it could have been.

Although little changed, this was a strong victory for the Conservatives, who won the largest share of seats for a single party at a post-war general election. It became the first party since the passage of the Reform Act 1867 to increase its parliamentary majority after a term in office.

The Liberal Party had yet another poor performance, only slightly improving their popular vote total from the previous election, and again winning just six seats. Five of their six seats did not have Conservative challengers, as per local-level agreements to avoid vote-splitting which likely would have thrown the seats to Labour; the only Liberal candidate to be victorious against both Conservative and Labour challengers was Orkney and Shetland MP Jo Grimond, who was first elected in 1950. The poor national showing was widely viewed as the death knell for the embattled leadership of Clement Davies, who resigned the following year and was replaced by Grimond.

Future Labour leader Michael Foot lost his seat of Plymouth Devonport at this election; he returned for Ebbw Vale at a 1960 by-election.

For the first time, television took a prominent role in the campaign; this is the earliest UK general election of which television coverage survives (the 1950 and 1951 election nights were broadcast on television live, but the footage was not recorded). Only three hours of the coverage, presented by Richard Dimbleby, was kept; this was rebroadcast on BBC Parliament on the fiftieth and sixtieth anniversaries of the date of the election.




|-
|+ style=&quot;caption-side: bottom; font-weight:normal&quot; |All parties shown.

===Votes summary===

===Seats summary===
==Selected declarations==
* First declaration: Cheltenham (Con: 24,259, Lab: 16,638; Con hold)
* Prime Minister&#x27;s seat: Warwick and Leamington (Con: 29,979, Lab: 16,513; Con hold)

== Transfers of seats ==
* All comparisons are with the 1951 election.
**In some cases the change is due to the MP defecting to the gaining party. Such circumstances are marked with a *.
**In other circumstances the change is due to the seat having been won by the gaining party in a by-election in the intervening years, and then retained in 1955. Such circumstances are marked with a †. The parliament of 1951–55 only saw one by-election where a seat changed hands (Sunderland South), and unusually this was a gain for the party in government.
:1 Sinn Féin winner overturned on petition for a criminal conviction. The second-placed Ulster Unionist candidate was also overturned by resolution of the House; eventually the 1956 by-election was held, which returned an Independent Unionist.
:2 Sinn Féin winner overturned on petition for a criminal conviction. The second-placed candidate, an Ulster Unionist, was awarded the seat.
== See also ==
*List of MPs elected in the 1955 United Kingdom general election
*List of MPs for constituencies in Scotland (1955–1959)
*List of MPs for constituencies in Wales (1955–1959)
*1955 United Kingdom general election in Northern Ireland
*1955 United Kingdom general election in Scotland
*1955 United Kingdom general election in England
*1955 United Kingdom local elections

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* the standard study

==External links==
* United Kingdom election results—summary results 1885–1979 

===Manifestos===
*&quot;United for Peace and Progress: The Conservative and Unionist Party&#x27;s Policy&quot;, 1955 Conservative Party manifesto
*&quot;Forward With Labour: Labour&#x27;s Policy for the Consideration of the Nation&quot;, 1955 Labour Party manifesto
*&quot;Crisis Unresolved&quot;, 1955 Liberal Party manifesto</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q918412" start="4" end="40" title="1955 United Kingdom general election" label="1955 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333366" start="84" end="97" title="snap election" label="snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="99" end="111" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="149" end="158" title="Winston Churchill" label="Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7724526" start="198" end="208" title="Eden ministry" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="314" end="332" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="461" end="479" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="527" end="539" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="586" end="599" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155290" start="604" end="617" title="Welfare state in the United Kingdom" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="642" end="654" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q535297" start="723" end="732" title="Rationing in the United Kingdom" label="rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585398" start="812" end="826" title="Public housing in the United Kingdom" label="public housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q182035" start="874" end="884" title="Rab Butler" label="Rab Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="990" end="1002" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1288" end="1300" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="1312" end="1325" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1386" end="1438" title="Princess Margaret#Romance with Peter Townsend" label="Princess Margaret&amp;#x27;s romance with Peter Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="1505" end="1519" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900370" start="1585" end="1594" title="Bevanites" label="Bevanites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517397" start="1616" end="1629" title="Gaitskellites" label="Gaitskellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q11414572" start="1685" end="1704" title="equal pay for women" label="equal pay for women"/>
<link wikidata="Q682697" start="1764" end="1797" title="Comprehensive education" label="comprehensive secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560795" start="1831" end="1851" title="industrial democracy" label="industrial democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673073" start="1856" end="1877" title="workers&amp;#x27; control" label="workers&amp;#x27; control"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="1881" end="1893" title="nationalized" label="nationalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="2038" end="2052" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="2222" end="2239" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2493" end="2507" title="Food rationing in Britain#Post-Second World War 1945–1954" label="food rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797766" start="2551" end="2583" title="coronation of Queen Elizabeth II" label="coronation of Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="2993" end="3009" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="3017" end="3026" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042701" start="3083" end="3087" title="1918 United Kingdom general election" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="3113" end="3129" title="Irish Free State" label="Southern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318051" start="3481" end="3496" title="Reform Act 1867" label="Reform Act 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050931" start="3990" end="4009" title="Orkney and Shetland (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Orkney and Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q335812" start="4013" end="4023" title="Jo Grimond" label="Jo Grimond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131308" start="4151" end="4165" title="Clement Davies" label="Clement Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q332419" start="4250" end="4262" title="Michael Foot" label="Michael Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164454" start="4280" end="4298" title="Plymouth Devonport" label="Plymouth Devonport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331564" start="4333" end="4342" title="Ebbw Vale (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ebbw Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331570" start="4348" end="4364" title="1960 Ebbw Vale by-election" label="1960 by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430720" start="4668" end="4684" title="Richard Dimbleby" label="Richard Dimbleby"/>
<link wikidata="Q787206" start="4720" end="4734" title="BBC Parliament" label="BBC Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239188" start="4985" end="4995" title="Cheltenham (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cheltenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601509" start="5035" end="5061" title="List of United Kingdom Parliament constituencies represented by sitting Prime Ministers" label="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q874946" start="5063" end="5085" title="Warwick and Leamington" label="Warwick and Leamington"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162601" start="5592" end="5608" title="1953 Sunderland South by-election" label="Sunderland South"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841036" start="5847" end="5863" title="1956 Mid Ulster by-election" label="1956 by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017344" start="5892" end="5912" title="Independent Unionist" label="Independent Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577378" start="6071" end="6134" title="List of MPs elected in the 1955 United Kingdom general election" label="List of MPs elected in the 1955 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q124727393" start="6136" end="6190" title="List of MPs for constituencies in Scotland (1955–1959)" label="List of MPs for constituencies in Scotland (1955–1959)"/>
<link wikidata="Q127040090" start="6192" end="6243" title="List of MPs for constituencies in Wales (1955–1959)" label="List of MPs for constituencies in Wales (1955–1959)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60773852" start="6245" end="6301" title="1955 United Kingdom general election in Northern Ireland" label="1955 United Kingdom general election in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30750627" start="6303" end="6351" title="1955 United Kingdom general election in Scotland" label="1955 United Kingdom general election in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130634358" start="6353" end="6400" title="1955 United Kingdom general election in England" label="1955 United Kingdom general election in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q30681247" start="6402" end="6437" title="1955 United Kingdom local elections" label="1955 United Kingdom local elections"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416900" wikidata="Q918420" url="?curid=416900" title="1959 United Kingdom general election">
<text>The 1959 United Kingdom general election was held on Thursday, 8 October 1959. The Conservative Party under the leadership of incumbent prime minister Harold Macmillan won a landslide victory with a majority of 100 seats. This was their third election victory in a row.

The Conservatives won the largest number of votes in Scotland, but narrowly failed to win the most seats in that country. They have not made either achievement ever since. Both Jeremy Thorpe, a future Liberal leader, and Margaret Thatcher, a future Conservative leader and eventually Prime Minister, first entered the House of Commons after this election.

==Background==
After the Suez Crisis in 1956, Anthony Eden, the Conservative Prime Minister, became unpopular. He resigned early in 1957, and was succeeded by Chancellor of the Exchequer Harold Macmillan. At that point, the Labour Party, whose leader Hugh Gaitskell had succeeded Clement Attlee after the 1955 general election, enjoyed large leads in opinion polls over the Conservative Party, and it looked as if Labour would win.

The Liberal Party also had a new leader, Jo Grimond, so all three parties contested the election with a new leader at the helm.

However, the Conservatives enjoyed an upturn in fortunes as the economy quickly recovered from the Recession of 1958 under Macmillan&#x27;s leadership, and his personal approval ratings remained high. At the same time, the Labour Party&#x27;s popularity suffered due to the rise of industrial disputes in the 1950s and controversies over the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. By September 1958, the Conservatives had moved ahead of Labour in the opinion polls. Parliament was dissolved on 18 September 1959.

==Campaign==
All the three main parties had changed leadership since the previous election. The Conservatives fought under the slogan &quot;Life is better with the Conservatives, don&#x27;t let Labour ruin it&quot; and were boosted by a pre-election economic boom. Macmillan very effectively &quot;summed up&quot; the mood of the British public when he said that most of the people had &quot;never had it so good&quot;. Macmillan was very popular, and was described as a politician of the centre ground; in the 1930s he had represented a constituency in northern England (Stockton-on-Tees), which had experienced large-scale unemployment and poverty during the Great Depression. The first week of polling put the Conservatives ahead of Labour by over 5%, but this narrowed as the campaign continued. The Labour Party fought a generally effective campaign, with television broadcasts masterminded by Tony Benn under the umbrella of their manifesto entitled &quot;Britain Belongs to You&quot;, which accused the Conservatives of complacency over the growing gap between rich and poor. Labour&#x27;s manifesto pledged to reverse reductions in welfare benefits, pensions, and National Health Service expenditure; renationalize the steel industry and road haulage; reform secondary education; expand consumer protections; and create the Welsh Office. It notably promised not to fully nationalise industries which were performing efficiently and profitably, pivoting away from its earlier emphasis on socialism towards welfare capitalism. Hugh Gaitskell made a mistake in declaring that a Labour government would not raise taxes if it came to power—even though the Labour manifesto contained pledges to increase spending; especially to increase pensions. Although Gaitskell argued revenue would be provided by economic growth, this led some voters to doubt Labour&#x27;s spending plans, and is cited as a key reason for their defeat.

==Results==
Early on during election night, it became clear that the Conservative Party had been returned to government with an increased majority, performing better than it had been expected to. For the fourth general election in a row, the Conservatives increased their number of seats, despite experiencing a slight decrease in their share of the vote. However, there were swings to Labour in parts of north-west England, and in Scotland; where Scottish Labour had overtaken the Conservative-aligned Unionist Party as the largest single party in terms of seats, despite winning a slightly smaller share of the vote, thanks to overturning narrow majorities in several constituencies. Future Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher was elected to the House of Commons for the first time as the MP for Finchley, where she would represent until her retirement from politics 33 years later at the 1992 general election.

For Labour, the result was disappointing; despite appearing more united than they had in recent years under Gaitskell&#x27;s leadership, the party suffered a third consecutive defeat. James Callaghan believed that the Conservatives increased their majority in part because working-class Labour voters were still angry at the party for opposing the Suez conflict. Many of both the Labour Party&#x27;s supporters and opponents, including Prime Minister Macmillan himself, also blamed the Gaitskellite leadership for spending more time preparing to form a government with the assumption that they would win the election than actually campaigning or offering criticism of the Conservative Party&#x27;s leadership. Political scientists Mark Abrams and Richard Rose blamed Labour&#x27;s electoral losses from 1959 onwards on an &quot;embourgeoisement&quot; in which British voters identified increasingly with the middle class, leaving Labour&#x27;s appeals to the working class less effective. Another key factor was the decline of support of younger voters after 1955, although older voters over the age of 65 increased support for the party in 1959 because of its pledges to expand pensions.

While the Liberal Party earned more than twice as many votes compared to the previous general election, this was largely the result of them nominating nearly double the number of candidates that they did four years prior; their average number of votes-per-candidate only slightly improved. Future Liberal Party Leader Jeremy Thorpe was elected to Parliament for the first time, as the MP for North Devon.

The &quot;Daily Mirror&quot;, despite being a staunch supporter of the Labour Party, wished Macmillan &quot;good luck&quot; on its front page following his election victory.

The BBC Television Service&#x27;s election coverage, presented by Richard Dimbleby, was shown on BBC Parliament on 9 October 2009 to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the election and again on 9 October 2019 to mark the sixtieth anniversary.

The 1959 general election was the first election to be covered by commercial television in the United Kingdom. The ITV network provided election night coverage from the studios of Independent Television News (ITN) in London, with ITV given permission by the Independent Television Authority to use all of the ITV companies on air in 1959 for election links to the main studio in London. Ian Trethowan was the presenter for the ITV coverage.







|+ style=&quot;caption-side: bottom; font-weight:normal&quot; |All parties shown.

===Votes summary===

===Seat summary===
== Transfers of seats ==
* All comparisons are with the 1955 election.
**In some cases the change is due to the MP defecting to the gaining party. Such circumstances are marked with a *.
**In other circumstances the change is due to the seat having been won by the gaining party in a by-election in the intervening years, and then retained in 1959. Such circumstances are marked with a †.
:1 Sinn Féin winner in 1955 overturned on petition. The second-placed Ulster Unionist candidate was also overturned, by resolution of the House; eventually the 1956 by-election was held, which returned an Independent Unionist. This candidate later defected to the Ulster Unionists.
:2 Sinn Féin winner in 1955 overturned on petition for criminal conviction. The second-placed candidate, an Ulster Unionist, was awarded the seat. He retained it in 1959.
:3 Seat had been won by the Liberals in a 1958 by-election.
== See also ==
*List of MPs elected in the 1959 United Kingdom general election
*List of MPs for constituencies in Scotland (1959–1964)
*List of MPs for constituencies in Wales (1959–1964)
*1959 United Kingdom general election in Northern Ireland
*1959 United Kingdom general election in Scotland
*1959 United Kingdom general election in England

==Notes==
==References==

===Sources===

* the standard scholarly study.
*
==External links==
*United Kingdom election results—summary results 1885–1979 

===Manifestos===
*&quot;The Next Five Years&quot;, 1959 Conservative Party manifesto
*&quot;Britain Belongs to You: The Labour Party&#x27;s Policy for Consideration by the British People&quot;, 1959 Labour Party manifesto
*&quot;People Count&quot;, 1959 Liberal Party manifesto</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q918420" start="4" end="40" title="1959 United Kingdom general election" label="1959 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="83" end="101" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="151" end="167" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q334102" start="448" end="461" title="Jeremy Thorpe" label="Jeremy Thorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="492" end="509" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="653" end="664" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="674" end="686" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="692" end="704" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="787" end="814" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="815" end="831" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="852" end="864" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q337380" start="879" end="893" title="Hugh Gaitskell" label="Hugh Gaitskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="908" end="922" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q918412" start="933" end="954" title="1955 United Kingdom general election" label="1955 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="1065" end="1078" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q335812" start="1102" end="1112" title="Jo Grimond" label="Jo Grimond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302387" start="1289" end="1306" title="Recession of 1958" label="Recession of 1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q178511" start="1532" end="1564" title="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament" label="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788657" start="2253" end="2269" title="northern England" label="northern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618214" start="2271" end="2287" title="Stockton-on-Tees (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Stockton-on-Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057447" start="2324" end="2348" title="Interwar unemployment and poverty in the United Kingdom" label="unemployment and poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599058" start="2360" end="2376" title="Great Depression in the United Kingdom" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="2598" end="2607" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="2747" end="2780" title="Economic inequality" label="growing gap between rich and poor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155290" start="2839" end="2855" title="Welfare state in the United Kingdom" label="welfare benefits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509356" start="2857" end="2865" title="Pensions in the United Kingdom" label="pensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="2871" end="2894" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q664183" start="2994" end="3014" title="consumer protections" label="consumer protections"/>
<link wikidata="Q515268" start="3031" end="3043" title="Welsh Office" label="Welsh Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="3194" end="3203" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q488399" start="3212" end="3230" title="welfare capitalism" label="welfare capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308200" start="3316" end="3321" title="Taxation in the United Kingdom" label="taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509356" start="3438" end="3446" title="Pensions in the United Kingdom" label="pensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q47967" start="4033" end="4051" title="North West England" label="north-west England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="4060" end="4068" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="4076" end="4091" title="Scottish Labour" label="Scottish Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886824" start="4131" end="4145" title="Unionist Party (Scotland)" label="Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="4336" end="4353" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449840" start="4423" end="4431" title="Finchley (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Finchley"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="4516" end="4537" title="1992 UK general election" label="1992 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="4724" end="4739" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="4888" end="4901" title="Suez conflict" label="Suez conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517397" start="5026" end="5038" title="Gaitskellite" label="Gaitskellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118388" start="5271" end="5282" title="Mark Abrams" label="Mark Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328739" start="5287" end="5299" title="Richard Rose (political scientist)" label="Richard Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356549" start="5368" end="5384" title="embourgeoisement" label="embourgeoisement"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="5740" end="5753" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q334102" start="6048" end="6061" title="Jeremy Thorpe" label="Jeremy Thorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032551" start="6122" end="6133" title="North Devon (UK Parliament constituency)" label="North Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="6146" end="6158" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="6315" end="6337" title="BBC One" label="BBC Television Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430720" start="6377" end="6393" title="Richard Dimbleby" label="Richard Dimbleby"/>
<link wikidata="Q787206" start="6408" end="6422" title="BBC Parliament" label="BBC Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378498" start="6619" end="6640" title="commercial television" label="commercial television"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="6668" end="6679" title="ITV network" label="ITV network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210241" start="6733" end="6760" title="Independent Television News" label="Independent Television News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017286" start="6811" end="6843" title="Independent Television Authority" label="Independent Television Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161173" start="6940" end="6953" title="Ian Trethowan" label="Ian Trethowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841036" start="7673" end="7689" title="1956 Mid Ulster by-election" label="1956 by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017344" start="7718" end="7738" title="Independent Unionist" label="Independent Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577379" start="8042" end="8105" title="List of MPs elected in the 1959 United Kingdom general election" label="List of MPs elected in the 1959 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q113518860" start="8107" end="8161" title="List of MPs for constituencies in Scotland (1959–1964)" label="List of MPs for constituencies in Scotland (1959–1964)"/>
<link wikidata="Q127040083" start="8163" end="8214" title="List of MPs for constituencies in Wales (1959–1964)" label="List of MPs for constituencies in Wales (1959–1964)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60773854" start="8216" end="8272" title="1959 United Kingdom general election in Northern Ireland" label="1959 United Kingdom general election in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30750626" start="8274" end="8322" title="1959 United Kingdom general election in Scotland" label="1959 United Kingdom general election in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130384155" start="8324" end="8371" title="1959 United Kingdom general election in England" label="1959 United Kingdom general election in England"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416902" wikidata="Q1761924" url="?curid=416902" title="Church of Christ With the Elijah Message">
<text>The Church of Christ with the Elijah Message is the name of three related church groups and a denomination of the Latter Day Saint movement, headquartered in Independence, Missouri. It split from the Church of Christ (informally referred to as the &quot;Fettingites&quot;) in 1943 in a dispute over claimed revelations given to its founder William A. Draves. Draves, an elder in the Fettingite group, claimed to be receiving messages from an angelic being who identified himself as John the Baptist—the same person who had allegedly appeared to Fettingite founder Otto Fetting, a former apostle of the Temple Lot Church of Christ. While many Fettingites accepted these new missives, some did not, leading Draves to form his own church. His adherents claim it to be the sole legitimate continuation of Fetting&#x27;s organization, as well as that of the Temple Lot church. As of 1987, the church had approximately 12,500 adherents spread between Africa, Europe, Asia, Australia and the Americas.

==Origin of name==
The church&#x27;s name originates in the alleged visitations of John the Baptist to Otto Fetting and William Draves. In the Gospel of Matthew 11:14, Jesus Christ identifies John with the prophet Elijah in the Book of Malachi; hence the use of &quot;Elijah Message&quot;. Malachi 4:5-6 says: &quot;Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. And He shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers; lest I come and smite the land with a curse&quot;. Members believe that the purported visits of this &quot;messenger&quot; fulfill Malachi&#x27;s prophecy, as well as others found in Revelation 14:6, Malachi 3:1, Deuteronomy 18:15-19, and Daniel 7:9-10.

==History==

===Otto Fetting===

Otto Fetting was born on 20 November 1871 in Casco, St. Clair County, Michigan. Making his home in Port Huron, Michigan, he was baptised into the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints on February 9, 1891, and ordained to its priesthood in 1899. In 1925, dismayed by the &quot;Supreme Directional Control&quot; controversy within the RLDS church, Fetting switched his allegiance to the Temple Lot Church of Christ (also informally known as &quot;Hedrickites&quot;). At the time, this did not require rebaptism or reordination, as each group accepted the priesthood and sacraments of the other. In the spring of 1926, he was among seven men ordained to be Apostles in the Church of Christ.

On February 4 of 1927, Otto Fetting claimed that he had been visited by John the Baptist, who had delivered a message for him to relay to the Temple Lot organization. This missive directed the construction of the long-awaited Temple in Independence, Missouri, first foretold by Latter Day Saint founder Joseph Smith in 1831. The Temple Lot church had a long history of direction via revelation and angelic visits and thus was originally receptive to these alleged visits of the Biblical prophet, publishing Fetting&#x27;s messages in their monthly periodical &quot;Zion&#x27;s Advocate&quot;. They also began work on the temple with a groundbreaking ceremony held on 6 April 1929. According to Fetting, the Hedrickites were given seven years to complete the structure.

Fetting&#x27;s messenger revealed various architectural details for the building and specifically directed surveyors to move their markers ten feet to the east of where they had originally been placed. The angel also revealed the location of two of Joseph Smith&#x27;s original marker stones, which Smith had buried 98 years before to indicate the location for his planned temple. Another revelation indicated that the &quot;Articles of Faith and Practice&quot; of the Temple Lot church were correct, and should not be changed from their original form. On other occasions, the messenger indicated particular men to be ordained within the organization, including to its Quorum of Twelve Apostles.

===Trouble on the Temple Lot===
Although the Temple Lot organization had enthusiastically accepted the first eleven of Fetting&#x27;s messages, this would not hold true for the twelfth. In verse four of this missive, John the Baptist states that all persons coming into the Church of Christ must be rebaptized, as &quot;the Lord has rejected all creeds and factions of men&quot;. While this reflects the practice of the majority of Latter Day Saint denominations (including the Temple Lot church itself, today), it did not reflect the policy of the Temple Lot church at the time, which accepted members during this period from the Reorganized church, certain other Latter Day Saint organizations, and Joseph Smith&#x27;s pre-1844 church on their original baptisms. This message equally declared Fetting to have been given the same &quot;keys to the priesthood&quot; that were given to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on May 15, 1829.

Controversy over the meaning and application of Fetting&#x27;s twelfth message became so great that Fetting himself was &quot;silenced&quot; in October 1929 by the Temple Lot organization. Choosing to withdraw rather than continue under such a restriction, Fetting led approximately half of the Church of Christ members (including some of its apostles) to found a &quot;Church of Christ&quot; of his own, which became known as the Church of Christ (Fettingite). Since the main Temple Lot organization retained possession of the Temple Lot and its meetinghouse, Fetting&#x27;s organization met in members&#x27; homes for a considerable period prior to building their own worship facilities.

Fetting would claim to be visited a total of 30 times by the messenger prior to his death on 30 January 1933.

===William A. Draves===

Four years after Fetting&#x27;s death, a young Fettingite elder named William A. Draves from Nucla, Colorado claimed that the same messenger who had appeared to Fetting had begun to appear to him, as well. While the Fettingite organization was initially receptive to these new missives, it ultimately decided to reject them all, leading to a split in the Fettingite organization in 1943. Draves&#x27; adherents formed the Church of Christ with the Elijah Message, which claims to be the sole legitimate continuance of Fetting&#x27;s original organization. Draves himself announced a total of 90 messages prior to his death in 1994, which were combined with Fetting&#x27;s into a book entitled &quot;The Word of the Lord Brought to Mankind by an Angel&quot;. Fetting&#x27;s organization publishes its own compendium, simply entitled &quot;The Word of the Lord&quot;, which contains only Fetting&#x27;s original 30 messages.

Prior to W.A. Draves&#x27;s death in 1994 the final three messages he had recorded reflected leadership disputes within The Church of Christ with the Elijah Message. These led to a division causing Apostles W.A. Draves, Leonard Draves and Mervyn Johnson to be blocked from church property by way of a restraining order. After a short legal battle, a failure to reconcile, and the death of W.A. Draves, six of the twelve leading Apostles decided to reincorporate the Church under the name The Church of Christ with the Elijah Message, Inc. in August 1994. This new organization would go on to become the Church of Christ With the Elijah Message, The Assured Way of the Lord, Inc. The remaining five Apostles, including those who filed the above restraining order, retained the corporate name &quot;The Church of Christ with the Elijah Message, Established Anew 1929&quot; and all properties including the headquarters building at 608 Lacy Rd. Independence, Missouri.

==Doctrine and practices==
Other than their acceptance of Fetting&#x27;s 30 messages and the 90 offered by William Draves, the beliefs and practices of the Elijah Message organization are virtually identical to those of the Church of Christ (Temple Lot). In common with the Temple Lot church, the Elijah Message church rejects the office of President of the Church, being led instead by their Quorum of Twelve Apostles; all members of that quorum are considered equal.

Also, like their Temple Lot cousins, the church rejects the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price, as well as Joseph Smith&#x27;s Inspired Version of the Bible, preferring to use only the King James Bible and the Record of the Nephites (their name for the Book of Mormon) as standards. They also await an as-yet-unrevealed work of scripture which the Messenger was alleged to have shown to Draves in 1946. Baptism for the Dead, eternal marriage, polygamy and the eternal progression doctrine are all rejected. Members of the Church of Christ with the Elijah Message still believe that a temple will be reared on the Temple Lot, but it will not be like any of the LDS or Community of Christ temples currently in use.

In verse 6 of his twelfth message, Otto Fetting quoted John the Baptist as saying that Joseph Smith had indeed been a true prophet, but that he &quot;sinned before God&quot; due to &quot;pride, and the love and praise of men&quot;. &quot;Much of his work has been destroyed&quot;, wrote Fetting, &quot;but he will be saved as by fire, and will be numbered with the prophets of old&quot;. Accordingly, the Elijah Message church respects Joseph Smith as a prophet but does not necessarily accept all of his teachings. In verse 1 of his first message, Fetting&#x27;s heavenly envoy commanded that the &quot;Articles of Faith and Practice&quot; of the Temple Lot organization (of which Fetting was then still an apostle) were to remain unchanged, &quot;because the Lord inspired the men that wrote them&quot;. Hence, these remain the same in the Elijah Message organization, as well as within all Fettingite sects.

== See also ==

==References==
==External links==
*Church of Christ with the Elijah Message - The Assured Way of the Lord. Official church website of The Church of Christ with the Elijah Message - The Assured Way of the Lord, Inc. Contains &quot;The Word of the Lord Brought to Mankind by an Angel&quot; in 4 languages.
*Church of Christ with the Elijah Message. Official church website of The Church of Christ with the Elijah Message, Inc. Contains &quot;The Word of the Lord Brought to Mankind by an Angel&quot;.
*Church of Christ - &quot;The Church with the Elijah Message&quot; - Established Anew in 1929. Official church website of The Church of Christ - &quot;The Church with the Elijah Message&quot; - Established Anew in 1929. Contains &quot;The Word of the Lord Brought to Mankind by an Angel&quot;.
*The Church of Christ (Temple Lot), and Their Quest to Build a Temple in Zion, by R. Jean Adams. Overview of the efforts to build a temple during the &#x27;20s and &#x27;30s, including Fetting and his messages.
*Testimonies of Otto Fetting and William A. Draves. Includes photos of each man.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1761924" start="0" end="44" title="Church of Christ With the Elijah Message" label="The Church of Christ with the Elijah Message"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="114" end="139" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q24603" start="158" end="180" title="Independence, Missouri" label="Independence, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138086" start="200" end="216" title="Church of Christ (Fettingite)" label="Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629163" start="370" end="375" title="Elder (Latter Day Saints)" label="elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="482" end="498" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764480" start="564" end="576" title="Otto Fetting" label="Otto Fetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620760" start="587" end="594" title="Apostle (Latter Day Saints)" label="apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742521" start="613" end="629" title="Church of Christ (Temple Lot)" label="Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="1164" end="1176" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q133507" start="1210" end="1216" title="Elijah" label="Elijah"/>
<link wikidata="Q51675" start="1224" end="1239" title="Book of Malachi" label="Book of Malachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q115273" start="1865" end="1891" title="St. Clair County, Michigan" label="St. Clair County, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000222" start="1912" end="1932" title="Port Huron, Michigan" label="Port Huron, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q625363" start="1959" end="2014" title="Community of Christ" label="Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492096" start="2056" end="2066" title="Priesthood (Latter Day Saints)" label="priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645114" start="2107" end="2134" title="Supreme Directional Control" label="Supreme Directional Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="2399" end="2409" title="sacraments" label="sacraments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850068" start="2746" end="2752" title="Temple Lot" label="Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q24603" start="2756" end="2768" title="Independence, Missouri" label="Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="2770" end="2778" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="2823" end="2835" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4824" end="4846" title="Priesthood (Latter Day Saints)#Priesthood keys" label="keys to the priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="4872" end="4884" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q982343" start="4889" end="4903" title="Oliver Cowdery" label="Oliver Cowdery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629163" start="5807" end="5812" title="Elder (Latter Day Saints)" label="elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761924" start="5819" end="5836" title="W.A. Draves" label="William A. Draves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206973" start="5842" end="5857" title="Nucla, Colorado" label="Nucla, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775801" start="6448" end="6499" title="The Word of the Lord Brought to Mankind by an Angel" label="The Word of the Lord Brought to Mankind by an Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775801" start="6587" end="6607" title="The Word of the Lord" label="The Word of the Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116839" start="7276" end="7351" title="Church of Christ (Assured Way)" label="Church of Christ With the Elijah Message, The Assured Way of the Lord, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1742521" start="7864" end="7893" title="Church of Christ (Temple Lot)" label="Church of Christ (Temple Lot)"/>
<link wikidata="Q596458" start="7981" end="8004" title="President of the Church" label="President of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q462463" start="8170" end="8192" title="Doctrine and Covenants" label="Doctrine and Covenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q459864" start="8201" end="8221" title="Pearl of Great Price (Mormonism)" label="Pearl of Great Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462340" start="8254" end="8270" title="Joseph Smith Translation" label="Inspired Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="8312" end="8328" title="King James Version" label="King James Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302857" start="8337" end="8359" title="Record of the Nephites" label="Record of the Nephites"/>
<link wikidata="Q459842" start="8380" end="8394" title="Book of Mormon" label="Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81990" start="8530" end="8550" title="Baptism for the Dead" label="Baptism for the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q170585" start="8570" end="8578" title="polygamy" label="polygamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851691" start="8587" end="8606" title="eternal progression" label="eternal progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142152" start="8711" end="8717" title="Temple (Latter Day Saints)" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="8928" end="8940" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071551" start="9028" end="9033" title="pride" label="pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="9295" end="9302" title="prophet" label="prophet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416904" wikidata="Q401857" url="?curid=416904" title="Maysville">
<text>Maysville is the name of several places in the United States of America:
* Maysville, Alabama
* Maysville, Arkansas
* Maysville, Colorado
* Maysville, Georgia
* Maysville, Illinois
* Maysville, Indiana
* Maysville, Iowa
* Maysville, Kentucky
* Maysville, Maine
* Maysville, Missouri
* Maysville, North Carolina
* Maysville, Allen County, Ohio (in Allen and Hardin counties)
* Maysville, Coshocton County, Ohio
* Maysville, Wayne County, Ohio
* Maysville, Oklahoma
* Maysville, Armstrong County, Pennsylvania
* Maysville, Mercer County, Pennsylvania
* Maysville, West Virginia
* Maysville, Virginia, a former name for Buckingham, Virginia

==See also==
*Maysville High School, Ohio
*Mayville (disambiguation)
*Marysville (disambiguation)
*New Maysville, Indiana</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q401857" start="0" end="9" title="Maysville" label="Maysville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797982" start="75" end="93" title="Maysville, Alabama" label="Maysville, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5390324" start="96" end="115" title="Maysville, Arkansas" label="Maysville, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664592" start="118" end="137" title="Maysville, Colorado" label="Maysville, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3261840" start="140" end="158" title="Maysville, Georgia" label="Maysville, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14687850" start="161" end="180" title="Maysville, Illinois" label="Maysville, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q14688608" start="183" end="201" title="Maysville, Indiana" label="Maysville, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928790" start="204" end="219" title="Maysville, Iowa" label="Maysville, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q478393" start="222" end="241" title="Maysville, Kentucky" label="Maysville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q986013" start="244" end="260" title="Maysville, Maine" label="Maysville, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q953104" start="263" end="282" title="Maysville, Missouri" label="Maysville, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q942011" start="285" end="310" title="Maysville, North Carolina" label="Maysville, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q22133951" start="313" end="342" title="Maysville, Allen County, Ohio" label="Maysville, Allen County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q22133952" start="376" end="409" title="Maysville, Coshocton County, Ohio" label="Maysville, Coshocton County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q22133953" start="412" end="441" title="Maysville, Wayne County, Ohio" label="Maysville, Wayne County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287538" start="444" end="463" title="Maysville, Oklahoma" label="Maysville, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q28958310" start="466" end="507" title="Maysville, Armstrong County, Pennsylvania" label="Maysville, Armstrong County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q28958309" start="510" end="548" title="Maysville, Mercer County, Pennsylvania" label="Maysville, Mercer County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797997" start="551" end="575" title="Maysville, West Virginia" label="Maysville, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474782" start="617" end="637" title="Buckingham, Virginia" label="Buckingham, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="653" end="680" title="Maysville High School, Ohio" label="Maysville High School, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q357224" start="682" end="707" title="Mayville (disambiguation)" label="Mayville (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q295911" start="709" end="736" title="Marysville (disambiguation)" label="Marysville (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22059109" start="738" end="760" title="New Maysville, Indiana" label="New Maysville, Indiana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416906" wikidata="Q391169" url="?curid=416906" title="Barry Gardiner">
<text>Barry Strachan Gardiner (born 10 March 1957) is a British politician who has served as Member of Parliament (MP) for Brent North from 1997 until the seat&#x27;s abolition in 2024 and Brent West since 2024. He is a member of the Labour Party.

The son of an Olympic footballer, Gardiner was born and educated in Glasgow before being moved to Hertfordshire to be educated at Haileybury and Imperial Service College. After studying at the University of St Andrews, he worked in the Student Christian Movement and considered a career in the Episcopal Church. He then studied philosophy at Harvard University and researched the subject at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. He was first elected to public office in Cambridge and became the youngest mayor of the city in 1992. Leaving local government in 1994, he worked in marine arbitration before being elected to Parliament at the 1997 general election.

Gardiner served in Tony Blair&#x27;s New Labour government from April 2004 to June 2007 as a junior minister in the Northern Ireland Office, Department of Trade and Industry and Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs respectively. After holding junior positions on the Official Opposition frontbench under Ed Miliband and Jeremy Corbyn, Gardiner served in Corbyn&#x27;s Shadow cabinet as Shadow Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change from June to July 2016. He subsequently served as Shadow Secretary of State for International Trade and Shadow Minister for International Climate Change until returning to the backbenches in April 2020.

==Early life and career==
Barry Gardiner, the son of Olympic footballer John Gardiner, was born in Glasgow, Scotland. His mother trained as a surgeon and was the first woman to win the gold medal for surgery at the University of Glasgow. Before Gardiner was eight, his father had died of lung cancer; his mother moved him to Haileybury; six years later, his mother fell ill with cancer, dying by the time Gardiner was seventeen. He was educated at the independent High School of Glasgow and Haileybury and Imperial Service College in Hertfordshire. He received an undergraduate Master of Arts from the University of St Andrews before serving for two years as full-time Scottish Regional Secretary of the Student Christian Movement. As a young man, he planned to become an Episcopal priest and began identifying politically with democratic and Christian socialism.

In 1983, Gardiner was awarded a Kennedy Memorial Trust scholarship to study philosophy at Harvard University under John Rawls, returning to conduct doctoral research at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge for three years from 1984. He was elected as a councillor to Cambridge City Council in 1988 becoming Mayor of Cambridge in 1992, the youngest mayor in the city&#x27;s 800-year history. He left the council in 1994. Before his election to Parliament, he worked as a senior partner in shipping insurance and arbitration.

==Parliamentary career==

=== In government: 1997–2010 ===
Gardiner contested the Greater London constituency of Brent North at the 1997 general election, defeating the incumbent Conservative MP Rhodes Boyson by 4,019 votes. Following his election, he moved from Cambridge to Hertfordshire. He made his maiden speech on 4 July 1997.

Gardiner served on the Procedure Committee, the Select Committee on Broadcasting, the Public Accounts Committee and the Joint Committee on Consolidation of Bills. He was Chair of the PLP Departmental Committee for Culture, Media and Sport and vice-chair of the PLP Departmental Committee for the Treasury. He was the Chairman of the Labour Friends of India, and has lectured at the Academy of National Economy in Moscow. He is a former vice-chair of Labour Friends of Israel and remains a member.

Gardiner became Parliamentary Private Secretary (PPS) to Minister of State at the Home Office Beverley Hughes in 2002. In 2004, he was appointed Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State at the Northern Ireland Office, moving to the same position at the Department of Trade and Industry following the 2005 general election. He moved to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs in a May 2006 reshuffle and left the Government in June 2007, to once again serve as a PPS, this time to the Business Secretary.

New Prime Minister Gordon Brown appointed Gardiner as his special representative on forestry in July 2007. He left this role &quot;by mutual consent&quot; on 13 September 2008 after joining other Labour MPs in declaring an MP should stand against Brown, accusing him of &quot;vacillation, loss of international credibility and timorous political manoeuvres that the public cannot understand&quot;.

Gardiner&#x27;s expenses in 2008–2009 were ranked 129 out of 647 MPs whilst his 2007–2008 expenses were ranked 369. He claimed for a second home, despite his constituency being near Westminster. After the 2010 general election, the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority published new expenses rules replacing funding for a second home with a London Allowance of £3,760 for MPs with seats within 20 miles of Westminster. Those who kept their seats and already owned a second home had profits &quot;recouped&quot;. The Legg Report requested Gardiner repay £174.17 for mortgage interest overpaid in 2005–06 although he voluntarily repaid £15,404.07 by April 2009.

=== In opposition: 2010–present ===

==== Early opposition career: 2010–2016 ====
Gardiner was re-elected at the 2010 general election with a majority of 8,028 votes. Upon his re-election, he was described by Andrew Roth in &quot;The Guardian&quot; as &quot;One of the best educated and most internationally experienced MPs&quot;. He nominated David Miliband in the 2010 Labour Party leadership election.

Between 2011 and 2013, Gardiner served as Ed Miliband&#x27;s Special Envoy for Environment and Climate Change. In June 2013, Gardiner and Conservative MP Tim Yeo jointly tabled an amendment to the Energy Bill which proposed establishing by 2014 a decarbonisation target for the UK&#x27;s electricity generating sector, to be achieved by 2030. The amendment was narrowly defeated.

Gardiner was appointed as Shadow Minister for Natural Environment and Fisheries in July 2013. In this role, Gardiner criticised the lack of prosecutions of leading players ten months after David Cameron promised that everything possible would be done to deal with crime relating to the horse meat scandal. &quot;The extraordinary thing is that because of its clout, industry has been able to commit what appears to be a criminal offence – selling the public horsemeat falsely labelled as beef – and just say they are sorry and didn&#x27;t know&quot;. He gave his support in 2014 to the first annual Hen Harrier Day demonstrations in Derbyshire to highlight the illegal persecution of UK raptors. In January 2015, he admitted the push by the previous Labour government to encourage car-buyers to opt for diesel vehicles in a bid to protect the environment was &quot;wrong&quot;, identifying that a &quot;massive problem for public health&quot; had been created.

==== Shadow Cabinet: 2016–2020 ====
When Jeremy Corbyn was elected Leader of the Labour Party in September 2015, Gardiner moved to becoming Shadow Minister for the Department of Energy and Climate Change. Following a string of Shadow Cabinet resignations in June 2016, Gardiner replaced Lisa Nandy as Shadow Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change. In June, the department was abolished and he became Shadow Secretary of State for International Trade and Shadow Minister for International Climate Change.

Gardiner supported the development of Hinkley Point C nuclear power station, rejecting criticism of Chinese involvement in the project despite military and intelligence figures warning ministers that such involvement posed a threat to national security. He urged Theresa May to tell China that Britain wanted strong investment in infrastructure projects and described her decision to halt the deal as &quot;politically stupid&quot; and tantamount to &quot;closing UK Plc down&quot;. He criticised May for negotiating a &quot;rip-off deal&quot; over its development.

In October 2017, Gardiner became involved in a complaint by Boeing to the US Department of Commerce. Boeing claimed Bombardier Aerospace was &#x27;dumping&#x27; aircraft in the US by selling them below the cost of production, due to large Canadian government subsidies. The US Department had suggested the solution was a 300% tariff on Bombardier CSeries being sold to Delta Air Lines, which would adversely affect prospects for the sale. A major employer in Belfast, a punitive tariff again Bombardier would threaten more than 4,000 manufacturing jobs. Boeing&#x27;s complaint against Bombardier had made no reference to its own multibillion-dollar tax breaks from Washington state. Gardiner seized on this and accused Boeing of hypocrisy, insisting all aircraft manufacturers require government subsidies; he labelled Boeing &quot;the king of corporate welfare&quot; and a &quot;subsidy junkie&quot;, and suggested the company was trying to &quot;crush a competitor&quot;. Boeing replied their illegal-subsidies complaint against Bombardier was about selling aircraft below the cost of production and not anti-competitive, saying it merely wanted &quot;fairness&quot; in &quot;following trade rules&quot;.

In response to the murder in 2018 of Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi, Gardiner said &quot;We must look very carefully again at the relationship we have with Saudi Arabia. What we would do certainly at the moment, and I think the government should do this, is to suspend all arms sales to the kingdom.&quot;

In January 2020, Gardiner received India&#x27;s Padma Shri award for his work in the field of public affairs. He endorsed Rebecca Long-Bailey in the 2020 Labour Party leadership election. Following Keir Starmer&#x27;s victory in the contest, he was stood down from the Shadow Cabinet in April of that year.

==== Return to the backbenches: 2020–present ====
After following government social distancing guidelines from March to June 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic, Gardiner joined Black Lives Matter protesters in London as they marched outside Parliament. Since the protest had ignored government guidelines, he took a test for COVID-19 but tested negative for the virus.

On the backbenches, Gardiner began organising a cross-party effort to bring in legislation banning fire-and-rehire practices by employers. In this role, he helped the Labour whips office to organise the defection of Conservative MP Christian Wakeford to the Labour Party in January 2022.

=== Links to Chinese Communist Party agent ===
In 2017 &quot;The Times&quot; revealed, from September 2015 to February 2017, Gardiner had received £182,284 in disclosed cash donations from Christine Lee &amp; Co, a firm of solicitors which acts as the chief legal adviser to the Chinese embassy. Before this, his constituency party received cash donations from the firm of £22,500 between 2009 and 2015. The paper also revealed part of this money was used to fund the employment of Daniel Wilkes, son of the firm&#x27;s founder Christine Lee, in his parliamentary offices. Gardiner said the son was hired via an open recruitment process and was appointed on merit. Sir Alistair Graham, former chair of the Committee on Standards in Public Life, called the situation &quot;bizarre&quot; and said &quot;there are clearly questions to be answered&quot;. After &quot;The Times&quot; 2017 piece, Gardiner received a further £200,000 from Lee. Gardiner received a total of £425,000 from Lee.

In January 2022 Lee was declared by MI5 to be an agent working for the United Front Work Department of the Chinese Communist Party, who was covertly &quot;involved in political interference activities in the UK&quot;. Lee&#x27;s son was employed by Gardiner&#x27;s constituency office until the MI5 classification was announced. &quot;The Times&quot; said Gardiner generally took a pro-Beijing position in his shadow portfolio dealings, but the donations were disclosed and there was no suggestion of impropriety on Gardiner&#x27;s part. Gardiner wrote a letter saying the amounts he received were used to fund researchers and Lee had no influence in the appointment or management of these individuals.

== In popular culture ==
Gardiner was portrayed by Kevin McMonagle in the 2024 Amazon Prime Video drama series &quot;A Very Royal Scandal&quot;.

== Personal life ==
Gardiner is married to Caroline Anne (née) Smith and has employed her as an office manager and executive secretary. Following the 2017 general election, employing family members was banned for new MPs, however the restriction was not retroactive. They have four children; one of whom, Jacob Gardiner-Smith, is a footballer.

== Honours and awards ==
* 2020: Padma Shri of 

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Guardian Unlimited Politics – Ask Aristotle: Barry Gardiner MP
* Barry Gardiner Allowances


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q391169" start="0" end="23" title="Barry Gardiner" label="Barry Strachan Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="87" end="107" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077540" start="117" end="128" title="Brent North" label="Brent North"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="134" end="138" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q123676540" start="183" end="193" title="Brent West" label="Brent West"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="228" end="240" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="265" end="275" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="311" end="318" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="341" end="354" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639263" start="373" end="412" title="Haileybury and Imperial Service College" label="Haileybury and Imperial Service College"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="436" end="460" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627652" start="479" end="505" title="Student Christian Movement of Great Britain" label="Student Christian Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205829" start="537" end="553" title="Scottish Episcopal Church" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="585" end="603" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q536282" start="634" end="667" title="Corpus Christi College, Cambridge" label="Corpus Christi College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="710" end="719" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797681" start="744" end="761" title="List of mayors of Cambridge" label="mayor of the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q207946" start="825" end="836" title="arbitration" label="arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="879" end="900" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="922" end="932" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396591" start="940" end="950" title="New Labour" label="New Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q218886" start="1019" end="1042" title="Northern Ireland Office" label="Northern Ireland Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q584148" start="1044" end="1076" title="Department of Trade and Industry (United Kingdom)" label="Department of Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044721" start="1081" end="1131" title="Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs" label="Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117085" start="1184" end="1203" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Loyal Opposition" label="Official Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q216594" start="1221" end="1232" title="Ed Miliband" label="Ed Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="1237" end="1250" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q303329" start="1285" end="1299" title="Shadow cabinet" label="Shadow cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460593" start="1303" end="1358" title="Shadow Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change" label="Shadow Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q27961997" start="1409" end="1458" title="Shadow Secretary of State for International Trade" label="Shadow Secretary of State for International Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q25927629" start="1463" end="1511" title="Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy" label="Shadow Minister for International Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="1624" end="1634" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6234860" start="1635" end="1648" title="John Gardiner (footballer, born 1911)" label="John Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="1662" end="1669" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="1778" end="1799" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639263" start="1888" end="1898" title="Haileybury and Imperial Service College" label="Haileybury"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="2015" end="2026" title="Private school" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q386695" start="2027" end="2049" title="High School of Glasgow" label="High School of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639263" start="2054" end="2093" title="Haileybury and Imperial Service College" label="Haileybury and Imperial Service College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="2097" end="2110" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785149" start="2127" end="2155" title="Master of Arts (Scotland)" label="undergraduate Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="2165" end="2189" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627652" start="2267" end="2293" title="Student Christian Movement of Great Britain" label="Student Christian Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="2335" end="2351" title="Episcopal priest" label="Episcopal priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q189280" start="2391" end="2401" title="Democratic socialism" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q739609" start="2406" end="2425" title="Christian socialism" label="Christian socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389684" start="2460" end="2482" title="Kennedy Memorial Trust" label="Kennedy Memorial Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="2518" end="2536" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q172544" start="2543" end="2553" title="John Rawls" label="John Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="2576" end="2584" title="doctoral" label="doctoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q536282" start="2597" end="2630" title="Corpus Christi College, Cambridge" label="Corpus Christi College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025388" start="2692" end="2714" title="Cambridge City Council" label="Cambridge City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797681" start="2732" end="2750" title="Mayor of Cambridge" label="Mayor of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="2782" end="2790" title="Cambridge" label="the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="2868" end="2878" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q17093209" start="2913" end="2931" title="shipping insurance" label="shipping insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q207946" start="2936" end="2947" title="arbitration" label="arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q23306" start="3032" end="3046" title="Greater London" label="Greater London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077540" start="3063" end="3074" title="Brent North" label="Brent North"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="3082" end="3103" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="3129" end="3141" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321005" start="3145" end="3158" title="Rhodes Boyson" label="Rhodes Boyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="3226" end="3239" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735422" start="3253" end="3266" title="maiden speech" label="maiden speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247159" start="3307" end="3326" title="Procedure Committee" label="Procedure Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257298" start="3370" end="3395" title="Public Accounts Committee (United Kingdom)" label="Public Accounts Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3635" end="3640" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="3697" end="3703" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467418" start="3734" end="3758" title="Labour Friends of Israel" label="Labour Friends of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477321" start="3798" end="3829" title="Parliamentary Private Secretary" label="Parliamentary Private Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632935" start="3839" end="3856" title="Minister of State" label="Minister of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="3864" end="3875" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q775059" start="3876" end="3891" title="Beverley Hughes" label="Beverley Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492070" start="3927" end="3965" title="Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State" label="Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q218886" start="3973" end="3996" title="Northern Ireland Office" label="Northern Ireland Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q584148" start="4033" end="4065" title="Department of Trade and Industry (United Kingdom)" label="Department of Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q428598" start="4080" end="4101" title="2005 United Kingdom general election" label="2005 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044721" start="4119" end="4169" title="Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs" label="Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858507" start="4279" end="4297" title="Business Secretary" label="Business Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="4304" end="4318" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="4319" end="4331" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="4904" end="4925" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848097" start="4931" end="4976" title="Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority" label="Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="5482" end="5503" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758439" start="5578" end="5589" title="Andrew Roth" label="Andrew Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="5599" end="5611" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q272670" start="5713" end="5727" title="David Miliband" label="David Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467491" start="5735" end="5772" title="2010 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="2010 Labour Party leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q216594" start="5817" end="5828" title="Ed Miliband" label="Ed Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q259961" start="5929" end="5936" title="Tim Yeo" label="Tim Yeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974806" start="5972" end="5983" title="Energy Act 2013" label="Energy Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267905" start="6022" end="6037" title="low-carbon economy" label="decarbonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="6345" end="6358" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502745" start="6442" end="6460" title="2013 horse meat scandal" label="horse meat scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25572" start="6755" end="6770" title="Hen harrier" label="Hen Harrier Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q23098" start="6789" end="6799" title="Derbyshire" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25572" start="6843" end="6850" title="Hen harrier" label="raptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="6959" end="6965" title="diesel engine" label="diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="7159" end="7172" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647581" start="7177" end="7184" title="2015 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615378" start="7185" end="7211" title="Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="Leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044733" start="7282" end="7321" title="Department of Energy and Climate Change" label="Department of Energy and Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q96384839" start="7335" end="7385" title="2016 British shadow cabinet resignations" label="string of Shadow Cabinet resignations in June 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q578037" start="7405" end="7415" title="Lisa Nandy" label="Lisa Nandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460593" start="7419" end="7474" title="Shadow Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change" label="Shadow Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q27961997" start="7528" end="7577" title="Shadow Secretary of State for International Trade" label="Shadow Secretary of State for International Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q25927629" start="7582" end="7630" title="Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy" label="Shadow Minister for International Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767271" start="7671" end="7708" title="Hinkley Point C nuclear power station" label="Hinkley Point C nuclear power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="7896" end="7907" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="8260" end="8266" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="8274" end="8299" title="US Department of Commerce" label="US Department of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q891779" start="8316" end="8336" title="Bombardier Aerospace" label="Bombardier Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q426074" start="8536" end="8554" title="Bombardier CSeries" label="Bombardier CSeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="8569" end="8584" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="8659" end="8666" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="8866" end="8876" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172508" start="9045" end="9062" title="corporate welfare" label="corporate welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262052" start="9463" end="9478" title="Jamal Khashoggi" label="Jamal Khashoggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="9567" end="9579" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q949193" start="9766" end="9776" title="Padma Shri" label="Padma Shri"/>
<link wikidata="Q19979355" start="9840" end="9859" title="Rebecca Long-Bailey" label="Rebecca Long-Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q78326482" start="9867" end="9904" title="2020 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="2020 Labour Party leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="9916" end="9928" title="Keir Starmer" label="Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="10167" end="10184" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600530" start="10202" end="10220" title="Black Lives Matter" label="Black Lives Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="10350" end="10358" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433693" start="10569" end="10574" title="Whip (politics)" label="whips"/>
<link wikidata="Q76363097" start="10627" end="10645" title="Christian Wakeford" label="Christian Wakeford"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="10745" end="10754" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q14284" start="10907" end="10916" title="solicitor" label="solicitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369936" start="10963" end="10978" title="Embassy of China, London" label="Chinese embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111800037" start="11212" end="11225" title="Christine Lee (lawyer)" label="Christine Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727284" start="11349" end="11368" title="Alistair Graham" label="Sir Alistair Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229734" start="11390" end="11427" title="Committee on Standards in Public Life" label="Committee on Standards in Public Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="11707" end="11710" title="MI5" label="MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274087" start="11742" end="11770" title="United Front Work Department" label="United Front Work Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="11778" end="11801" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="12454" end="12472" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q123510199" start="12492" end="12512" title="A Very Royal Scandal" label="A Very Royal Scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q70276625" start="12826" end="12846" title="Jacob Gardiner-Smith" label="Jacob Gardiner-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q949193" start="12899" end="12909" title="Padma Shri" label="Padma Shri"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416909" wikidata="Q391960" url="?curid=416909" title="Damian Green">
<text>Damian Howard Green (born 17 January 1956) is a British politician who served as First Secretary of State and Minister for the Cabinet Office from June to December 2017 in the second May government. A member of the Conservative Party, he served as Member of Parliament (MP) for Ashford from 1997 to 2024.

Green was born in Barry, Vale of Glamorgan, in Wales and studied philosophy, politics and economics at Balliol College, Oxford. He is married to the barrister Alicia Collinson who was a contemporary of Theresa May at St Hugh&#x27;s College, Oxford.

After working as a journalist for the BBC, Channel 4 and &quot;The Times&quot;, he entered parliament at the 1997 general election by winning the seat of Ashford in Kent.

Green served in several shadow ministerial positions, including Shadow Transport Secretary and Shadow Education and Skills Secretary. He came to national prominence in November 2008 after being arrested and having his parliamentary office raided by police, although no case was brought. He served in the Cameron–Clegg coalition until July 2014, first as Minister of State for Immigration and then as Minister of State for Police and Criminal Justice.

Green was appointed as Secretary of State for Work and Pensions by Prime Minister Theresa May in July 2016. Following the 2017 general election, he was promoted to First Secretary of State and Minister for the Cabinet Office. After the results of an inquiry into allegations that he sexually harassed a woman and viewed pornography on a work computer were published, it was found that he had breached the ministerial code and he was instructed to resign from the cabinet amidst the 2017 Westminster sexual misconduct allegations. He became chair of the One Nation Conservatives caucus following the formation of Boris Johnson&#x27;s government in July 2019. In January 2023, he became acting chair of the Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee after Julian Knight temporarily stood aside, and again in April 2023 after Knight resigned.

At the 2024 general election, Green lost the Ashford constituency to Sojan Joseph of the Labour Party amidst a strong nationwide swing from the Conservatives. This represented the first time since 1929 that the seat had returned a non-Conservative MP.

==Early life and education==
Damian Green was born in Barry, Glamorgan, Wales. He grew up in Reading and was educated at Reading School.

Green studied philosophy, politics and economics at Balliol College, Oxford. He was president of the Oxford Union in 1977 and was the vice-chairman of the Federation of Conservative Students (now known as Conservative Future) from 1980 until 1982.

During his time at Oxford, Green broke a wrist after a group of fellow students ambushed him and threw him into the River Cherwell. Reportedly the group included Dominic Grieve, who was later to serve alongside Green as a cabinet minister.

==Early career==
In 1978, Green was appointed by BBC Radio as a financial journalist, before joining &quot;Channel 4 News&quot; as a business producer in 1982. He joined &quot;The Times&quot; for a year in 1984 as the business news editor before returning to television journalism and Channel 4 as the business editor in 1985. He became the City editor and presenter on Channel 4&#x27;s &quot;Business Daily&quot; television programme in 1987 until he left television to join Prime Minister John Major&#x27;s Policy Unit in 1992. Green had acted as an occasional speechwriter for Major since 1988. He left 10 Downing Street in 1994 to run his own consultancy in public affairs.

==Political career==
Green stood unsuccessfully for election in Brent East at the 1992 general election, where he came second with 36.6% of the vote behind the incumbent Labour MP Ken Livingstone.

At the 1997 general election, Green was elected as MP for Ashford, winning with 41.4% of the vote and a majority of 5,345. He made his maiden speech on 20 May 1997. He was re-elected as MP for Ashford at the 2001 general election with an increased vote share of 47.4% and an increased majority of 7,359. At the 2005 general election, Green was again re-elected with an increased vote share of 51.6% and an increased majority of 13,298. At the 2010 general election, Green was again re-elected with an increased vote share of 54.1% and an increased majority of 17,297.

Green is an advocate of allowing illegal immigrants to return to the UK sooner. He has supported voluntary return for overstayers and other migrants in order to avoid deportation, claiming &quot;we expect those with no right to be in the country to leave voluntarily&quot;. In 2011, in his role as Immigration Minister, he relaxed a five-year re-entry ban to two years He has stated that the illegal immigrants being in the UK for a &quot;shorter period of time&quot; was a positive and &quot;saves money&quot;, although children kept being detained.

At the 2015 general election, Green was again re-elected, with a decreased vote share of 52.5% and an increased majority of 19,296.

Green was opposed to Brexit prior to the 2016 EU membership referendum.

Green is chairman of Parliamentary Mainstream, a vice-president of the Tory Reform Group and is a vice-chairman of the John Smith Memorial Trust.

At the snap 2017 general election, Green was again re-elected, with an increased vote share of 59% and a decreased majority of 17,478. He was again re-elected at the 2019 general election, with an increased vote share of 62.1% and an increased majority of 24,029.

===Shadow ministerial career===
While a backbencher, he was a member of the Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee from 1997 until his appointment to the frontbench by William Hague in 1998 as a spokesman on education and employment. He spoke on the environment from 1999 and was promoted to the shadow cabinet by Iain Duncan Smith in 2001 as the Shadow Secretary of State for Education and Skills.

In 2003, Michael Howard gave him the position of Shadow Secretary of State for Transport. In September 2004, he left the frontbench altogether of his own accord and joined the Home Affairs Select Committee.

Following the 2005 general election, Green returned to the shadow frontbench under the leadership of David Cameron as a spokesman on home affairs and shadow minister for immigration.

Whilst sitting as an MP he was a non-executive director of Mid Kent Water from 2005 to 2007, and of its successor company South East Water until 2010. Between July 2009 and February 2010, Green was paid £16,666.64 for 112 hours by South East Water for &quot;attending meetings and offering advice&quot; according to the House of Commons Record of Members Interests. 

===Police Minister===
As Police Minister in the coalition government, Green called for increased partnerships between the police and the private sector. 

===Theresa May ministry===
Green was appointed as Secretary of State for Work and Pensions by Theresa May in July 2016.

He was appointed as First Secretary of State on 11 June 2017 following the 2017 general election, effectively making him May&#x27;s deputy. He was also promoted to Minister for the Cabinet Office.

===Candidacy for the 2024 election===

With the 2023 boundary review foreshadowing substantial changes to the Ashford constituency, Green sought selection for the new seat of Weald of Kent. On 19 February 2023 he announced on Twitter that he had been unsuccessful. On 28 February he announced that he would seek selection for the revised seat of Ashford. Green&#x27;s selection for Ashford was confirmed on 31 March 2023.

Green came second in the Ashford constituency at the 2024 UK general election.

== Controversies ==

===2008 arrest===
Green was arrested by the Metropolitan Police at his constituency home on 27 November 2008 on suspicion of &quot;aiding and abetting misconduct in public office&quot; and &quot;conspiring to commit misconduct in a public office&quot;. The documents were reported to include information politically embarrassing to the then-Labour government. He was later released on bail. In a statement to parliament on 3 December, Michael Martin, Speaker of the House of Commons, responsible for the security of the Palace of Westminster, stated that although the police undertaking the search had neither presented a search warrant nor given &quot;the requisite advice that such a warrant was necessary&quot;, the search of the Parliamentary office had been undertaken with the express written consent of the Serjeant-at-Arms, Jill Pay, who had signed a consent form without consulting the Clerk of the House.

The arrest led to speculation about the apparent coincidence that it was authorised on the last day in office of Metropolitan Police Commissioner Sir Ian Blair. It was criticised by political figures and journalists. It was reported in &quot;The Andrew Marr Show&quot; that he believed he was the subject of a bugging operation, which would have required the authorisation of the Home Secretary. Jacqui Smith stated that she had not granted any such order. Green&#x27;s constituency agent subsequently confirmed that a search of Green&#x27;s property and car had been commissioned, but that no listening devices were discovered.

A junior Home Office civil servant, Christopher Galley, subsequently admitted leaking four &quot;embarrassing&quot; documents to Green and was sacked. On 16 April 2009, the Crown Prosecution Service announced that it was not going to bring a case against either Green or Galley as there was &quot;insufficient evidence&quot;.

===Expenses claims===
During the UK parliamentary expenses scandal &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; newspaper revealed that, although Green&#x27;s constituency is a 45-minute commute from Westminster, he claimed expenses for a designated second home in Acton, west London. Green has regularly claimed expenses up to the maximum of £400 for food. He has also claimed for the interest on his mortgage, for his council tax, and for his phone bills.

===Sexual harassment and pornography allegations===

During the 2017 Westminster sexual scandals revelations, a Cabinet Office inquiry was started into allegations Green sent suggestive text messages and &quot;fleetingly&quot; touched the knee of a young Conservative activist. He disputes this, stating it&#x27;s &quot;absolutely and completely untrue that I’ve ever made any sexual advances on Ms [Kate] Maltby&quot;. Both Baroness Kennedy and journalist Rosamund Urwin stated that Maltby had made the claims to them over a year before making them public. Urwin published Facebook messages and time stamps, showing that Maltby had complained to her, and detailed her earlier experience with Green, within four minutes of receiving what she reported as an “inappropriate” text message from Green in 2016.

During this investigation, allegations emerged that pornography had been found on Green&#x27;s work computer when he was arrested over leaks in 2008. He said this was a &quot;political smear&quot;. The police detective computer forensics expert who examined the computer when Green was arrested rebutted this in early December 2017, stating: &quot;The computer was in Mr Green’s office, on his desk, logged in, his account, his name ... it was ridiculous to suggest anybody else could have done it&quot;. In December 2017 the police expert was being investigated by Scotland Yard for keeping copies of confidential material, unrelated to the case he was working on, and then releasing it to the public. Green denied that he downloaded or looked at such images. Green said that the claims made by the retired Bob Quick were &quot;political smears&quot;. Metropolitan Police Commissioner Paul Stephenson confirmed that he was informed about the matter at the time but regarded it as a &quot;side issue&quot;.

On 20 December 2017, Green was removed from his position as First Secretary of State; it was found that he had lied to colleagues over pornography found on his computer. The report concluded that Green&#x27;s conduct as a minister had &quot;generally been both professional and proper&quot;, but that regarding the allegations by Maltby, although the private nature of their meetings meant that it was &quot;not possible to reach a definitive conclusion&quot; regarding his behaviour towards her, the report found her account to be &quot;plausible&quot;. In his resignation letter, Green said that he deeply regretted the distress to Maltby that the reaction to her article about him had caused, and although maintaining that he did not recognise the events described in it, he &quot;clearly made her feel uncomfortable&quot; and apologised for doing so. Theresa May had asked him to resign and accepted his resignation. She stated she had &quot;greatly appreciated&quot; his hard work and contribution to her team and that it was &quot;right&quot; that he had apologised to Maltby.

A few days later, Green faced calls to stand down as an MP, following the disclosure of a &quot;dirty tricks&quot; campaign which appeared to target his accuser. It emerged that text messages passed to the &quot;Mail on Sunday&quot;, allegedly sent between Maltby and Green before she made her complaint, had been edited and rewritten in order to inaccurately suggest that Maltby, rather than Green, had encouraged a continued close relationship and solicited a meeting between the two. After contacting Maltby prior to publication, the &quot;Mail on Sunday&quot; corrected one series of messages and the newspaper later issued a further post-publication correction acknowledging that it had published a second forged message and falsely attributed it to her. The faked message and subsequent article falsely accused of her of having flirtatiously texted Green that she regretted his absence from his party, because in his stead one of his aides had &quot;been smooching the room on your behalf x&quot;.

The Conservative MP Anna Soubry, previously an ally of Green, told the &quot;Sunday Times&quot; that attempts to smear Maltby were &quot;wrong and shameful&quot;. Another Conservative MP said: &quot;It appears that Green&#x27;s allies barely paused for breath after he apologised for the distress caused to Kate Maltby before launching an attack. It smacks of a dirty tricks campaign and is unhelpful to the government when it is still dealing with the fallout of the Westminster harassment scandal.&quot; Maltby and her supporters had accused Green of also being behind a negative, anonymously-briefed attack on her written by the &quot;Daily Mail&quot; journalist Andrew Pierce. Her parents, in a statement, responded angrily to claims made by Pierce that they disapproved of her actions and condemned &quot;the attempted campaign in certain sections of the media to denigrate and intimidate her and other witnesses&quot;.

Writing in the &quot;Sunday Times&quot;, Maltby alleged that the &quot;Daily Mail&quot; attack had been coordinated by Green&#x27;s team and formed part of a broader strategy of witness intimidation. Maltby alleged that two other women had intended to make allegations against Green, but &quot;as a result&quot; of the &quot;Daily Mail&quot;″ coverage of her own complaint, &quot;immediately backed out&quot;. In May 2018, the &quot;Daily Mail&quot; paid £11,000 towards Maltby&#x27;s legal costs after she prepared to go to court regarding Pierce&#x27;s article. The article was removed from the &quot;Mail&quot;″s website without an admission of fault.

==Publications==
* &quot;ITN Budget Factbook&quot;, 1984, ITN
* &quot;ITN Budget Factbook&quot;, 1985, ITN
* &quot;ITN Budget Factbook&quot;, 1986, ITN
* &quot;Better BBC: Public Service Broadcasting in the &#x27;90s&quot;, 1990, Centre for Policy Studies 
* &quot;Freedom of the Airwaves&quot;, 1990, CPC 
* &quot;Communities in the Countryside&quot;, 1995. 
* &quot;The Cross Media Revolution: Ownership and Control&quot;, Edited by Damian Green, 1995, University of Luton Press 
* &quot;Regulating the Media in the Digital Age&quot;, 1997, European Media Forum
* &quot;21st Century Conservatism&quot;, 1998
* &quot;The Four Failures of the New Deal&quot;, 1998, Centre for Policy Studies 

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==

* Damian Green MP &quot;official constituency website&quot;
* 





|-


|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q391960" start="0" end="19" title="Damian Green" label="Damian Howard Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068024" start="81" end="105" title="First Secretary of State" label="First Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865995" start="110" end="141" title="Minister for the Cabinet Office" label="Minister for the Cabinet Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q30178117" start="176" end="197" title="second May government" label="second May government"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="215" end="233" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="248" end="268" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q751068" start="278" end="285" title="Ashford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="291" end="295" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="299" end="303" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q809009" start="324" end="348" title="Barry, Vale of Glamorgan" label="Barry, Vale of Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="353" end="358" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777850" start="371" end="405" title="philosophy, politics and economics" label="philosophy, politics and economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="409" end="432" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="508" end="519" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q128497" start="523" end="553" title="St Hugh&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="St Hugh&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="594" end="597" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="599" end="608" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="619" end="628" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="665" end="686" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q751068" start="710" end="717" title="Ashford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="721" end="725" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460600" start="792" end="818" title="Shadow Transport Secretary" label="Shadow Transport Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460592" start="823" end="860" title="Shadow Secretary of State for Education and Skills" label="Shadow Education and Skills Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="1032" end="1055" title="Cameron–Clegg coalition" label="Cameron–Clegg coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q125590038" start="1082" end="1115" title="Minister of State for Immigration" label="Minister of State for Immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865933" start="1128" end="1177" title="Minister of State for Police" label="Minister of State for Police and Criminal Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444357" start="1203" end="1243" title="Secretary of State for Work and Pensions" label="Secretary of State for Work and Pensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="1262" end="1273" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052149" start="1302" end="1323" title="2017 United Kingdom general election" label="2017 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q55713844" start="1627" end="1650" title="List of resignations from the Second May ministry" label="resign from the cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42808655" start="1662" end="1708" title="2017 Westminster sexual misconduct allegations" label="2017 Westminster sexual misconduct allegations"/>
<link wikidata="Q85790741" start="1733" end="1764" title="One Nation Conservatives (caucus)" label="One Nation Conservatives caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="1792" end="1805" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q104900386" start="1885" end="1928" title="Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee" label="Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647567" start="1935" end="1948" title="Julian Knight (politician)" label="Julian Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="2029" end="2050" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q126847692" start="2091" end="2103" title="Sojan Joseph" label="Sojan Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="2111" end="2123" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q517639" start="2219" end="2223" title="1929 United Kingdom general election" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q809009" start="2329" end="2334" title="Barry, Vale of Glamorgan" label="Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q870815" start="2336" end="2345" title="Glamorgan" label="Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="2368" end="2375" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300559" start="2396" end="2410" title="Reading School" label="Reading School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777850" start="2427" end="2461" title="philosophy, politics and economics" label="philosophy, politics and economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="2465" end="2488" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157937" start="2514" end="2526" title="Oxford Union" label="Oxford Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440778" start="2568" end="2603" title="Federation of Conservative Students" label="Federation of Conservative Students"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163043" start="2618" end="2637" title="Conservative Future" label="Conservative Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q332994" start="2824" end="2838" title="Dominic Grieve" label="Dominic Grieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="2952" end="2961" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707372" start="3010" end="3024" title="Channel 4 News" label="Channel 4 News"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="3079" end="3088" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="3244" end="3248" title="City of London" label="City"/>
<link wikidata="Q25183362" start="3296" end="3310" title="Business Daily (TV programme)" label="Business Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="3394" end="3404" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="3509" end="3526" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978655" start="3550" end="3561" title="consultancy" label="consultancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q546113" start="3565" end="3579" title="Public policy" label="public affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q126877467" start="3646" end="3656" title="Brent East" label="Brent East"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="3664" end="3685" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="1992 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="3752" end="3758" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q220723" start="3762" end="3777" title="Ken Livingstone" label="Ken Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="3787" end="3808" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q751068" start="3838" end="3845" title="Ashford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735422" start="3915" end="3928" title="maiden speech" label="maiden speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="3988" end="4009" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q428598" start="4091" end="4112" title="2005 United Kingdom general election" label="2005 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="4223" end="4244" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q20380176" start="4446" end="4462" title="voluntary return" label="voluntary return"/>
<link wikidata="Q379693" start="4516" end="4527" title="deportation" label="deportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="4908" end="4929" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="5055" end="5061" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="5075" end="5104" title="2016 EU membership referendum" label="2016 EU membership referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827492" start="5178" end="5195" title="Tory Reform Group" label="Tory Reform Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052149" start="5266" end="5287" title="2017 United Kingdom general election" label="2017 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="5420" end="5441" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q731591" start="5559" end="5570" title="backbencher" label="backbencher"/>
<link wikidata="Q104900386" start="5595" end="5636" title="Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee" label="Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981489" start="5676" end="5686" title="frontbench" label="frontbench"/>
<link wikidata="Q58282" start="5690" end="5703" title="William Hague" label="William Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="5772" end="5783" title="Natural environment" label="environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q303329" start="5818" end="5832" title="Shadow Cabinet" label="shadow cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q302486" start="5836" end="5853" title="Iain Duncan Smith" label="Iain Duncan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q325381" start="5931" end="5945" title="Michael Howard" label="Michael Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152450" start="6098" end="6127" title="Home Affairs Select Committee" label="Home Affairs Select Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="6231" end="6244" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567143" start="6436" end="6452" title="South East Water" label="South East Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444357" start="6887" end="6927" title="Secretary of State for Work and Pensions" label="Secretary of State for Work and Pensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="6931" end="6942" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068024" start="6978" end="7002" title="First Secretary of State" label="First Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052149" start="7033" end="7054" title="2017 United Kingdom general election" label="2017 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865995" start="7122" end="7153" title="Minister for the Cabinet Office" label="Minister for the Cabinet Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q97358891" start="7204" end="7224" title="2023 periodic review of Westminster constituencies" label="2023 boundary review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="7724" end="7743" title="Metropolitan Police" label="Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q332576" start="8115" end="8129" title="Michael Martin, Baron Martin of Springburn" label="Michael Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q464103" start="8131" end="8162" title="Speaker of the House of Commons (United Kingdom)" label="Speaker of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770743" start="8302" end="8316" title="search warrant" label="search warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454937" start="8494" end="8510" title="Serjeant at Arms of the British House of Commons" label="Serjeant-at-Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6193004" start="8512" end="8520" title="Jill Pay" label="Jill Pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131870" start="8575" end="8593" title="Clerk of the House of Commons" label="Clerk of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q335858" start="8746" end="8755" title="Ian Blair" label="Ian Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713706" start="8838" end="8858" title="The Andrew Marr Show" label="The Andrew Marr Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q320765" start="8906" end="8913" title="bugging" label="bugging"/>
<link wikidata="Q237217" start="8992" end="9004" title="Jacqui Smith" label="Jacqui Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141790" start="9399" end="9424" title="Crown Prosecution Service" label="Crown Prosecution Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164580" start="9586" end="9619" title="UK parliamentary expenses scandal" label="UK parliamentary expenses scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="9626" end="9645" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q42808655" start="10063" end="10095" title="2017 Westminster sexual scandals" label="2017 Westminster sexual scandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q337151" start="10424" end="10440" title="Helena Kennedy, Baroness Kennedy of The Shaws" label="Baroness Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933705" start="11614" end="11623" title="Bob Quick (police officer)" label="Bob Quick"/>
<link wikidata="Q9057041" start="11692" end="11707" title="Paul Stephenson (police officer)" label="Paul Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068024" start="11874" end="11898" title="First Secretary of State" label="First Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463285" start="13110" end="13124" title="Mail on Sunday" label="Mail on Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q389855" start="13923" end="13934" title="Anna Soubry" label="Anna Soubry"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="13980" end="13992" title="Sunday Times" label="Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="14541" end="14551" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758274" start="14569" end="14582" title="Andrew Pierce" label="Andrew Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210241" start="15543" end="15546" title="ITN" label="ITN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054214" start="15715" end="15740" title="Centre for Policy Studies" label="Centre for Policy Studies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416912" wikidata="Q2304090" url="?curid=416912" title="The Church of Jesus Christ (Bickertonite)">
<text>The Church of Jesus Christ is an international Christian religious denomination headquartered in Monongahela, Pennsylvania, United States. The church is a Christian Restorationist church and accepts the Book of Mormon as scripture. The church considers itself the gospel restored, or the original church and good news as established by Jesus Christ in the New Testament, restored upon the earth. It also claims to be the spiritual successor to the Church of Christ, organized by Joseph Smith on April 6, 1830. The church sees Sidney Rigdon as Smith&#x27;s rightful successor following the assassination of Smith because Rigdon was Smith&#x27;s first counselor in the First Presidency. The church is not officially affiliated with any other church, organization or denomination.

As of August 2023, church membership totaled 22,992. The Church of Jesus Christ is considered &quot;the third largest Restoration church to have resulted from the 1844 succession crisis&quot;, describing Joseph Smith&#x27;s death that year without a clear line of succession. It has sometimes been referred to as a &quot;Bickertonite church&quot; or &quot;Rigdonite organization&quot; based upon the church&#x27;s historical succession through William Bickerton and Sidney Rigdon. However, the church does not use these terms in referring to itself.

The stated purpose of the church is &quot;to share the gift of salvation through Jesus Christ, His promises and His redeeming love with all nations and races throughout the world and to carry out God’s plans in the latter days.&quot; 
==Mission and purpose==

Stated mission:
* &quot;The Church of Jesus Christ will teach the Gospel to all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things commanded by Jesus Christ, while working to draw Israel to Christ through efforts focused on the indigenous peoples of North, Central, and South America.&quot;
Stated purpose:
* &quot;To fulfill the plan of God by bringing salvation through Christ to all people.&quot;

Stated vision:
* &quot;Living and worshipping in unity and righteousness will result in the fullness of God’s spirit and power among the saints, culminating in continuous growth of the Church and fulfillment of Christ’s promises concerning His kingdom on Earth.&quot;

==Use of descriptive terms==
The church refers to itself only as &quot;The Church of Jesus Christ&quot;, its legal and official name. This name comes from Jesus Christ&#x27;s words in the text of the Book of Mormon, who names his church after himself. The Church of Jesus Christ believes itself to be the restored self-same church as established in both the New Testament and Book of Mormon. The belief system of being Jesus Christ&#x27;s church upon the earth is the reason for avoiding any other names as descriptive terms, even in a historical context.

The church is sometimes referred to as a &quot;Bickertonite&quot; or &quot;Rigdonite&quot; organization by non-members, and occasionally used in scholarly works to distinguish from other denominations with similar names. These terms have reference to the church tracing its historical succession through William Bickerton and Sidney Rigdon. The use of these terms are discouraged by the church as detracting from Jesus Christ. Although the church acknowledges the Book of Mormon to be scripture, it does not consider itself to be a &quot;Mormon church&quot; as it is distinct from the largest Latter Day Saint church, based in Utah.

==History==


The Church of Jesus Christ sees itself as a continuation of the Church of Christ, which was the original church organization established by Joseph Smith informally in 1829 and then as a legal entity on April 6, 1830 in northwestern New York. On April 6, 1830, Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and a group of approximately 30 believers met to formally organize the Church of Christ into a legal institution. Traditionally, this is said to have occurred at the home of Peter Whitmer Sr. in Fayette, New York, but some early accounts place it in Manchester. Soon after this formal organization, small branches were formally established in Fayette, Manchester and Colesville.

Smith and his associates intended that the Church of Christ would be a restoration of the 1st-century Christian church, which Smith taught had fallen from God&#x27;s favor and authority because of a Great Apostasy. In late 1830, Smith envisioned a &quot;city of Zion&quot; in Native American lands near Independence, Missouri. In October 1830, he sent his second-in-command Oliver Cowdery and others on a mission to the area. Passing through Kirtland, Ohio, the missionaries converted a congregation of Disciples of Christ led by Sidney Rigdon, and in 1831, Smith decided to temporarily move his followers to Kirtland until the Missouri area could be colonized. The church headquarters remained in Kirtland from 1831 to 1838.

Many of Smith&#x27;s followers attempted to colonize Missouri throughout the 1830s, and Smith himself moved there in 1838. The church faced political and military opposition by other Missouri settlers. After the Mormon War of 1838, the religion was expelled from Missouri under an Extermination Order signed by the governor. The church then established its new headquarters in Nauvoo, Illinois, a city they built on drained swampland by the Mississippi River, where Smith served as mayor. There, the church thrived until Smith and his brother Hyrum were killed by a mob in 1844. They were in prison awaiting trial for crimes related to the destruction of the printing press of the &quot;Nauvoo Expositor&quot;. At the time, Smith was a minor candidate for President of the United States with Rigdon as his running mate.

After Smith was killed in 1844, there was confusion about who should succeed him in leading the church. Many of the leaders of the church were absent from Nauvoo at the time of his death, serving as missionaries or working on Smith&#x27;s presidential campaign. Rigdon was in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, when he heard of Smith&#x27;s death, and hurried back to Nauvoo, becoming one of the first church leaders to return. He quickly announced that he had the right to lead the church as its &quot;guardian&quot; until proper proceedings could decide the next church president, and that the Quorum of the Twelve did not have the right to lead the church. Rigdon, like the Twelve, had been ordained by Smith as a &quot;prophet, seer, and revelator&quot;.

The Church of Jesus Christ maintains that the First Presidency had made nearly all the major decisions and led the Church of Christ prior to Smith&#x27;s death, and as first counselor to Smith at the time of Smith&#x27;s death, Rigdon should naturally have been the leader of the church after Smith&#x27;s death.

The Latter Day Saints who followed Rigdon separated themselves from the majority of the members, who followed Brigham Young and the Quorum of the Twelve. Rigdon and his followers settled in Monongahela, Pennsylvania. On April 6, 1845, Rigdon presided over a conference of the Church of Christ, which he saw as the rightful continuation of the church founded by Smith. William Bickerton was among those converted by Rigdon&#x27;s preaching, and was baptized at Monongahela in 1845. Later that same year, Bickerton was ordained an elder and shortly after an evangelist in the church. Rigdon&#x27;s organization disbanded shortly afterwards.

Bickerton continued to preach and by May 1851 a branch of the church was organized under Bickerton&#x27;s leadership in West Elizabeth, Pennsylvania. At a conference on July 9, 1861, it was recorded that twelve of their number were chosen and called by the Holy Spirit to be apostles. The church was incorporated in Pittsburgh in June 1865 with the legal name, &quot;Church of Jesus Christ of Green Oak, Pennsylvania.&quot; On April 5, 1941, the church was granted the name of &quot;The Church of Jesus Christ&quot; by Washington County, Pennsylvania. The church today is registered as &quot;The Church of Jesus Christ&quot; in the corporate registry of the state of Pennsylvania.

==Organizational structure and membership==

The Church of Jesus Christ is organized with twelve apostles, seventy evangelists (see Quorum of Seventy Evangelists), and elders as ordained offices within the general priesthood. Teachers, deacons and deaconesses are also ordained offices within the church. The church structures itself as closely as possible to the New Testament church according to the 4th and 5th articles of the Faith and Doctrine of The Church of Jesus Christ. Apostles lead the church; evangelists preach to the world; elders serve their various branches and missions. Teachers visit the membership, teach, and preach or lead services when elders are not present.  All of these offices are considered the &quot;ministry&quot; of the church.

The church presidency is composed of apostles including the president of the church, first and second counselors. The president of the church and his two counselors are elected by the general priesthood in conference and selected from among the Quorum of Twelve Apostles. The president of the church, while being an ordained apostle, along with his counselors, also apostles, oversee the general operations of the church. In contrast, the Quorum of Twelve Apostles has its own president and officers elected among themselves, independent of the general priesthood. The Quorum of Twelve is primarily responsible for guiding the spiritual growth and development of the church in general, acting as advisers to key operating committees.

Today, The Church of Jesus Christ has a total worldwide membership of 23,200, with nearly 3,000 located in the United States.

==Doctrines and practices==
The Church of Jesus Christ is independent of any other church in the Latter Day Saint movement. The Church of Jesus Christ has long rejected plural marriage, celestial marriage, two separate priesthoods, and many other doctrines taught by some other Latter Day Saint movement denominations. The Church of Jesus Christ teaches that many of the doctrines and revelations Joseph Smith taught were not from God and were contrary to the Bible and the Book of Mormon. The church also teaches that many of the Latter Day Saint denominations fell into error by following these revelations. The Church of Jesus Christ views the nature of God as explained in the Bible and Book of Mormon, which the church distinguishes from the views taught by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

===Nature of God===
Godhead: The Church of Jesus Christ believes, &quot;...in God, the Eternal Father, and His Son, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit. These three are the great matchless power that rules all things visible and invisible, for it is of Him and through Him that we receive all things both for this life, and that which is to come.&quot;

* God the Father: God the Father, or God Almighty, is believed to be a personage of Glory.
* Jesus Christ: Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the &quot;...express image of the Father...&quot; who &quot;...came from the bosom of the Father, was born of the Virgin Mary...became man and suffered and died for the sins of the whole world.&quot; The church believes in the physical life, crucifixion, resurrection and ascension of Jesus Christ who they believe now sits at the right hand of God the Father.
* Holy Spirit: The Holy Spirit is considered to be a spirit and the very mind of the Father and the Son. He is not considered to be a personage itself, but can take upon himself many forms. &quot;God, through His spirit, can be everywhere. He can observe and penetrate any part of the universe of His creation. This does not mean that God is physically everywhere, but His spirit, which is in communication with all things at all times, is everywhere. It is like the fragrance of a beautiful bouquet of flowers that permeates an entire house, although it is only in one room.&quot; It is considered to be the Power, Glory and Witness as referenced in New Testament Scriptures.

===Scriptures===
The Church of Jesus Christ teaches that the New Testament scriptures contain a true description of the church as established by Jesus Christ. The church teaches that this church is set up to be sufficient for life and salvation to all humankind. Both the Bible and Book of Mormon are considered to be the inspired word of God. All doctrines and faith of the church are referenced with these two books. No other books are accepted as scripture.

===Salvation===
The Church of Jesus Christ teaches that the church as set up by Christ in the New Testament contains all doctrines and practices essential for salvation. Adherents believe that the church today should contain every element of the early church. Humankind will be punished according to their own sins and not the sins of Adam and Eve. The church believes that in order to obtain salvation, one must obey the Gospel by fulfilling the commandment of Jesus Christ.

===Principles of the gospel===

#Faith – Members must believe in Jesus Christ, that He died and was resurrected.
#Repentance – A feeling of sorrow for sin and desire to sin no more.
#Baptism (Water) – Done by immersion in water in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost for the remission of sins. Immersion is considered being buried in likeness of the death of Christ and arising in newness of life. The church teaches that baptism must be in a natural body of water such as a river or lake, and not in a pool or other artificial structure.
#Laying on of hands to receive the Holy Ghost – The priesthood lay hands on the head of the candidate for this reception after the baptism of water.
#Enduring to the End – Members must strive to serve God to the best of their ability for the rest of their time on this earth.

===Priesthood and church structure===
The Church of Jesus Christ teaches that the structure of the early church and that apostles, evangelists, elders, teachers, and deacons should still lead the church today. Apostles, Evangelists, and Elders are called after the holy order of the priesthood of Jesus Christ and have the responsibility to perform ordinances based on the example Jesus Christ provided as recorded in the Bible and The Book of Mormon. These three offices make up &quot;The Priesthood&quot;. The leadership is not considered a hierarchy, but rather the church holds that those with greater responsibility are called to greater service, and the most important calling within the church is that of a member. The priesthood is responsible for the spiritual well-being of the church. As with most Restoration denominations, elders are never referred to as &quot;Father&quot; or &quot;Reverend&quot;, as the belief of the church is that scripture forbids this practice (Matthew 23:9). Elders and all church officials (including the Church Presidency and Quorum of Apostles) receive no financial remuneration for their activities.

Teachers, deacons, and deaconesses are also called to support the ministry. Teachers, while considered a part of the broader ministry, cannot perform any ordinances. Their responsibilities include visiting the membership, teaching, and preaching or leading services when elders are not present. Deacons and deaconesses visit the sick, widows, and attend to many physical and spiritual duties for each branch of the church. Deaconesses also set the sacrament table and attend to the needs and development of the women of the church. Although women may serve as deaconesses in the church, in accordance with the church&#x27;s interpretation of the scriptures, only men may become elders. Deaconesses do not have priesthood authority.

In worship services, members of the priesthood do not prepare written sermons prior to the meeting. Instead, the priesthood strives to speak under the inspiration from the Holy Spirit. Each week, church services begin with preaching from the priesthood and generally followed by a testimony portion of the meeting, during which time members of the congregation (and visitors) are given the opportunity to &quot;praise God for what He has done for them.&quot;

According to the doctrine of the church, all ordained offices are called to their positions by revelation. No office within the church is paid, including the ministry. 

===Joseph Smith===

The Church of Jesus Christ considers Joseph Smith to have been an instrument in the hands of God in the restoration of the gospel. The Church of Jesus Christ believes that many revelations began to enter into the church through Smith that were contrary to the scriptures and the will of God. In contrast with other Latter Day Saint denominations, the church does not believe that Smith was the &quot;choice seer&quot; predicted by the Book of Mormon (). Its members are still awaiting the coming of the choice seer whom many in the organization believe will be of Native American heritage.

One of the key reasons why The Church of Jesus Christ believes Smith received many revelations contrary to the word of God was described by one of the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon, David Whitmer. A revelation received by Smith to go to Toronto for business turned into a bankrupt expedition. Smith then was reportedly given a revelation clarifying that, &quot;Some revelations are of God: some revelations are of men: and some revelations are of the devil.&quot; Thus, in order to strictly adhere to God&#x27;s will, The Church of Jesus Christ only accepts revelation as supported by the Bible and the Book of Mormon. On this matter, church leader William Cadman wrote:

&quot;There has been much said about Joseph Smith ... [A]ll people who manifest faith in the Restored Gospel of Jesus Christ, which includes the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, do acknowledge him to be inspired of God when but a youth ... He has been a much accused man, whether truly or falsely, eternity will reveal. If he taught plural marriage ... plural Gods, baptism for the dead, the Book of Mormon does not sustain him, neither does the teachings of our Savior in the New Testament ... The Church of Jesus Christ does not believe such teachings.&quot;
===Ordinances===
Members of The Church of Jesus Christ perform many ordinances as found in the New Testament and the Book of Mormon. Baptism, the Lord&#x27;s Supper/Communion, feet washing, and others are all ways to remember Jesus Christ. The church claims these ordinances demonstrate remembrance, love, and humility before God and each other.

Like many Christian denominations, the church uses bread and wine for the Lord&#x27;s Supper/Communion, which represents the body and blood of Christ, which it believes was sacrificed for the sins of humankind. Although the Book of Mormon provides an example of an appropriate prayer for communion ( and ), the ministry does not recite them verbatim and instead follows the &quot;inspiration of the Holy Spirit&quot; for the communion prayers. A first prayer is given prior to passing the bread and then another is offered prior to passing the wine. The communion is administered only to active, baptized members of the church. The wine is served in a communal cup. The ministers serve the congregation by walking around to each person in their seats, first with plate of bread and then with the cup of wine. The bread is not wafers or crackers, but leavened bread that has been broken into small pieces by the ministry during the ordinance. The ministers are the last to partake of the bread and the wine after the congregation has been served.

Church members follow the ordinance of feet washing () four times a year as a demonstration of personal humility. The church believes that this is a very important ordinance, citing Jesus&#x27; statement to Peter: &quot;If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me.&quot; Church members greet each other with a &quot;holy kiss&quot;, preferably on the cheek, to signify that they are greeting each other in the love of God, in accordance with the description given in the King James Version of the New Testament. Members of the church believe in the gifts of the Spirit, as described in their scriptures. These include but are not limited to: the word of wisdom, the word of knowledge, faith, healing, prophecy, discernment, witnessing of angels, speaking in tongues, and the interpretation of divers tongues.

===Other===
Members of the church refer to each other as &quot;Brother&quot; and &quot;Sister.&quot; The church counsels members to be moderate in all things including their dress and appearance.

The church believes that little children have no need of baptism to obtain salvation, as they are without sin, and are commonly blessed by the priesthood. Young people are permitted to join the church when they reach an age of accountability and have a desire to obey the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Elders perform administration to the sick through the laying on of hands, using oil if the illness is physical.

The church believes that serving God and following Jesus is a &quot;365 day per year activity&quot;, not just a Sunday activity. Chapels of the church do not contain altars or crosses.

The Church of Jesus Christ teaches that hymns are often revealed through divine inspiration for the edification of the church. The hymnal &quot;The Songs of Zion&quot; consists of hymns that were given to a church member, Arlene Lea Buffington, through divine inspiration. The church also uses &quot;The Saints Hymnal&quot;, which contains many hymns sung in traditional Christian churches as well as hymns of the restoration. Many congregations also use additional hymnals from other Christian organizations.

The church maintains a publishing house in Greensburg, Pennsylvania, and prints its own edition of the Book of Mormon. The church publishes a monthly periodical called &quot;The Gospel News&quot;.

==Racial integration==

The Church of Jesus Christ has advocated full racial integration throughout all aspects of the church since its organization in 1862. While North America disputed over civil liberties and racial segregation, the church directed its message towards all races. In 1905, the church suspended an elder for opposing the full integration of all races.

Historian Dale Morgan wrote in 1949: &quot;An interesting feature of the Church&#x27;s doctrine is that it discriminates in no way against ... members of other racial groups, who are fully admitted to all the privileges of the priesthood. It has taken a strong stand for human rights, and was, for example, uncompromisingly against the Ku Klux Klan during that organization&#x27;s period of ascendancy after the First World War.&quot;

At a time when racial segregation or discrimination was commonplace in most institutions throughout North America, two of the most prominent leaders of The Church of Jesus Christ were African American. Apostle John Penn, member of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles from 1910 to 1955, conducted missionary work with many Italian Americans, and was often referred to as &quot;the Italians&#x27; Doctor&quot;. Matthew Miller, an evangelist ordained in 1937, traveled throughout Canada establishing missions with Native Americans.

==References==
==Further reading==
*Entz, Gary R. &quot;The Bickertonites: Schism and Reunion in a Restoration Church, 1880–1905,&quot; &quot;Journal of Mormon History&quot; 32 (fall 2006): 1–44.

==External links==
*Official website

*Locations

Auxiliaries/Media
*Youth GMBA YouTube Channel
*Youth GMBA Podcast
*General Ladies&#x27; Uplift Circle
*YouTube Channels</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2304090" start="0" end="26" title="The Church of Jesus Christ (Bickertonite)" label="The Church of Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="47" end="56" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414953" start="57" end="79" title="religious denomination" label="religious denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q267927" start="97" end="122" title="Monongahela, Pennsylvania" label="Monongahela, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q855941" start="165" end="179" title="Restorationism (Christian primitivism)" label="Restorationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q459842" start="203" end="217" title="Book of Mormon" label="Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="221" end="230" title="scripture" label="scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848233" start="448" end="464" title="Church of Christ (Latter Day Saints)" label="Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="479" end="491" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q727001" start="526" end="539" title="Sidney Rigdon" label="Sidney Rigdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247467" start="589" end="611" title="Death of Joseph Smith" label="assassination of Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995523" start="667" end="683" title="First Presidency" label="First Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724996" start="947" end="964" title="succession crisis (Latter Day Saints)" label="succession crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304090" start="1100" end="1119" title="The Church of Jesus Christ (Bickertonite)" label="Bickertonite church"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005527" start="1223" end="1240" title="William Bickerton" label="William Bickerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q727001" start="1245" end="1258" title="Sidney Rigdon" label="Sidney Rigdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14912104" start="3073" end="3111" title="Church of Jesus Christ (disambiguation)" label="other denominations with similar names"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005527" start="3196" end="3213" title="William Bickerton" label="William Bickerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q727001" start="3218" end="3231" title="Sidney Rigdon" label="Sidney Rigdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="3305" end="3317" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q459842" start="3356" end="3370" title="Book of Mormon" label="Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="3477" end="3523" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="largest Latter Day Saint church, based in Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848233" start="3604" end="3620" title="Church of Christ (Latter Day Saints)" label="Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="3680" end="3692" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="3772" end="3780" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q982343" start="3807" end="3821" title="Oliver Cowdery" label="Oliver Cowdery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177696" start="3997" end="4014" title="Peter Whitmer Sr." label="Peter Whitmer Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3359142" start="4018" end="4035" title="Fayette, New York" label="Fayette, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747240" start="4073" end="4083" title="Manchester (town), New York" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968929" start="4128" end="4136" title="Branch (Mormonism)" label="branches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359142" start="4166" end="4173" title="Fayette, New York" label="Fayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483264" start="4190" end="4200" title="Colesville, New York" label="Colesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316200" start="4274" end="4285" title="Restoration (Latter Day Saints)" label="restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="4305" end="4314" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039460" start="4402" end="4416" title="Great Apostasy" label="Great Apostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146159" start="4451" end="4475" title="Zion (Latter Day Saints)" label="&amp;quot;city of Zion&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="4479" end="4494" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q24603" start="4506" end="4528" title="Independence, Missouri" label="Independence, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q982343" start="4577" end="4591" title="Oliver Cowdery" label="Oliver Cowdery"/>
<link wikidata="Q932039" start="4645" end="4659" title="Kirtland, Ohio" label="Kirtland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281468" start="4706" end="4725" title="Disciples of Christ (Campbell Movement)" label="Disciples of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q727001" start="4733" end="4746" title="Sidney Rigdon" label="Sidney Rigdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q576110" start="5307" end="5323" title="Nauvoo, Illinois" label="Nauvoo, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="5371" end="5388" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976186" start="5473" end="5478" title="Hyrum Smith" label="Hyrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247467" start="5484" end="5499" title="death of Joseph Smith" label="killed by a mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981536" start="5617" end="5633" title="Nauvoo Expositor" label="Nauvoo Expositor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056491" start="5666" end="5681" title="Joseph Smith 1844 presidential campaign" label="minor candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="5686" end="5716" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="6027" end="6051" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775834" start="6338" end="6358" title="Quorum of the Twelve" label="Quorum of the Twelve"/>
<link wikidata="Q596458" start="6465" end="6493" title="prophet, seer, and revelator" label="prophet, seer, and revelator"/>
<link wikidata="Q203559" start="6926" end="6939" title="Brigham Young" label="Brigham Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q267927" start="7006" end="7031" title="Monongahela, Pennsylvania" label="Monongahela, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005527" start="7184" end="7201" title="William Bickerton" label="William Bickerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155908" start="7345" end="7350" title="Elder (Christianity)" label="elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415826" start="7372" end="7382" title="Evangelist (Latter Day Saints)" label="evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183917" start="7576" end="7604" title="West Elizabeth, Pennsylvania" label="West Elizabeth, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620760" start="7731" end="7739" title="apostle (Latter Day Saints)" label="apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q497200" start="7975" end="8006" title="Washington County, Pennsylvania" label="Washington County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272868" start="8270" end="8299" title="Quorum of Seventy Evangelists" label="Quorum of Seventy Evangelists"/>
<link wikidata="Q596458" start="8960" end="8983" title="president of the church" label="president of the church"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="9746" end="9759" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="9859" end="9884" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459202" start="9931" end="9946" title="plural marriage" label="plural marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294927" start="9948" end="9966" title="celestial marriage" label="celestial marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="10159" end="10171" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q459842" start="10236" end="10250" title="Book of Mormon" label="Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="10525" end="10572" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="12166" end="12179" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="12377" end="12382" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q459842" start="12387" end="12401" title="Book of Mormon" label="Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="12902" end="12914" title="Adam and Eve" label="Adam and Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410500" start="13077" end="13082" title="Faith" label="Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="13109" end="13121" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q497263" start="13158" end="13168" title="Repentance" label="Repentance"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227" start="13195" end="13198" title="sin" label="sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272869" start="13989" end="13997" title="Quorum of Twelve Apostles (Bickertonite)" label="apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="13999" end="14010" title="Evangelism" label="evangelists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155908" start="14012" end="14018" title="Elder (Christianity)" label="elders"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="14034" end="14040" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37302" start="15915" end="15926" title="Holy Spirit" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196258" start="16024" end="16033" title="testimony" label="testimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="16430" end="16442" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="16957" end="16972" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797925" start="17135" end="17150" title="Three Witnesses" label="Three Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177157" start="17174" end="17187" title="David Whitmer" label="David Whitmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="17229" end="17236" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459202" start="18000" end="18015" title="plural marriage" label="plural marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q81990" start="18033" end="18053" title="baptism for the dead" label="baptism for the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="18361" end="18368" title="Baptism" label="Baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351369" start="18404" end="18416" title="feet washing" label="feet washing"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="18454" end="18466" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q908833" start="19425" end="19431" title="leaven" label="leaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351369" start="19661" end="19673" title="feet washing" label="feet washing"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="19829" end="19834" title="Saint Peter" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456750" start="19940" end="19949" title="holy kiss" label="holy kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="20095" end="20113" title="King James Version" label="King James Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464584" start="20173" end="20192" title="gifts of the Spirit" label="gifts of the Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034360" start="20270" end="20284" title="word of wisdom" label="word of wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410500" start="20309" end="20314" title="faith" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420463" start="20316" end="20323" title="Faith healing" label="healing"/>
<link wikidata="Q214267" start="20325" end="20333" title="prophecy" label="prophecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132167" start="20335" end="20346" title="Discernment in Christianity" label="discernment"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="20362" end="20367" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q61070" start="20370" end="20389" title="speaking in tongues" label="speaking in tongues"/>
<link wikidata="Q61070" start="20399" end="20431" title="Interpretation of tongues" label="interpretation of divers tongues"/>
<link wikidata="Q193770" start="20943" end="20969" title="administration to the sick" label="administration to the sick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076136" start="20982" end="21000" title="laying on of hands" label="laying on of hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q101687" start="21207" end="21212" title="altar" label="altar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40843" start="21217" end="21222" title="cross" label="cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q484692" start="21267" end="21271" title="hymn" label="hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q734974" start="21781" end="21805" title="Greensburg, Pennsylvania" label="Greensburg, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q10579095" start="22128" end="22143" title="Civil rights movement (1896–1954)" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="22148" end="22166" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210562" start="22317" end="22328" title="Dale Morgan" label="Dale Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="22643" end="22655" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="22719" end="22734" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="22927" end="22943" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912635" start="23409" end="23434" title="Journal of Mormon History" label="Journal of Mormon History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416913" wikidata="Q689166" url="?curid=416913" title="Kate Hoey">
<text>Catharine Letitia Hoey, Baroness Hoey (born 21 June 1946), better known as Kate Hoey, is a Northern Irish politician and life peer who served as Parliamentary Under-Secretary for Home Affairs from 1998 to 1999 and Minister for Sport from 1999 to 2001. During the 1970s Hoey was involved in radical far-left groups but by the end of the decade became involved with the Labour Party. Hoey remained a member of the Labour Party for several decades while she was Member of Parliament (MP) for Vauxhall from 1989 to 2019, but resigned from the party in 2020. 

Hoey has attracted a high level of attention throughout her career, but particularly in the 2010s, holding many socially conservative views that brought her into conflict with fellow members of Labour. Early in her life, Hoey was radically in favour of a United Ireland; however, in more recent decades she has pulled away from this view, declaring in 2017 &quot;I&#x27;m pro-union, I&#x27;ll do anything to make sure that the United Kingdom has Northern Ireland as an integral part of it on the same terms as any other part of the United Kingdom when we leave the EU.&quot;

== Early life ==
Hoey was born in Mallusk, County Antrim, and studied at Belfast Royal Academy and the Ulster College of Physical Education. She has a degree in Economics earned at London Guildhall University, and was a Vice-President of the National Union of Students.

==Sport==
Hoey has a longstanding interest in sport. She was the 1966 Northern Ireland high jump champion and has worked for football clubs including Arsenal, Tottenham Hotspur, Queens Park Rangers, Chelsea and Brentford as an educational advisor. Before entering Parliament, she was educational adviser to Arsenal FC from 1985 to 1989.

==Political career==
===Student politics===
During the mid-1970s Hoey was one of the early members of the Newtownabbey Labour Party, which left its parent organisation, the Northern Ireland Labour Party (NILP), in 1974. Prior to being a member of the British Labour Party, Hoey was a member of the International Marxist Group (IMG), whose policies included support for a united Ireland with the slogan &#x27;Victory for the IRA&#x27;. Hoey also ran for a seat on the National Union of Students as a candidate for a left-wing grouping called the Liaison Committee for the Defence of Student Unions (LDSCU). The LDSCU demanded the defence of student unions and &quot;solidarity of students and workers&quot;. Another LCDSU demand was &quot;Support for both wings of the IRA – unconditionally but not uncritically&quot;.

===Member of the Labour Party===
As a member of the Labour Party, she unsuccessfully contested Dulwich at the 1983 and 1987 general elections, being defeated by the Conservative Gerald Bowden, on the second occasion by only 180 votes. In 1989, she was elected at the Vauxhall by-election precipitated by the resignation of Stuart Holland. Vauxhall Constituency Labour Party had wanted Martha Osamor, vice-chair of the Labour Party Black Sections, as the Party&#x27;s candidate. Osamor did secure the most nominations, eighty in total, with Hoey only having one. However, the National Executive Committee declined to shortlist Osamor and imposed a shortlist on the constituency party. When the local party refused to choose from the shortlist, Hoey was imposed by the NEC as the Labour candidate.

Interviewed by a Belfast-based newspaper in 1989, Hoey claimed that she &quot;yearned&quot; for Irish unity, adding &quot;I believe that there should be a united Ireland by consent and I think that there are a lot of people in Ireland who want this.&quot; Hoey also said she wanted to see an all-Ireland soccer team: &quot;I believe that football supporters on both sides of the border would like to see this happen but it is football officials who are preventing it from coming about.&quot; 

Hoey was Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State at the Home Office from 1998 to 1999, and Minister for Sport in the Department of Culture, Media and Sport from 1999 to 2001.

As the chairman of the all-party parliamentary group on Zimbabwe, Hoey was a vocal critic of the government of Robert Mugabe. In 2005, she called on Tony Blair to put diplomatic pressure on South Africa to condemn Zimbabwean government demolitions of townships, after an unsanctioned visit to the country. The Zimbabwean government threatened to jail her if she repeated her &quot;sneak&quot; visit.

On 29 April 2008, it was announced that Hoey would form part of the team of Conservative Boris Johnson, should he become Mayor, as an unpaid non-executive director advising on sport and the 2012 Olympics. The announcement was controversial both because Hoey had once said of London&#x27;s Olympic bid &quot;we don&#x27;t deserve it and Paris does&quot; and because it could have been perceived as endorsing an election candidate from a rival party.

Hoey nominated John McDonnell for the Labour leadership election of 2010 but, on his withdrawal, she switched her nomination to Diane Abbott. However, she voted for Andy Burnham, giving Ed Miliband her second preference. In the 2015 Labour election, Hoey supported Andy Burnham and Caroline Flint for the leadership and deputy leadership, saying that she could not see Liz Kendall as a Prime Minister. 

In 2016, Hoey was one of few Labour MPs who voted to have confidence in Jeremy Corbyn&#x27;s leadership of the party. She supported him during the leadership contest. 

On 8 July 2019, Hoey announced that she would retire from the House of Commons, and would not seek re-election as a Labour candidate at the next general election.

===Independent politician===
In December 2019 Hoey announced she was no longer a member of the Labour Party.

In July 2020, Hoey was nominated for a life peerage in the House of Lords in the 2019 Dissolution Honours and was created Baroness Hoey, &quot;of Lylehill and Rathlin in the County of Antrim&quot;, on 14 September 2020.

On 23 August 2021, Prime Minister Boris Johnson appointed Baroness Hoey as the UK&#x27;s trade envoy to Ghana.

==Political views==
Hoey is a Eurosceptic and has often rebelled against her party. She was a prominent critic of the ban on handguns and, in an interview in &quot;Sporting Gun&quot; magazine, voiced her support for fox hunting. She has voted against Labour government policy on the war in Iraq, foundation hospitals, Trident, university tuition and top-up fees, ID cards and extended detention without trial. She was a leading Labour rebel supporting a referendum on the EU Lisbon Treaty. Hoey favours stricter controls on immigration, tougher welfare reform, withdrawal from the European Union, English votes for English laws, grammar schools, marriage tax allowances, free schools and academies. 

===LGBT+ rights===
In 1994, Hoey successfully proposed an amendment to the Criminal Justice Bill to have Northern Ireland included in the gay age of consent reform which reduced the male age from 21 to 18. Her amendment passed by 254 votes to 141.

In 2010, Hoey was described as &quot;the least gay-friendly of all Labour MPs&quot; by the chief executive of Stonewall. However, she voted in favour of same-sex marriage in 2013.

In 2017, Hoey sparked criticism from LGBT advocates after it emerged she had liked a swastika-emblazoned Pride flag on Twitter. She stated that the tweet was &quot;liked in error&quot; and later apologised.

In March 2019, Hoey abstained on a vote to allow LGBT+ inclusive education in schools. When asked why by Vice News, she stated that it was &quot;going to pass anyway&quot;.

In July 2019, she was the only Labour MP to have voted against allowing abortion and same-sex marriage in Northern Ireland.

===Brexit===
Hoey advocated the United Kingdom leaving the European Union during the campaign for the EU membership referendum held on 23 June 2016. She pointed to Labour&#x27;s earlier Euroscepticism &quot;from Attlee to Foot&quot; in &quot;The Independent&quot; and changes in European bodies since Jacques Delors&#x27; advocacy of a &quot;social Europe&quot; to refute the claim that Eurosceptism was a movement of the right. She later extended these views, characterising the EU as a &quot;part of the global movement to remove democratic resistance to capitalism&quot; and as fascism, in a &quot;Heat Street&quot;/blog article written after the EU referendum, deleted from her blog.

Originally active in Labour Leave as a co-chair, Hoey resigned in February 2016 following internal disagreements. Soon afterwards, she became active in Grassroots Out, along with then-UKIP leader Nigel Farage and George Galloway, then-leader of the Respect Party. In her Vauxhall constituency, an estimated 78% voted to remain in the EU. Her Constituency Labour Party (CLP) stated in February 2017 that she was insufficiently opposing Conservative government policy on child refugees and the residency rights of EU nationals after the UK leaves.

The following month, Hoey was one of 70 parliamentary signatories to a letter sent to the Director-General of the BBC, Lord Hall of Birkenhead, along with two Labour colleagues and many Conservative politicians, which was critical of the BBC for running stories biased against Brexit. Since then she has continued to criticise the BBC, accusing them of being &quot;embittered Remainers&quot; &quot;taking delight&quot; in &quot;undermining our country&quot;. Fellow Labour MP Wes Streeting responded that it was &quot;Orwellian&quot; to expect broadcasters to &quot;act as cheerleaders for the government&quot;.

During an interview on BBC Radio 4&#x27;s &quot;Today programme&quot; in November 2017, Hoey commented that the Irish border problem – how to avoid a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, post-Brexit, whilst avoiding a border in the Irish Sea between Northern Ireland and the rest of the UK – would be solved if the Republic of Ireland also left the EU. Addressing Senator Neale Richmond, Fine Gael spokesperson on European affairs in Seanad Éireann, Hoey said, &quot;We joined the EU together, you joined when we joined, and I wouldn&#x27;t be a bit surprised if we leave and when we are very successful that you don&#x27;t start thinking about leaving as well&quot;.

Hoey attracted criticism again from within the Labour Party and from Irish political figures in February 2018 after she said the Good Friday Agreement was &quot;not sustainable in the long term&quot;. These comments followed similar remarks by Eurosceptic Conservative politicians Daniel Hannan and Owen Paterson. Simon Coveney, the Republic of Ireland&#x27;s Tánaiste (deputy head of government) and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, condemned the comments as &quot;not only irresponsible but reckless&quot;. Owen Smith, the Shadow Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, said the remarks by Hannan, Paterson and Hoey were a &quot;concerted, transparent effort to undermine the GFA... driven by their blind, misplaced faith in Brexit&quot; and were &quot;reckless and utterly wrong&quot;.

On 17 July 2018, Hoey was one of five Labour MPs who defied the Labour whip in order to vote with the government on a Brexit amendment, which, if passed, would have required the UK to remain a member of a customs union with the EU in the event of no other arrangements on free trade and no arrangements for no hard border in Ireland. The UK Government was against this amendment, but would have lost the vote without Hoey and the other Labour rebels, who possibly saved the Government from defeat. A few days later her CLP members passed a motion calling for her Labour whip to be withdrawn and for her to become ineligible to be a future Labour parliamentary candidate.

In March 2019, whilst taking part in a televised discussion about Brexit on the Andrew Neil show, Hoey was asked to &quot;name any reputable independent study that show us better off if we leave&quot;. She admitted she could not produce any study that showed leaving the European Union would leave the UK in a better off position.

On 3 September 2019, Hoey and John Mann were the only Labour MPs to vote with the Government in an attempt to prevent MPs from taking control of the House in an attempt to block a potential no deal Brexit. In November 2019, Hoey said she would be voting for the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) in the December general election in Northern Ireland. She also endorsed the Conservative Party and Boris Johnson, stating that Labour &quot;would not keep faith with the British people&quot;.

In February 2021 Hoey, together with Jim Allister, leader of the Traditional Unionist Voice, and former Brexit Party MEP Ben Habib, applied for a judicial review of the Northern Ireland Protocol, that was ultimately dismissed by the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom. It was later revealed that the UK Government had spent a total of £196,567 of public money on legal fees associated with defending the judicial actions against the Northern Ireland Protocol.

In June 2021, Hoey claimed that the Republic of Ireland &quot;will probably decide to leave&quot; in the short term following the UK&#x27;s departure from the EU.

===&quot;Nationalist Persuasion&quot; comments===
In January 2022, Hoey faced widespread criticism after writing &quot;there are very justified concerns that many professional vocations [in Northern Ireland] have become dominated by those of a nationalist persuasion, and this positioning of activists is then used to exert influence on those in power&quot; in the foreword for a loyalist pamphlet. Hoey&#x27;s comments initially incited a vocal reaction on social media, with some from a Catholic background posting their educational achievements in response. The Belfast branch of the National Union of Journalists (NUJ) accused her of adopting &quot;an appallingly blinkered view of professional journalists&quot;. Sinn Féin vice-president and Deputy First Minister Michelle O&#x27;Neill labelled the piece &quot;outrageous&quot; and called on Hoey to withdraw the remarks, saying they were a throwback to a &quot;bygone era&quot;. O&#x27;Neill added that &quot;the days of nationalists being denied opportunities are gone&quot;. Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) MLA Matthew O&#x27;Toole accused Hoey of promoting a &quot;McCarthyite tactic of othering members of the judiciary, lawyers, academics or journalists just because you disagree with them&quot;. Ulster Unionist Party leader Doug Beattie dismissed Hoey&#x27;s comments as &quot;vacuous&quot;. Alliance Party MP Stephen Farry said she was espousing an &#x27;enemy within&#x27; argument that was &quot;inaccurate, sinister, and dangerous&quot; and represented a &quot;further shameful intervention&quot; from Hoey. 

DUP leader Jeffrey Donaldson endorsed the report and Hoey&#x27;s foreword, describing it as a &quot;welcome contribution&quot;. 

Journalist Susan McKay described the remarks as sectarian and &quot;distasteful&quot; and linked them to historic Protestant resentment of increasing Catholic social mobility in Northern Ireland. The unionist-leaning &quot;News Letter&quot; claimed to have unearthed data &quot;which appear[ed] to support&quot; Hoey&#x27;s comments, noting that according to the 2011 census, there were 2,474 legal professionals with a Catholic background practicing in Northern Ireland, compared with 1,665 from a Protestant background. The &quot;Newsletter&quot; was unable to find a similar breakdown for journalists.

==Other interests==

Hoey is known for her objection to the ban of fox hunting: a rare position among Labour MPs. On 22 July 2005, she was named the new chairman of the Countryside Alliance (a British group known for its pro-hunting stance). She said the appointment was a &quot;great honour and a great challenge&quot;. The Alliance&#x27;s headquarters are in Hoey&#x27;s Vauxhall constituency. This appointment was controversial in the Labour Party as the Countryside Alliance was seen to be behind a campaign to unseat Labour MPs at the 2005 election. Hoey stepped down in 2015 saying &quot;I am sad to be resigning after more than nine years as chairman of the Countryside Alliance. The organisation has achieved much in that time, but I will always be most proud that having joined when hunting faced such uncertainty, I leave with new generations queuing up to join the hunting field.&quot;

Hoey is patron of Roots &amp; Shoots, a vocational training centre for young people in Lambeth.

Hoey has been a trustee of the Outward Bound charity since October 2002.

A vice-president of the Great Britain Wheelchair Basketball Association, Hoey is a supporter of the women&#x27;s national team and the work of the charity.

In December 2018 she became patron of the Professional Paralegal Register.

In October 2013, Hoey was fined £240 for driving through a red light having previously criticised cyclists as &quot;Lycra louts that run red lights&quot;. Hoey wants all cyclists to pay tax and be registered so they have a registration number:

==Government and parliamentary positions==
* Member of Parliament for Vauxhall (1989–2019)
* Opposition Spokesperson, Citizen&#x27;s Charter and Women (1992–1993)
* Parliamentary private secretary to Frank Field as Minister of State for Welfare Reform, Department of Social Security (1997–1998)
* Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Home Office (1998–1999)
* Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for, Department of Culture, Media and Sport (Minister for Sport) (1999–2001)
* Chair of the Northern Ireland Affairs Select Committee (2019)
* Member of the House of Lords (2020–present)
* Prime Ministerial Trade Envoy to Ghana (2021–present)

Additionally, Hoey was a member of several select committees during her time as a Member of Parliament, including: the European Scrutiny Committee, the Northern Ireland Affairs Committee, the Public Administration Committee, the Social Security Committee and the Science and Technology Committee.

==In popular culture==
Hoey&#x27;s role on the Public Administration and Constitutional Affairs Select Committee was dramatised in the 2017 verbatim musical &quot;Committee: (A New Musical)&quot;, which retold the downfall of the charity Kids Company and which was first performed at the Donmar Warehouse. Hoey was portrayed by actor Rosemary Ashe.

==References==
==External links==
* Kate Hoey MP &quot;official constituency website&quot;
* Lambeth Labour Party
* London Northern Ireland Supporters Club
* Sunday Times Magazine profile, 8 August 1993
* Hoey becomes Countryside Alliance Chairman, 22 July 2005





|- style=&quot;text-align: center;&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q689166" start="0" end="37" title="Kate Hoey" label="Catharine Letitia Hoey, Baroness Hoey"/>
<link wikidata="Q689166" start="75" end="84" title="Kate Hoey" label="Kate Hoey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="121" end="130" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="145" end="191" title="Home Office" label="Parliamentary Under-Secretary for Home Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865965" start="214" end="232" title="Minister for Sport and Civil Society" label="Minister for Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="412" end="424" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="459" end="479" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q873637" start="489" end="497" title="Vauxhall (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Vauxhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752036" start="811" end="825" title="United Ireland" label="United Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q110264247" start="1166" end="1173" title="Mallusk" label="Mallusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q189592" start="1175" end="1188" title="County Antrim" label="County Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882325" start="1205" end="1226" title="Belfast Royal Academy" label="Belfast Royal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096524" start="1235" end="1271" title="Ulster College of Physical Education" label="Ulster College of Physical Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670459" start="1313" end="1340" title="London Guildhall University" label="London Guildhall University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979170" start="1374" end="1400" title="National Union of Students (United Kingdom)" label="National Union of Students"/>
<link wikidata="Q165704" start="1490" end="1499" title="high jump" label="high jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="1528" end="1536" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="1553" end="1560" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="1562" end="1579" title="Tottenham Hotspur" label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q18723" start="1581" end="1600" title="Queens Park Rangers" label="Queens Park Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="1602" end="1609" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571" start="1614" end="1623" title="Brentford F.C." label="Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="1667" end="1677" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020777" start="1847" end="1872" title="Newtownabbey Labour Party" label="Newtownabbey Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058511" start="1914" end="1943" title="Northern Ireland Labour Party" label="Northern Ireland Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4288221" start="2039" end="2066" title="International Marxist Group" label="International Marxist Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752036" start="2112" end="2126" title="united Ireland" label="united Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979170" start="2208" end="2234" title="National Union of Students (United Kingdom)" label="National Union of Students"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="2509" end="2512" title="Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="2612" end="2624" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313538" start="2655" end="2662" title="Dulwich (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Dulwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q918466" start="2670" end="2674" title="1983 United Kingdom general election" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q918472" start="2679" end="2701" title="1987 United Kingdom general election" label="1987 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548947" start="2738" end="2751" title="Gerald Bowden" label="Gerald Bowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917467" start="2827" end="2847" title="1989 Vauxhall by-election" label="Vauxhall by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626661" start="2883" end="2897" title="Stuart Holland" label="Stuart Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q53870716" start="2945" end="2958" title="Martha Osamor" label="Martha Osamor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091265" start="3135" end="3163" title="National Executive Committee (Labour Party)" label="National Executive Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q54870098" start="3649" end="3672" title="Proposed all-Ireland football team" label="all-Ireland soccer team"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="3906" end="3917" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865965" start="3941" end="3959" title="Minister for Sport and Civil Society" label="Minister for Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q910019" start="3967" end="4005" title="Department of Culture, Media and Sport" label="Department of Culture, Media and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="4082" end="4090" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707" start="4137" end="4150" title="Robert Mugabe" label="Robert Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="4175" end="4185" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="4516" end="4529" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="4617" end="4630" title="2012 Olympics" label="2012 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q694695" start="4892" end="4906" title="John McDonnell" label="John McDonnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467491" start="4915" end="4949" title="2010 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="Labour leadership election of 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q153454" start="5005" end="5017" title="Diane Abbott" label="Diane Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q269909" start="5042" end="5054" title="Andy Burnham" label="Andy Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q216594" start="5063" end="5074" title="Ed Miliband" label="Ed Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647581" start="5105" end="5125" title="2015 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="2015 Labour election"/>
<link wikidata="Q269909" start="5142" end="5154" title="Andy Burnham" label="Andy Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q251095" start="5159" end="5173" title="Caroline Flint" label="Caroline Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q750260" start="5246" end="5257" title="Liz Kendall" label="Liz Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="5353" end="5366" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="5586" end="5611" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="the next general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="5763" end="5775" title="life peerage" label="life peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="5783" end="5797" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q98078979" start="5805" end="5829" title="2019 Dissolution Honours" label="2019 Dissolution Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223119" start="5870" end="5878" title="Lylehill" label="Lylehill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136111" start="5883" end="5890" title="Rathlin" label="Rathlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189592" start="5898" end="5914" title="County of Antrim" label="County of Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="6003" end="6011" title="Baroness" label="Baroness"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="6049" end="6054" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="6087" end="6098" title="Eurosceptic" label="Eurosceptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644969" start="6340" end="6351" title="war in Iraq" label="war in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q47988" start="6420" end="6428" title="ID cards" label="ID cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="6532" end="6545" title="Lisbon Treaty" label="Lisbon Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="6638" end="6652" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q46526397" start="6654" end="6684" title="English votes for English laws" label="English votes for English laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="6686" end="6701" title="grammar schools" label="grammar schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q681943" start="7117" end="7126" title="Stonewall (charity)" label="Stonewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="7160" end="7177" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="7273" end="7281" title="swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242811" start="7293" end="7303" title="Pride flag" label="Pride flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155506" start="7501" end="7510" title="Vice News" label="Vice News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="7723" end="7768" title="Brexit" label="the United Kingdom leaving the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="7797" end="7821" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="EU membership referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="7907" end="7913" title="Attlee" label="Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q332419" start="7917" end="7921" title="Michael Foot" label="Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="7937" end="7952" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q153425" start="7996" end="8010" title="Jacques Delors" label="Jacques Delors"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="8117" end="8122" title="right-wing politics" label="right"/>
<link wikidata="Q24590031" start="8296" end="8307" title="Heat Street" label="Heat Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079689" start="8405" end="8417" title="Labour Leave" label="Labour Leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q24083465" start="8536" end="8550" title="Grassroots Out" label="Grassroots Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="8568" end="8572" title="UKIP" label="UKIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q318471" start="8580" end="8592" title="Nigel Farage" label="Nigel Farage"/>
<link wikidata="Q332483" start="8597" end="8612" title="George Galloway" label="George Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q287031" start="8633" end="8646" title="Respect Party" label="Respect Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163958" start="8726" end="8751" title="Constituency Labour Party" label="Constituency Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q48181" start="9021" end="9048" title="Director-General of the BBC" label="Director-General of the BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q80390" start="9050" end="9073" title="Lord Hall of Birkenhead" label="Lord Hall of Birkenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="9208" end="9214" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983764" start="9407" end="9420" title="Wes Streeting" label="Wes Streeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156379" start="9449" end="9458" title="Orwellian" label="Orwellian"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="9567" end="9578" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353208" start="9592" end="9607" title="Today programme" label="Today programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063520" start="9656" end="9676" title="Irish border problem" label="Irish border problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063520" start="9694" end="9705" title="hard border" label="hard border"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="9714" end="9730" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="9739" end="9758" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41735" start="9805" end="9814" title="Irish Sea" label="Irish Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="9937" end="9944" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q24196929" start="9945" end="9959" title="Neale Richmond" label="Neale Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="9961" end="9970" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="10007" end="10021" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Seanad Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="10371" end="10392" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q974023" start="10523" end="10536" title="Daniel Hannan" label="Daniel Hannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q197894" start="10541" end="10554" title="Owen Paterson" label="Owen Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670096" start="10556" end="10569" title="Simon Coveney" label="Simon Coveney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146214" start="10602" end="10610" title="Tánaiste" label="Tánaiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865853" start="10643" end="10681" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade" label="Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q390690" start="10758" end="10768" title="Owen Smith" label="Owen Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460599" start="10774" end="10820" title="Shadow Secretary of State for Northern Ireland" label="Shadow Secretary of State for Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433693" start="11111" end="11115" title="Whip (politics)" label="whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063520" start="11350" end="11361" title="hard border" label="hard border"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="11365" end="11372" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758108" start="11792" end="11803" title="Andrew Neil" label="Andrew Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q694967" start="12074" end="12083" title="John Mann, Baron Mann" label="John Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q65086242" start="12234" end="12248" title="no deal Brexit" label="no deal Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="12306" end="12331" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="Democratic Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="12437" end="12450" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499853" start="12568" end="12580" title="Jim Allister" label="Jim Allister"/>
<link wikidata="Q985076" start="12596" end="12622" title="Traditional Unionist Voice" label="Traditional Unionist Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q104721252" start="12635" end="12647" title="Brexit Party" label="Brexit Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q63929374" start="12652" end="12661" title="Ben Habib" label="Ben Habib"/>
<link wikidata="Q105474751" start="12700" end="12725" title="Northern Ireland Protocol" label="Northern Ireland Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="12764" end="12799" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="13029" end="13048" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394819" start="13537" end="13545" title="Ulster loyalism" label="loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843420" start="13744" end="13773" title="National Union of Journalists" label="National Union of Journalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="13875" end="13884" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362221" start="13904" end="13925" title="First Minister and deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland" label="Deputy First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837191" start="13926" end="13947" title="Michelle O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Michelle O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q175443" start="14190" end="14224" title="Social Democratic and Labour Party" label="Social Democratic and Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272410" start="14232" end="14235" title="Member of the Legislative Assembly (Northern Ireland)" label="MLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q61883171" start="14236" end="14256" title="Matthew O&amp;#x27;Toole" label="Matthew O&amp;#x27;Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="14425" end="14446" title="Ulster Unionist Party" label="Ulster Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q20675966" start="14454" end="14466" title="Doug Beattie" label="Doug Beattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q244927" start="14522" end="14536" title="Alliance Party of Northern Ireland" label="Alliance Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609180" start="14540" end="14553" title="Stephen Farry" label="Stephen Farry"/>
<link wikidata="Q300292" start="14755" end="14772" title="Jeffrey Donaldson" label="Jeffrey Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q104872189" start="14885" end="14896" title="Susan McKay" label="Susan McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="15074" end="15090" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="unionist-leaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753920" start="15097" end="15108" title="News Letter" label="News Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="15237" end="15248" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q133333" start="15547" end="15558" title="fox hunting" label="fox hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137257" start="15649" end="15669" title="Countryside Alliance" label="Countryside Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="16418" end="16437" title="vocational training" label="vocational training"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047357" start="16491" end="16498" title="trustee" label="trustee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411901" start="16506" end="16519" title="Outward Bound" label="Outward Bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598823" start="16573" end="16620" title="Great Britain Wheelchair Basketball Association" label="Great Britain Wheelchair Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q146747" start="17097" end="17105" title="Vauxhall" label="Vauxhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477321" start="17192" end="17223" title="Parliamentary private secretary" label="Parliamentary private secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q304388" start="17227" end="17238" title="Frank Field, Baron Field of Birkenhead" label="Frank Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q16877182" start="17280" end="17309" title="Department of Social Security" label="Department of Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="17371" end="17382" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q910019" start="17441" end="17479" title="Department of Culture, Media and Sport" label="Department of Culture, Media and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865965" start="17481" end="17499" title="Minister for Sport (United Kingdom)" label="Minister for Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058460" start="17528" end="17569" title="Northern Ireland Affairs Select Committee" label="Northern Ireland Affairs Select Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="17593" end="17607" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="17762" end="17782" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q104900459" start="18025" end="18090" title="Public Administration and Constitutional Affairs Select Committee" label="Public Administration and Constitutional Affairs Select Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q634138" start="18118" end="18134" title="Verbatim theatre" label="verbatim musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404919" start="18216" end="18228" title="Kids Company" label="Kids Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296262" start="18266" end="18282" title="Donmar Warehouse" label="Donmar Warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588047" start="18312" end="18325" title="Rosemary Ashe" label="Rosemary Ashe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416914" wikidata="Q6831544" url="?curid=416914" title="Michael Jack">
<text>John Michael Jack, (born 17 September 1946) is a Conservative Party politician in the United Kingdom and was Member of Parliament for Fylde between 1987 and 2010, serving at various junior ministerial posts during the John Major administration. He was chair of the Office of Tax Simplification (OTS).

==Early life==

Michael Jack was born in Folkestone, Kent, England, the son of Ralph and Florence Jack. He attended Bradford Grammar School and then Bradford Institute of Technology (now the University of Bradford). At the University of Leicester, he received a BA in Economics, and a MPhil in Transport Economics. He worked for Procter &amp; Gamble from 1971 to 1975. From 1975 to 1980 he worked at Marks &amp; Spencer, being PA to Managing Director Lord Rayner from 1975 to 1976, National Chairman of the Young Conservatives from 1976 to 1977, Sales Director at LO Jeffs Ltd (a fresh produce supply company and part of Northern Foods) from 1981 to 1987. He has also been a member of the Eastern Area Electricity Consultative Council, and of the Mersey Regional Health Authority.

==Parliamentary career==
He contested Newcastle Central in February 1974. He was a Minister at the DSS from 1990 to 1992, at the Home Office from 1992 to 1993, then at MAFF from 1993 to 1995. From 1995 to 1997, he was Financial Secretary to the Treasury. William Hague appointed him a member of his Shadow Cabinet in 1997 as Shadow Agriculture Minister, but he returned to the back-benches in 1998. He was Chairman of the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Committee. He was a pro-European, and was member of the Tory Reform Group.

He was appointed to the Privy Council in the 1997 New Year Honours. On 14 March 2008, Jack announced that he would stand down at the 2010 general election. After he left Parliament he served as chairman of the Office of Tax Simplification and he was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2015 New Year Honours for services to tax policy.

==Personal life==
He married Alison Jane Musgrave in 1976, and they have two sons.

He retired as Chairman of Topps Tiles Plc in 2015, having served since 1999.

In 2018 he was appointed Chair of Governors of the Royal Agricultural University.

==References==
==External links==
*
*ePolitix.com – Michael Jack MP
*Guardian Unlimited Politics – Ask Aristotle: Michael Jack MP
*TheyWorkForYou.com – Michael Jack MP
*The Public Whip – Michael Jack MP voting record
*BBC News – Michael Jack MP profile 4 March 2005

===Audio clips===
*Discussing a £40m fridge &quot;mountain&quot; in 2002
*Discussing Margaret Beckett in 2007

===News items===
*Discussing Gangmasters in 2004</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6831544" start="0" end="17" title="Michael Jack" label="John Michael Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="49" end="67" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="86" end="100" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="109" end="129" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077771" start="134" end="139" title="Fylde (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Fylde"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="218" end="228" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018276" start="265" end="293" title="Office of Tax Simplification" label="Office of Tax Simplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q375314" start="343" end="353" title="Folkestone" label="Folkestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="355" end="359" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="361" end="368" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954686" start="418" end="441" title="Bradford Grammar School" label="Bradford Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q954035" start="493" end="515" title="University of Bradford" label="University of Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333399" start="525" end="548" title="University of Leicester" label="University of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="564" end="566" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="BA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="570" end="579" title="Economics" label="Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527520" start="587" end="592" title="Master of Philosophy" label="MPhil"/>
<link wikidata="Q212405" start="631" end="651" title="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble" label="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q714491" start="702" end="721" title="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer" label="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262296" start="753" end="764" title="Derek Rayner, Baron Rayner" label="Lord Rayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173260" start="809" end="828" title="Young Conservatives (UK)" label="Young Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058350" start="923" end="937" title="Northern Foods" label="Northern Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027489" start="1049" end="1081" title="List of NHS Regional Health Authorities (before 1996)" label="Mersey Regional Health Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052935" start="1122" end="1139" title="Newcastle upon Tyne Central (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Newcastle Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q16877182" start="1183" end="1186" title="Department of Social Security" label="DSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="1213" end="1224" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866602" start="1252" end="1256" title="Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (United Kingdom)" label="MAFF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449647" start="1302" end="1337" title="Financial Secretary to the Treasury" label="Financial Secretary to the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q58282" start="1339" end="1352" title="William Hague" label="William Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q303329" start="1383" end="1397" title="Shadow Cabinet" label="Shadow Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381000" start="1506" end="1551" title="Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Committee" label="Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827492" start="1598" end="1615" title="Tory Reform Group" label="Tory Reform Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="1642" end="1655" title="Privy council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592672" start="1663" end="1684" title="1997 New Year Honours" label="1997 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="1751" end="1772" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018276" start="1828" end="1856" title="Office of Tax Simplification" label="Office of Tax Simplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="1895" end="1922" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026595" start="2097" end="2108" title="Topps Tiles" label="Topps Tiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445856" start="2200" end="2229" title="Royal Agricultural University" label="Royal Agricultural University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416918" wikidata="Q4764929" url="?curid=416918" title="Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service">
<text>The Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) is an agency of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) based in Riverdale, Maryland responsible for protecting animal health, animal welfare, and plant health. APHIS is the lead agency for collaboration with other agencies to protect U.S. agriculture from invasive pests and diseases. APHIS&#x27;s PPQ is the National Plant Protection Organization for the U.S., and the agency&#x27;s head of veterinary services/veterinary Deputy Administrator is the Chief Veterinary Officer of the United States.

==History==
APHIS was created in 1972 by Secretary&#x27;s Memorandum No. 1769.

The origins of the agency predate creation of USDA, to 1854 when the Office of Entomologist, Agricultural Section, U.S. Patent Office was created. It was the first of three agencies that eventually were merged to form APHIS. In 1881, a Cattle Commission was created in the Department of the Treasury that three years later was transferred to USDA. Plant quarantine functions followed in 1912 when USDA&#x27;s Federal Horticultural Board was created. Between the 1880s and 1930s, these evolved into the USDA Bureaus of Entomology, of Animal Industry, and of Plant Quarantine, respectively.

In 1953, those three bureaus were made into the new Agricultural Research Service. In 1971, the animal and plant regulatory functions were separated from ARS to create a new entity known as Animal and Plant Health Services. In 1972, the meat and poultry inspection divisions of the Consumer and Marketing Service (later known as the Agricultural Marketing Service) were added to APHS, thus creating the contemporary APHIS.

In 2003, many APHIS agricultural border inspectors were transferred to U.S. Customs and Border Protection, a unit of the newly created U.S. Department of Homeland Security.

APHIS is the primary agency responsible for responding to animal and plant disease(s) and pest emergencies as well as to other emergencies as set forth by the National Response Plan (NRP) completed in 2005 (APHIS Strategic Plan 2003–2008).

APHIS celebrated its 50th anniversary on April 2, 2022.

==Duties and responsibilities==
The originally-stated purpose of APHIS is to “protect the animal and plant resources of the nation” and carry out “a poultry and meat inspection program.” A more modern articulation of APHIS&#x27;s mission is “protecting and promoting U.S. agricultural health, regulating genetically engineered organisms, administering the Animal Welfare Act and carrying out wildlife damage management activities.”

APHIS aims to protect American animals, plants, and the agricultural industry by offering:
* Protection from invasive non-native plants, animals, insects, and diseases
* Monitoring and management of existing agricultural pests and diseases
* Resolution and management of trade issues related to animal or plant health
* Prevention or cessation of the inhumane treatment (of animals)

The threats and challenges within APHIS&#x27; scope include:
* Non-compliant biotech events
* Invasive species
* Agricultural animal/plant health threats
* Agricultural bioterrorism
* Sanitary and phytosanitary trade barriers
* Wildlife conflicts and diseases
* Zoonotic diseases
* Animal welfare issues

===Statutory authorities===
APHIS is granted specific authority under several federal statutes:

Animal Health Protection Act, &quot;et seq.&quot;
Governs the prevention, detection, control, and eradication of diseases and pests of animals, where &quot;animal&quot; is defined as &quot;any member of the animal kingdom (except a human).&quot; (1) (West 2009).

Animal Welfare Act of 1966, &quot;et seq.&quot;
Originally intended to prevent the theft of pets for sale to research facilities, the AWA now broadly regulates minimum standards of care and treatment of animals in research, exhibition, transport, and by dealers. It exempts birds, rats, or mice bred for use in research, horses not used for research, cold blooded animals, and all farm animals used in the production of “food and fiber.” It provides for licensing and registration of all animal dealers and exhibitors.

Horse Protection Act, 
Prohibits horses subjected to a process called “soring” (injecting or applying chemicals to a horse&#x27;s forelegs to accentuate its gait) from participating in and being transported to exhibitions, sales, shows, or auctions.

Animal Damage Control Act of March 2, 1931, 
Provides broad authority for investigation, demonstrations and control of “injurious animal species” (mammalian predators, rodents and birds.) Amended in 1991 to prevent the inadvertent introduction of brown tree snakes into other areas of the United States from Guam.

Lacey Act, 
Makes it unlawful for any person to import, export, transport, sell, receive, acquire, or purchase any fish or wildlife or plant taken, possessed, transported, or sold in violation of any law, treaty, or regulation of the United States or in violation of any Indian tribal law whether in interstate or foreign commerce.

Plant Protection Act, &quot;et seq.&quot;
Consolidates all or part of ten existing USDA plant health laws into one comprehensive law. Gives USDA the authority to regulate and to prohibit or restrict the importation, exportation, and the interstate movement of plants, plant products, certain biological control organisms, noxious weeds, and plant pests.

Federal Seed Act, Title III, 
Requires accurate labeling and purity standards for seeds in commerce, and prohibits the importation and movement of adulterated or misbranded seeds.

Honeybee Act, 
Prohibits or restricts the importation or entry of honeybees and honeybee semen into or through the United States in order to prevent the introduction and spread of diseases and parasites harmful to honeybees, as well as genetically undesirable germ plasm and undesirable bee species.

Animal quarantine laws:
 allows the President, by proclamation, to suspend the importation of all or any class of animals for a limited time, whenever, in his opinion, it is necessary for the protection of animals in the United States against infectious or contagious diseases.

 authorizes the Secretary of Agriculture to establish research facilities for hoof and mouth disease and other animal diseases which “in the opinion of the Secretary” constitute a threat to U.S. livestock. Mandates strict controls for the use of any live virus at such research facilities. Permits the Secretary to hire up to five technical experts or scientists at a maximum paygrade of GS-18. (This appears to be one of the most prescriptive statutes that USDA administers.)

 authorizes the Secretary of Agriculture to establish and carry out a program for the eradication of pseudorabies in United States swine populations.

Virus-Serum-Toxin Act, 

==Organization==
APHIS is divided into six operational programs units:
* Animal Care (AC): Determines and promotes standards of humane care and treatment of animals through inspections and educational efforts.
* Biotechnology Regulatory Services (BRS): Protects agricultural and natural resources by ensuring safe development of genetically engineered organisms using a science-based regulatory framework.
* International Services and Trade Support Team (IS): Provides international animal and plant health expertise to safeguard American agricultural health and promote U.S. agricultural trade.
* Plant Protection and Quarantine (PPQ): Safeguards agriculture and natural resources from risks associated with the entry, establishment, or spread of pests and noxious weeds.
* Veterinary Services (VS): Protects and improves the health, quality, and marketability of our nation&#x27;s animals, animal products, and veterinary biologics by preventing, controlling, and/or eliminating animal diseases, and monitoring, and promoting animal health and productivity.
* Wildlife Services (WS): Provides leadership to resolve wildlife conflicts and create a balance allowing people and wildlife to peacefully coexist.

APHIS is also divided into three management support units (Legislative and Public Affairs, Marketing and Regulatory Programs Business Services, and Policy and Program Development), and two offices that support government-wide initiatives: the Office of Emergency Management and Homeland Security and Office of Civil Rights Enforcement and Compliance.

The current APHIS Administrator, Kevin Shea, was appointed in June 2013. His immediate predecessor, Dr. Greg Parham, was appointed in April 2011.

The Deputy Administrator for Veterinary Services also functions as Chief Veterinary Officer of the United States, and represents the U.S. Government at the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE). APHIS Plant Protection and Quarantine (PPQ) is the National Plant Protection Organization; the Deputy Administrator for PPQ represents the United States in the North American Plant Protection Organization and other international fora related to plant health and quarantine.

In addition to its domestic operations, APHIS International Services staff several overseas offices, including veterinary and plant health attachés in U.S. diplomatic missions as well as technicians carrying out disease and pest eradication and control programs.

On February 26, 2022 Deputy Administrator Osama El-Lissy left to become the Secretary of the International Plant Protection Convention.

===Investigative and Enforcement Services===
As the name suggests, IES takes referrals from other APHIS personnel as to investigations and enforcements that are needed based on personnel&#x27;s observations in the course of their duties.

==Budget==
APHIS has a budget of approximately $800 million annually and employs about 7,000 people, about 5,000 of which are deployed as inspectors at ports, borders and on farms.

==Criticism==
In 2005, the USDA OIG published a report which identified numerous failures on the part of APHIS’ Animal Care (AC) unit to adequately enforce the AWA, including:
* failure of AC&#x27;s Eastern Region to aggressively pursue “enforcement actions against violators of the AWA”;
* failure to fine violators sufficiently, creating a climate in which “violators consider the monetary stipulation as a normal cost of conducting business rather than a deterrent for violating the law”;
* failure on the part of the USDA&#x27;s Veterinary Medical Officers (VMOs) to ensure that research facilities provided them with basic data on themselves such as “the number of animals used in research” and the number of “unexpected animal deaths”;
* failure on the part of Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUC) to effectively monitor animal care activities, in particular, veterinary care and review of painful procedures; and
* failure on the part of Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUC) to ensure the use of non-animal methodologies where such research avenues exist.

The OIG audit further reported that at almost one-third of facilities, IACUCs failed to ensure that principal investigators (PIs) considered alternatives to painful procedures; the report cites this failure on the part of IACUCs as being the most frequent AWA violation at animal research facilities.

In 2014, The USDA&#x27;s Office of the Inspector General (OIG) criticized the Service for a number of issues including its failure to efficiently allocate resources and its failure to administer appropriate fines for animal welfare violations among other issues. The report found the Service conducted inspections at facilities that did not have any animals regulated under the Animal Welfare Act (AWA). According to the report, “[Animal Care] did not make the best use of its limited resources, which could have been assigned to inspect other more problematic facilities, including breeders, dealers, and exhibitors.” The Service was also criticized for prematurely closing cases that involved “grave (e.g., animal deaths) or repeat welfare violations.” When the service did levy fines against institutions for AWA violations, the Inspector General&#x27;s report found “penalties that were reduced by an average of 86 percent from... authorized maximum penalty per violation. Consequently, 26 of the 30 violators in our sample received” and that the Service “grant[ed] good faith reductions without merit or us[ed] a smaller number of violations than the actual number.” According to the USDA&#x27;s report, APHIS agreed with the findings and will begin implanting reforms.

On 4 February 2017, the USDA Animal Care Search Tool, a searchable database containing documents with details about the animals held by individual US animal research facility together with inspection and action reports, was removed from public access, with a stated reason of protecting personal information. The removal affects inspection reports, research facility annual reports, regulatory correspondence (such as official warnings), and certain enforcement records. Information from these documents can now only be requested via a Freedom of Information Act inquiry. This removal has been criticized as substantially limiting information on animal care in US institutions, and of inhibiting access to what is still available.

==See also==
* Title 7 of the Code of Federal Regulations
* Title 9 of the Code of Federal Regulations
* Beagle Brigade
* Phytosanitary Certificate Issuance and Tracking System
* Plant Protection and Quarantine
* Sanitary and phytosanitary measures and agreements

==References==
==Further reading==
* 


==External links==

* APHIS website
* Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service in the Federal Register
* APHIS programs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4764929" start="4" end="46" title="Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service" label="Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764929" start="48" end="53" title="Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service" label="APHIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="75" end="114" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q754948" start="131" end="150" title="Riverdale Park, Maryland" label="Riverdale, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201488" start="365" end="368" title="Plant Protection and Quarantine" label="PPQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q42125886" start="518" end="542" title="Chief veterinary officer" label="Chief Veterinary Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="761" end="779" title="United States Patent and Trademark Office" label="U.S. Patent Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827151" start="1288" end="1317" title="Agricultural Research Service" label="Agricultural Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693909" start="1569" end="1599" title="Agricultural Marketing Service" label="Agricultural Marketing Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q368804" start="1731" end="1765" title="U.S. Customs and Border Protection" label="U.S. Customs and Border Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="1795" end="1831" title="U.S. Department of Homeland Security" label="U.S. Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764919" start="2488" end="2506" title="Animal Welfare Act of 1966" label="Animal Welfare Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="3043" end="3059" title="Invasive species" label="Invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q397501" start="3105" end="3130" title="Agro-terrorism" label="Agricultural bioterrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418314" start="3133" end="3174" title="Sanitary and phytosanitary measures and agreements" label="Sanitary and phytosanitary trade barriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5936811" start="3177" end="3195" title="Human-wildlife conflict" label="Wildlife conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570736" start="3200" end="3208" title="Wildlife disease" label="diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q182672" start="3211" end="3219" title="Zoonotic" label="Zoonotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q459426" start="3231" end="3245" title="Animal welfare" label="Animal welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764919" start="3615" end="3641" title="Animal Welfare Act of 1966" label="Animal Welfare Act of 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905519" start="4135" end="4155" title="Horse Protection Act of 1970" label="Horse Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201488" start="7402" end="7433" title="Plant Protection and Quarantine" label="Plant Protection and Quarantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923716" start="7717" end="7736" title="veterinary biologic" label="veterinary biologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001322" start="7866" end="7883" title="Wildlife Services" label="Wildlife Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320717" start="8399" end="8409" title="Kevin Shea (administrator)" label="Kevin Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058594" start="8669" end="8705" title="World Organisation for Animal Health" label="World Organisation for Animal Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189838" start="8764" end="8802" title="National Plant Protection Organization" label="National Plant Protection Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356058" start="8873" end="8917" title="North American Plant Protection Organization" label="North American Plant Protection Organization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9099" end="9135" title="Agricultural attaché#United States" label="veterinary and plant health attachés"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374375" start="9294" end="9308" title="Osama El-Lissy" label="Osama El-Lissy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374375" start="9345" end="9386" title="International Plant Protection Convention" label="International Plant Protection Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="9837" end="9841" title="USDA" label="USDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041131" start="10577" end="10621" title="Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees" label="Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764919" start="11586" end="11604" title="Animal Welfare Act of 1966" label="Animal Welfare Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003780" start="13020" end="13046" title="Freedom of Information Act (United States)" label="Freedom of Information Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151708" start="13231" end="13273" title="Title 7 of the Code of Federal Regulations" label="Title 7 of the Code of Federal Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17093871" start="13276" end="13318" title="Title 9 of the Code of Federal Regulations" label="Title 9 of the Code of Federal Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892799" start="13321" end="13335" title="Beagle Brigade" label="Beagle Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189835" start="13338" end="13392" title="Phytosanitary Certificate Issuance and Tracking System" label="Phytosanitary Certificate Issuance and Tracking System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201488" start="13395" end="13426" title="Plant Protection and Quarantine" label="Plant Protection and Quarantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418314" start="13429" end="13479" title="Sanitary and phytosanitary measures and agreements" label="Sanitary and phytosanitary measures and agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440362" start="13609" end="13625" title="Federal Register" label="Federal Register"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416919" wikidata="Q7609739" url="?curid=416919" title="Stephen Ladyman">
<text>Stephen John Ladyman (born 6 November 1952) is a British Labour Party politician who was the Member of Parliament (MP) for South Thanet from 1997 until 2010. He served as a minister in the government of Tony Blair between 2003 and 2007, latterly as Minister of State for Transport.

==Early life==
Ladyman attended the Birkenhead Institute Grammar School for Boys (became the comprehensive Birkenhead Institute High School then closed in August 1993) on &quot;Tollemache Road&quot; in Claughton, before studying at Liverpool Polytechnic where he received a BSc in Applied Biology.

Ladyman did work placements at Rothamsted Experimental Station in Harpenden and at Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in Liverpool, before studying for a PhD awarded by the University of Strathclyde for researching natural isotopic abundances of elements to enable prediction of soil development when at the Natural Environment Research Council&#x27;s radiocarbon laboratory, in the Scottish Universities Research and Reactor Centre, East Kilbride.

Ladyman worked as a research scientist for the Medical Research Council (MRC) Radiobiology Unit at Harwell in Oxfordshire from 1979–85, where he researched the removal of radionuclides from lung tissue, before becoming Head of Computing for the Mathilda and Terence Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology in Charing Cross (now owned by Imperial College) from 1985–90, building computer systems for the Kennedy Institute (also part of Hammersmith Hospital), the Arthritis and Rheumatism Research Council and Charing Cross Sunley Research Centre. From 1990–1, he was an IT consultant at Pfizer Central Research in Sandwich, south Thanet, where Viagra was discovered, advising research scientists on the design of computer systems, before working as Head of Computer User Support until 1997.

==Political career==
Ladyman contested the Wantage constituency in June 1987, when 34. From 1995–9, Ladyman was a Thanet councillor and was appointed as Chairman of Finance of Thanet District Council. He was elected to Parliament in the 1997 United Kingdom general election, defeating Jonathan Aitken. He was a junior minister at the Department for Health from June 2003 until May 2005, when he was appointed Minister of State for Transport having narrowly held his seat in the 2005 General Election with a majority of 664 votes.
In the General election of 6 May 2010, Ladyman once again stood as the Labour Party candidate for Thanet South; however, he was defeated by Conservative candidate Laura Sandys who took the seat with a majority of over 7,600.

Ladyman was chair of Somerset Partnership NHS Foundation Trust from January 2013 to 2020 and appointed as Chair of Wiltshire Health and Care in 2020 and Chair of the National Autistic Society in November 2021.

==&quot;Top Gear&quot;==
While Minister of State for Transport, Ladyman appeared on &quot;Top Gear&quot; in 2005 to discuss speed cameras with Jeremy Clarkson during the show&#x27;s Star in a Reasonably Priced Car segment. He revealed himself to be a fan of cars, and admitted to having received several speeding fines and a total of nine penalty points. The Minister displayed a passion for fast cars including having owned an Alfa Romeo and posting a lap time in the &#x27;Reasonably Priced Car&#x27; towards the top of the leaderboard. He set a time of 1:48.8, faster than Clarkson&#x27;s own time of 1:50.

After presenter Richard Hammond was seriously injured in a high-speed crash in 2006, Ladyman voiced his support for the programme. He denied that &quot;Top Gear&quot; encouraged dangerous driving, instead that they &quot;celebrate great engineering and, yes, they celebrate fast cars ... but, equally, they&#x27;ve had me on the programme giving out road safety messages. People don&#x27;t go onto the road and break the speed limit because they watch &quot;Top Gear&quot;.&quot;

==Personal life==
Ladyman married Janet Pike (née Baker) in May 1995 on the Isle of Thanet. He has one daughter, one stepdaughter and two stepsons (one deceased).

==References==
==External links==
* Dr Stephen Ladyman MP official site
* Department for Transport – Dr Stephen Ladyman MP
* Voting record at the Public Whip
* Guardian Unlimited Politics – Ask Aristotle: Stephen Ladyman MP
* TheyWorkForYou.com – Stephen Ladyman MP
* BBC Politics profile
* Interviewed on The Westminster Hour about saving the planet
* 2005 campaign

===Video clips===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7609739" start="0" end="20" title="Stephen Ladyman" label="Stephen John Ladyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="49" end="69" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="British Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q988835" start="123" end="135" title="South Thanet (UK Parliament constituency)" label="South Thanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="141" end="145" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="152" end="156" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="203" end="213" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q15109454" start="249" end="280" title="Minister of State for Transport" label="Minister of State for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690764" start="485" end="494" title="Claughton, Merseyside" label="Claughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627967" start="515" end="536" title="Liverpool John Moores University" label="Liverpool Polytechnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="557" end="560" title="Bachelor of Science" label="BSc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326711" start="613" end="644" title="Rothamsted Experimental Station" label="Rothamsted Experimental Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q19785" start="648" end="657" title="Harpenden" label="Harpenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866602" start="665" end="708" title="Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859178" start="764" end="789" title="University of Strathclyde" label="University of Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="814" end="822" title="Isotope" label="isotopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272261" start="899" end="935" title="Natural Environment Research Council" label="Natural Environment Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q840660" start="943" end="954" title="radiocarbon" label="radiocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q654226" start="1025" end="1038" title="East Kilbride" label="East Kilbride"/>
<link wikidata="Q746879" start="1088" end="1112" title="Medical Research Council (UK)" label="Medical Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q690200" start="1119" end="1131" title="Radiobiology" label="Radiobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q986049" start="1140" end="1147" title="Harwell, Oxfordshire" label="Harwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="1212" end="1224" title="radionuclide" label="radionuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q216185" start="1344" end="1357" title="Charing Cross" label="Charing Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q189022" start="1372" end="1388" title="Imperial College" label="Imperial College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645747" start="1470" end="1490" title="Hammersmith Hospital" label="Hammersmith Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q206921" start="1621" end="1627" title="Pfizer" label="Pfizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q26163" start="1648" end="1656" title="Sandwich, Kent" label="Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752642" start="1664" end="1670" title="Thanet District" label="Thanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q191521" start="1678" end="1684" title="Viagra" label="Viagra"/>
<link wikidata="Q875011" start="1869" end="1876" title="Wantage (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Wantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752642" start="1940" end="1946" title="Thanet District" label="Thanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="2063" end="2099" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q332881" start="2111" end="2126" title="Jonathan Aitken" label="Jonathan Aitken"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044742" start="2160" end="2181" title="British Department of Health" label="Department for Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q478832" start="2519" end="2531" title="Laura Sandys" label="Laura Sandys"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021629" start="2603" end="2644" title="Somerset Partnership NHS Foundation Trust" label="Somerset Partnership NHS Foundation Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q33162" start="2883" end="2891" title="Top Gear (2002 TV series)" label="Top Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q216160" start="2936" end="2951" title="Jeremy Clarkson" label="Jeremy Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2975" end="3006" title="Top Gear test track#Star in a Reasonably Priced Car (series 1-22)" label="Star in a Reasonably Priced Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476672" start="3132" end="3146" title="Point system (driving)" label="penalty points"/>
<link wikidata="Q26921" start="3221" end="3231" title="Alfa Romeo" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q297265" start="3420" end="3435" title="Richard Hammond" label="Richard Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q590422" start="3961" end="3975" title="Isle of Thanet" label="Isle of Thanet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416923" wikidata="Q750104" url="?curid=416923" title="Mark Lazarowicz">
<text>Mark Lazarowicz ( ; born Marek Lazarowicz; 8 August 1953) is a British Labour Co-operative politician and lawyer who was the Member of Parliament (MP) for Edinburgh North and Leith from 2001 to 2015.

==Early life==
Lazarowicz was born in Romford. He graduated from the University of St Andrews, where he had been Chairman of the St Andrews University Labour Club with an MA in Medieval History and Moral Philosophy in 1976, and the University of Edinburgh with an LLB in Law in 1992. He served as a Labour councillor on the City of Edinburgh District Council from 1980 to 1996, and was Leader of the Council from 1986 to 1993. He began practising law as an advocate at the Scottish bar in 1996. From 1999 to 2001, he was a member of the unitary City of Edinburgh Council, serving as Executive Member for Transport.

==Parliamentary career==
Lazarowicz stood for the House of Commons, unsuccessfully, for Edinburgh Pentlands at the 1987 general election and again in 1992, but was defeated by Malcolm Rifkind on both occasions. He was elected as Member of Parliament for Edinburgh North and Leith in June 2001 and was re-elected in May 2005 and May 2010, for the now expanded Edinburgh North and Leith constituency.

Lazarowicz was a member of the House of Commons Environmental Audit Committee. He previously served on the Environmental, Food and Rural Affairs Select Committee, the Scottish Affairs Committee and the Modernisation Committee. Between October 2010 and 2011 he was Labour&#x27;s shadow Minister for International Development. Lazarowicz succeeded in having two Private Member&#x27;s Bills passed. In 2002 he piloted the Employee Share Schemes Bill through Parliament, and in 2006 the Climate Change and Sustainable Energy Bill. He won the PRASEG Parliamentarian of the Year Award in 2006 for his work in promoting renewable energy.

In 2008, Lazarowicz lodged a further Private Member&#x27;s Bill to restrict ship-to-ship oil transfers, with the aim of preventing spillages in the Firth of Forth. In response, the government introduced regulations to restrict such transfers in April 2010 which were then delayed, but were brought into force in December 2010.

In October 2008, Lazarowicz was made the Prime Minister&#x27;s Special Representative on Global Carbon Markets and his report on the issue, &quot;Global Carbon Trading: a framework for reducing emissions&quot; was published in July 2009.

He rebelled against the Labour government on the Iraq war vote in 2003. He also opposed the Conservative government&#x27;s Immigration Bill and retrospective legislation on workfare.

Lazarowicz was defeated at the 2015 general election by the Scottish National Party&#x27;s Deidre Brock.

== Later career ==
Following his defeat in 2015, Lazarowicz returned to legal practice. His legal specialisms include public law, judicial review and human rights, immigration and asylum, personal injury, and planning and environmental law. He is the joint author of &quot;The Scottish Parliament: An Introduction&quot;, published in 1999 with new editions in 2000, 2003 and 2010. This was published as a revised work in a new edition in 2018, with the title &quot;The Scottish Parliament: Law and Practice.&quot;

==Personal life==
Lazarowicz is married with four children. He has been a supporter of many environmental causes, and in 2015 he was elected as an Honorary Fellow of Scottish Environment Link. 

==References==
==External links==
* BBC Politics</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q750104" start="0" end="15" title="Mark Lazarowicz" label="Mark Lazarowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q750104" start="25" end="41" title="Mark Lazarowicz" label="Marek Lazarowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467393" start="71" end="90" title="Labour Co-operative" label="Labour Co-operative"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="125" end="145" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138439" start="155" end="180" title="Edinburgh North and Leith (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Edinburgh North and Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="186" end="190" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="194" end="198" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339305" start="239" end="246" title="Romford" label="Romford"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="270" end="294" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785149" start="372" end="374" title="Master of Arts (Scotland)" label="MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="433" end="456" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q798137" start="465" end="468" title="Bachelor of Laws" label="LLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530250" start="525" end="559" title="City of Edinburgh Council" label="City of Edinburgh District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="648" end="651" title="Scots law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="805" end="814" title="Transport" label="Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338238" start="905" end="924" title="Edinburgh Pentlands (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Edinburgh Pentlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q918472" start="932" end="953" title="1987 United Kingdom general election" label="1987 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="967" end="971" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q333487" start="993" end="1008" title="Malcolm Rifkind" label="Malcolm Rifkind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="2030" end="2040" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q303618" start="2240" end="2262" title="Special Representative" label="Special Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488967" start="2266" end="2287" title="Global carbon market" label="Global Carbon Markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="2631" end="2652" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="2660" end="2683" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871637" start="2691" end="2703" title="Deidre Brock" label="Deidre Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="2856" end="2868" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q328798" start="2928" end="2945" title="environmental law" label="environmental law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="416924" wikidata="Q4935474" url="?curid=416924" title="Bobby R. Acord">
<text>Bobby R. Acord was the Administrator of the USDA&#x27;s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS). He was appointed by Ann Veneman on November 7, 2001, and was no longer administrator . 

Prior to his appointment, he had served for over a decade in the upper echelons of APHIS as:
* APHIS&#x27; Acting Administrator since September 2001
* Associate Administrator since 1999
* Deputy Administrator for APHIS&#x27; Wildlife Services program for nearly a decade prior

Acord has received two Presidential Rank Awards for his contributions to the USDA. He holds a Bachelor of Science degree in animal science from West Virginia University in Morgantown.

==External links==
*Biography in USDA News.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4935474" start="0" end="14" title="Bobby R. Acord" label="Bobby R. Acord"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="44" end="48" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="USDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764929" start="56" end="98" title="Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service" label="Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q292936" start="128" end="139" title="Ann Veneman" label="Ann Veneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q115376" start="619" end="643" title="West Virginia University" label="West Virginia University"/>
</links>
</doc>
