<doc id="423155" wikidata="Q878810" url="?curid=423155" title="Terry Sanford">
<text>James Terry Sanford (August 20, 1917April 18, 1998) was an American lawyer and politician from North Carolina. A member of the Democratic Party, Sanford served as the 65th Governor of North Carolina from 1961 to 1965, was a two-time U.S. presidential candidate in the 1970s, and served as a U.S. senator from 1986 to 1993. He was a strong proponent of public education and introduced several reforms and new programs in North Carolina&#x27;s schools and institutions of higher education as the state&#x27;s governor. From 1970 to 1985, Sanford served as the president of Duke University.

Born in Laurinburg, North Carolina, Sanford became a Federal Bureau of Investigation special agent after graduating from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in 1939. During World War II he joined the United States Army and saw combat in the European Theater. Following the war, Sanford attended and graduated from the University of North Carolina School of Law and began a legal career in the late 1940s, soon becoming involved in politics. He served one term in the North Carolina Senate and managed W. Kerr Scott&#x27;s U.S. Senate campaign in 1954 before running for governor in 1960. Focusing on improving education and economic opportunity, he defeated segregationist I. Beverly Lake, Sr. in the Democratic primary and was subsequently elected governor in the general election. Taking office in 1961, he pushed a controversial tax increase through the state legislature to double public spending on schools and created a commission to study further education. Growing increasingly anxious about opportunities for black students, he became the first Southern governor to call for an end to racially discriminatory employment practices in 1963 and used law enforcement to protect civil rights demonstrators. He also created the North Carolina Fund to alleviate poverty and lobbied for a major environmental research facility to be located at the Research Triangle Park.

Leaving the governorship in 1965, Sanford remained active in Democratic Party politics and engaged in the practice of law before being hired as President of Duke University in 1970. While there, he increased the school&#x27;s fundraising, managed student protests, and created new institutions to study public policy issues. Retiring in 1985, he successfully ran for a U.S. Senate seat the following year. In Congress he maintained a liberal voting record, cofounding the International Commission for Central American Recovery and Development, objecting to the passage of a Flag Desecration Amendment, and criticizing American involvement in the Gulf War. Defeated in a bid for re-election in 1992, he spent his later years practicing law, writing, and teaching at Duke before he died of cancer in 1998. He is remembered in North Carolina as the &quot;education governor&quot; and served as a role model for several other Southern governors.

== Early life ==
=== Youth ===
James Terry Sanford was born on August 20, 1917, in Laurinburg, North Carolina, United States. He was the second of five children of Elizabeth Terry () and Cecil Leroy Sanford. His father ran a hardware store while his mother worked as a teacher. The Sanfords enjoyed a middle class standard of living. During the Great Depression, Cecil&#x27;s hardware store was forced to close and the family was unable to pay rent, but the company which owned their house allowed them to stay. Cecil struggled to find steady work and performed temporary jobs while Elizabeth returned to full-time teaching. Despite the family&#x27;s economic troubles, the Sanfords never went hungry and Terry later reflected that he never thought of his family as poor. He and his brother worked odd jobs to make money in their youth, including raising chickens and pigs, selling vegetables, picking cotton, planting tobacco, and delivering newspapers.

=== Education ===
By November 1933 Sanford&#x27;s father had found a new permanent job and purchased a house, and the following year Sanford graduated from high school. In the fall of 1934 Sanford enrolled at Presbyterian Junior College in Maxton. He worked part-time to pay for his tuition and lived at his parents&#x27; home while he studied there, but he found the instruction lacking and dropped out after one semester. In the fall of 1935 he enrolled at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. He worked various jobs to pay for his tuition and during his senior year he settled on majoring in political science. After graduating in 1939 Sanford decided to enroll in law school.

While studying at the University of North Carolina School of Law, Sanford befriended Professor Albert Coates. He also took an increased interest in student politics, and won a seat in the newly created student legislative council. In that position he chaired the body&#x27;s ways and means committee until he was elected its speaker. Early in 1941 he found work at UNC-Chapel Hill&#x27;s Institute of Government, which was managed by Coates. In 1940, as World War II intensified and the likelihood of American involvement increased, the United States enacted a draft, and many students voluntarily joined the Armed Forces. Sanford attempted to get a commission in the Army Air Corps. Although he had earned his pilot&#x27;s license, the corps determined he was nearsighted and thus unfit to fly. He then unsuccessfully applied to join the Marine Corps and the Navy.

=== FBI and military service ===
With Coates&#x27; help, Sanford applied to join the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), which waived its requirement of a law degree and admitted him. After completing his semester exams, he began training in December 1941. He was posted as a special agent in Columbus, Ohio, and St. Louis. He married Margaret Rose Knight, a woman he had met at UNC-Chapel Hill, on July 4, 1942, and they later had two children: Terry Jr. and Elizabeth. Sanford pursued a position in the Armed Forces—as the United States had since entered the World War II—being especially intrigued by the new paratrooper units. After securing leave from the FBI, he enlisted in the Army on December 7, 1942. He was sent to Camp Toccoa in Georgia for training and was assigned to a medical detachment in the 501st Infantry Regiment. After eight weeks he was made a staff sergeant, and following jump training at Fort Benning he was sent to Camp Mackall and made assistant first sergeant. After a month he was promoted to first sergeant. He underwent officer training in 1943, and became a second lieutenant, and was made a platoon commander in A Company, First Battalion of the 517th Parachute Infantry Regiment.

Sanford&#x27;s unit was shipped to Italy in May 1944. He first fought in combat against German forces in June in the mountains north of Rome. In August he parachuted into southern France as the leader of B Company, First Battalion in Operation Dragoon. By December he had achieved the rank of first lieutenant. That month the German army launched a counteroffensive through the Ardennes region in Belgium, initiating the Battle of the Bulge. Sanford and his unit were quickly deployed to the village of Soy. While his company was holding a ridge line near the Soy-Hotton road, fighting broke out and Sanford captured a German major who had run through the American lines, restraining him by grabbing his belt. In early January 1945 he received a shrapnel wound to his hand while walking through a German machine gun ambush near the town of Bergeval. In late February, the 517th Regiment was recalled to Joigny in preparation for a new airborne operation, but it and subsequent assaults were dropped as Allied ground forces made steady advances over German-held territory. For his service in France and his wounds Sanford was awarded the Bronze Star and Purple Heart.

=== Early legal career and Institute of Government ===
As the European theatre wound down in April 1945, preparations were made to deploy the 517th Regiment in the Pacific War. Japan surrendered before it was done, and Sanford was released from duty. He re-enrolled at UNC Law School for the fall 1945 semester to finish his courses and earn his degree. He graduated in 1946, and took the bar examination; he was admitted to the North Carolina State Bar in November. That fall he also was hired by Coates to serve as an assistant director of the Institute of Government and held the job until 1948. He then decided to pursue a career as a lawyer, and wanted to establish himself as a leading figure in a community so as to pave the way for a bid to become Governor of North Carolina. He decided to move to Fayetteville, which he thought was appropriately sized as a small city and not too far away from Laurinburg. After moving there in 1948 he worked in Charlie Rose Jr.&#x27;s law firm, before setting up his own practice with L. Stacy Weaver. Sanford served as a company commander with the rank of captain in Company K of 119th Infantry Regiment of the North Carolina Army National Guard from 1948 to 1960.

==Early political career==
===Young Democratic Clubs and Graham campaign===
In the runoff 1948 Democratic gubernatorial primary, Sanford supported W. Kerr Scott, and after Scott was elected governor he appointed Sanford to a position in the North Carolina State Ports Authority. In 1949 Sanford was elected president of the North Carolina Young Democratic Clubs (YDC).

In March 1949 Scott surprised many Democrats when he appointed liberal UNC President Frank Porter Graham to fill a vacant U.S. Senate seat. Graham&#x27;s seat was subject to a special election in 1950. In the Democratic primary he was challenged by conservative Willis Smith. Sanford was friends with Smith&#x27;s son and respected him, but admired Graham and was &quot;all out&quot; for him. As YDC president, he had to keep his public stance on the primary neutral, though Smith&#x27;s campaign accused him of showing his favoritism. Graham won a plurality of the vote in the first primary, and Smith called for a runoff election. The campaign then took on racial overtones, as Smith&#x27;s supporters attacked Graham for his support of civil rights. Sanford wanted to improve Graham&#x27;s support in Cumberland County, and approached Graham&#x27;s local campaign manager to ask for a precinct he could canvass. He then took a job working in the Cumberland Mills area south of Fayetteville. During this time he kept a notebook where he jotted down lessons he was learning from campaigning. Of the 25 to 30 pages he filled, Sanford reflected, &quot;I learned one thing. That is, don&#x27;t ever let them get off the defensive. Frank Graham let them get off the defensive. He was just so nice and sweet.&quot; Graham won the Cumberland Mills precinct but lost the statewide primary. Sanford shortly thereafter visited Graham and vowed &quot;to get even, to rectify that injustice.&quot;

===North Carolina Senate tenure===
In 1952 Sanford ran for a seat in the 10th district in the North Carolina Senate, defeating a former legislator in the Democratic primary with 75 percent of the vote and facing no opposition in the general election. He was sworn in on January 7, 1953, and served one term to 1955, deciding not to run for a second term. He served on the Judiciary, Education, Conservation and Development, and Finance committees, but did not get his desired seat on the Appropriations committee. Sanford shared a room with another legislator at the Sir Walter Hotel in Raleigh while the North Carolina General Assembly was in session and worked at his law firm in Fayetteville in the evenings and on weekends. He found his legislative tenure dull and restrictive. He mostly worked on minor legislation affecting local issues, but developed a rapport with several political journalists, who sought him for quotes on their stories about statewide affairs.

===Managing Scott&#x27;s U.S. Senate campaign===
While in the state senate Sanford befriended Ralph H. Scott, brother of former Governor Kerr Scott. In 1953 when Kerr Scott began mulling a 1954 campaign for the U.S. Senate, Ralph, Capus M. Waynick, and Graham all advised him to hire Sanford as his campaign manager, hoping he could gain Scott more young supporters. Sanford temporarily left his law practice and took the job, living off of a bank loan in the interim. Scott declared his candidacy in early 1954. Sanford tried to temper Scott&#x27;s abrasive public image by preparing uncontroversial speeches for him, though Scott reportedly tore many of these up before attending campaign events. Sanford also assisted Scott in crafting a public stance on racial issues in wake of the United States Supreme Court&#x27;s 1954 decision in &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot; mandating the desegregation of public schools. He wrote a speech read by Scott insisting on the candidate&#x27;s support for segregated education and separate but equal schools. Scott&#x27;s opponent in the Democratic primary, Alton Lennon, attempted to portray Scott as a weak segregationist. When a leaflet ostensibly from a black civic group began to circulate in the last week of the primary emphasizing Scott&#x27;s appointments of black officials during his time as governor—information that would damage his support among white voters—Lennon&#x27;s campaign organization claimed it had no connection to them. Sanford recruited a union member to infiltrate Lennon&#x27;s campaign, and through this was able to discover that it was printing and distributing copies of the leaflets. Sanford leaked the information to &quot;The News &amp; Observer&quot;, which ran a story on the intrigue. He also called for a federal investigation and sent telegrams to Lennon campaign managers threatening to sue them if they distributed more leaflets. Scott won the Democratic nomination and the general election. In 1956 Sanford, at Scott&#x27;s encouragement, considered challenging Luther H. Hodges in the Democratic gubernatorial primary. He later decided against it and attempted unsuccessfully with Scott&#x27;s allies to recruit a different challenger.

== Gubernatorial career ==
=== 1960 campaign and election ===
Sanford began finding supporters and fundraising in preparation for his gubernatorial bid in 1959. On February 4, 1960, he declared his candidacy for governor in Fayetteville. He focused on the improvement of education and increased economic growth during his campaign. The other candidates in the Democratic primary were North Carolina Attorney General Malcolm Buie Seawell, state legislator John D. Larkins, and law professor I. Beverly Lake, Sr. Lake declared that preservation of racial segregation and the state&#x27;s existing social order would be the main theme of his campaign, worrying Sanford, who wished to avoid race becoming a large topic of discussion in the contest. Larkins and Seawell both ran as fiscal conservatives and moderates on issues of race. As Sanford was expected to place first in the initial primary, Larkins and Seawell focused their rhetorical criticisms against him, while Lake drew upon increasing support for his segregationist stances. Sanford resorted to only minor criticisms of his opponents. Voter turnout in the May primary broke all previous records for turnout in state primary elections with a 16 percent increase. Sanford placed first with 269,463 votes, Lake placed second with 181,692 votes, and both Larkins and Seawell earned less than 20 percent of the votes.

In declaring that he would contest Sanford in the Democratic primary runoff, Lake insisted that he liked Sanford personally, but disapproved of his economic and racial policies. He criticized Sanford as a proponent of a &quot;spend and tax&quot; platform and pledged to oppose the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and ensure that schools remained segregated. Feeling he could not afford to be too polite in his response, Sanford countered with hostility, saying &quot;Let&#x27;s get this straight right now on the race issue ... I have been and will continue to oppose to the end domination or direction by the NAACP. Professor Lake is bringing on integration when he stirs this up. I don&#x27;t believe in playing race against race or group against group.&quot; He further accused Lake of attempting to secure support by ruining race relations and assured that he could stave off federally-mandated integration whereas Lake would generate a confrontation that would hasten it. He also attacked Lake&#x27;s professional background, insisting &quot;I was raised around the cotton patches and tobacco fields of Scotland County, and I know how to handle the racial situation better than a theoretical college professor.&quot; He contended that Lake&#x27;s focus on racial matters distracted from the more important subject of quality education. Lake increased his rhetorical attacks on Sanford in the following weeks, including accusing Sanford of having the near-total support of the &quot;Negro bloc vote&quot;, which Sanford disputed.

Sanford received Seawell&#x27;s endorsement and the quiet backing of Governor Hodges. He also cultivated a strong campaign organization—bolstered by the connections he had made during Scott&#x27;s 1954 Senate campaign—and garnered the support of labor unions and education lobbyists. His network included former Scott supporters, Jaycees, and Young Democratic Clubs; he avoided relying on the traditional courthouse cliques. Winston-Salem businessman Bert Bennett, Sanford&#x27;s friend and former classmate at UNC-Chapel Hill, provided critical leadership to his campaign and lined up key support behind him. Sanford was also innovative in the use of media consultants and polling data, being the first North Carolinian gubernatorial candidate to hire a pollster and prolifically use television advertisements. He ran as a progressive, but tried to avoid being labeled too liberal on issues of race. Businessmen and professionals who feared that Lake&#x27;s positions on race would be unfavorable to North Carolina&#x27;s economy backed Sanford. Sanford ultimately won the June 27 Democratic primary with a large lead, earning 352,133 votes in contrast to Lake&#x27;s 275,905.

Meanwhile, preparations were underway for the 1960 Democratic National Convention in July. While most Southern politicians declared their support for Senator Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas for the party&#x27;s nomination in the 1960 United States presidential election, Sanford endorsed Senator John F. Kennedy of Massachusetts—the favorite to win the nomination—bringing the senator more support from the North Carolina Democratic delegation than any other Southern state, but angering Hodges and some of his own supporters and stoking division in the state Democratic Party. Kennedy ultimately secured the nomination and selected Johnson as the vice presidential nominee.

Sanford faced a strong opponent for the governor&#x27;s race, Robert L. Gavin, a moderate conservative Republican attorney. Gavin denounced Sanford as a tool of the liberal leadership of the national Democratic Party and organized labor. Although his reputation had been harmed by his early endorsement of Kennedy, Sanford enthusiastically campaigned for the two of them. He attacked Gavin for contradicting himself on several occasions and for displaying a lack of familiarity with certain issues. In the November election both Kennedy and Sanford won the offices they sought. Kennedy won the popular vote in North Carolina. Sanford won with 54.3 percent of the vote, approximately 131,000 votes over Gavin, but his performance was lackluster for a Democrat seeking state office at the time. Sanford remained proud of his gubernatorial victory for the rest of his life, feeling he had defeated a racist candidate (Lake) and avenged Graham&#x27;s loss in 1950. Out of appreciation for Sanford&#x27;s contribution to his campaign, Kennedy appointed Hodges to his cabinet as United States Secretary of Commerce. Sanford arranged for Bennett to assume the chairmanship of the North Carolina Democratic Party. In that capacity, Bennett organized continued backing for Sanford within the party and eased the way for many of Sanford&#x27;s supporters to advance in its ranks.

Sanford was sworn in as Governor on January 5, 1961. In his inaugural address he declared, &quot;There is a new day in North Carolina! ... Gone are the shackles. Gone are the limitations. Gone are the overwhelming obstacles. North Carolina is on the move and we intend to stay on the move.&quot; He became the youngest governor in North Carolina since Charles B. Aycock and the first born in the 20th century.

=== Education ===
In 1960, North Carolina spent $237 per pupil in public school (as opposed to New York&#x27;s $562), paid some of the lowest salaries in the country to its teachers, had overcrowded high school classes, and had the lowest average number of years of education among its residents in the United States. Sanford believed that improved statewide education would raise North Carolina&#x27;s low average wages. In his inaugural address, he affirmed his wish to increase spending for the purpose, saying, &quot;If it takes more taxes to give our children this quality education, we must face that fact and provide the money. We must never lose sight of the fact that our children are our best investment. This is no age for the faint of heart.&quot; Sanford spent the first few months of his time in office lobbying for a legislative plan to increase state spending on education.

The centerpiece of Sanford&#x27;s education platform was the Quality Education Program, which called for a 22 percent increase in average teacher pay, 33 percent more funds for instructional supplies, and a 100 percent increase in school library money. Sanford initially had difficulty figuring out how to fund his proposal, as the state already levied comparatively high income and corporate taxes, and a luxury tax on goods such as tobacco and soft drinks was likely to upset much of the populace. Many other elected state officials were fiscally conservative, and were likely to oppose any significant borrowing of money and raising debts. At the end of February 1961, Sanford decided to fund his proposals through the elimination of exemptions of the state&#x27;s 3 percent sales tax on certain goods, including food and prescription drugs. The advanced taxes were controversial, and the conservative General Assembly was hesitant to pass them into law. Upon the convening of the General Assembly in March many legislators commented in private that the proposal was doomed to fail. Liberals and journalists criticized it as unfair to the poor, who would be hurt the most by a tax on food. Despite these doubts, Sanford had the good faith of legislative leaders, being friends with Lieutenant Governor Harvey Cloyd Philpott and working on building a relationship with Speaker of the State House of Representatives Joseph M. Hunt Jr.
Sanford promoted his plan through a series of rallies across the state, arguing that North Carolina trailed most other states with respect to education and that the exemptions elimination was more acceptable than a 1 percent tax increase on all other items. He also intensively lobbied state legislators, inviting them to breakfast at the Governor&#x27;s Mansion and visiting them at the Sir Walter Hotel. Aside from arguing for his program, Sanford granted political favors in exchange for support. He also actively challenged his critics to think of a better way to fund the education plan. Members of the press and disgruntled liberals backed down when they realized that without the new levy the education expansions would have to be scaled down.

Sanford&#x27;s effort was ultimately successful and the General Assembly implemented his program and the taxes. Average teacher salaries for North Carolina quickly rose from 39th to 32nd among the states, and per-pupil expenditures rose from 45th to 38th. Sanford&#x27;s successful lobbying gained national attention. He was subsequently invited to numerous events around the country to speak about his education plan, and he visited thirty states. The increase in taxes was nevertheless poorly received in North Carolina and resulted in a backlash; in November 1961 the electorate rejected 10 state bond proposals in a referendum—the first time a bond had been turned down since 1924—and a public opinion poll found that three fifths of the population disapproved of Sanford&#x27;s performance as Governor. The referendum defeat demoralized Sanford&#x27;s staff. Though upset with the outcome and unapologetic in supporting the bonds, Sanford insisted on moving past the failure and focusing his attention elsewhere. In the 1962 elections the Democrats lost seats in the State House of Representatives. Sanford was disappointed, but he remained convinced that the tax proposal was the best way to fund his program and refused to heed calls to alter it.

In 1961 Sanford appointed a Governor&#x27;s Commission on Education Beyond the High School under the leadership of Irving E. Carlyle. The commission produced a set of proposals in August 1962 aimed at increasing college enrollment in North Carolina. One of its recommendations was the consolidation of the state&#x27;s &quot;public junior colleges&quot; and &quot;industrial education centers&quot; under a single system of community colleges. In May 1963 the General Assembly responded by creating a Department of Community Colleges under the State Board of Education. Sanford also convinced the legislature to establish the North Carolina School of the Arts to retain gifted students &quot;in the fields of music, drama, the dance and allied performing arts, at both the high school and college levels of instruction&quot; in their home state.

Sanford&#x27;s policies ultimately resulted in the near-doubling of North Carolina&#x27;s expenditures on public schools and the hiring of 2,800 additional teachers. However, he struggled to ensure the state&#x27;s educational funding maintained parity with other states and matched with inflation. Despite convincing the legislature to appropriate an additional $50 million () towards public schools during the 1963 session, by the end of his tenure North Carolina&#x27;s national rankings in educational expenditures had fallen.

=== North Carolina Fund ===
Feeling that his education program had spent most of his political capital in the legislature, Sanford began seeking private support to fund anti-poverty efforts in North Carolina. While traveling across the state to promote his education plan, Sanford came to believe that much of the poverty in North Carolina was due to racial discrimination and the lack of economic opportunity for blacks. He thus concluded that any anti-poverty plan he created would have to address economic problems for both blacks and whites. In mid-1962 he met John Ehle, a novelist and professor whom he quickly took on as an adviser on public policy. With Ehle he met with leaders of the Ford Foundation, a private philanthropic organization, and discussed a variety of issues with them, including anti-poverty efforts. He also established contact with George Esser, an academic at UNC-Chapel Hill&#x27;s Institute of Government, to ask him for potential uses of Ford Foundation funds in combating poverty. Sanford&#x27;s aides organized a three-day tour of North Carolina in January 1963 for Ford Foundation leaders to convince them to fund an anti-poverty project. He worked to secure the support of the Z. Smith Reynolds Foundation and the Mary Reynolds Babcock Foundation, two smaller North Carolina philanthropic organizations, to bolster proposed grants from the Ford Foundation, and tapped the advice of John H. Wheeler, leader of the black business community in Durham. He also invited officials from the U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare to come to North Carolina to work on coordinating federal efforts with the state project.
In July 1963 the Ford Foundation committed $7 million to support an anti-poverty project in North Carolina. With additional grants from the other foundations, on July 18 Sanford and several civic leaders incorporated the North Carolina Fund. Its goals were to fight poverty and promote racial equality across the state. Since the North Carolina Fund was backed by private organizations and not financed by the state, it could be more flexible in addressing social issues while also avoiding political opposition from segregationists. Sanford was made chairman of the Fund&#x27;s board and publicly announced its creation at a press conference on September 30. The organization had a racially integrated staff—which was unusual at the time—and consulted the local residents it aimed to assist. The Fund launched a program that utilized team teaching and provided for teacher aides, which was studied by President Johnson&#x27;s administration and used as a model for Head Start. The Fund also supported eleven additional anti-poverty programs under another initiative which included the establishment of day care facilities and job training courses. These were also evaluated by the Johnson administration when it developed its &quot;war on poverty&quot; programs. Sanford himself was disappointed by Johnson&#x27;s war on poverty and the agency responsible for it, the Office of Economic Opportunity, and told federal officials that the goal of their effort should not be to eliminate poverty—which Sanford thought impossible—as much as it should be to reduce the &quot;causes of poverty.&quot; The Fund ceased operations in 1969.

=== Race relations and civil rights ===
When Sanford assumed the governorship, the state of racial affairs in North Carolina was essentially the same as it had been since the early 1900s. The vast majority of schools and public accommodations remained segregated, and nonwhite voter registration rates were significantly lower than those of whites. In his inaugural address, Sanford appealed for mutual respect and understanding between races and said that &quot;no group of our citizens can be denied the right to participate in the opportunities of first-class citizenship.&quot; He enrolled his daughter Betsee and his son Terry in the integrated Murphy School (it was attended by a single black student), an action which received attention in the state and national press.

Sanford had considered racism to be immoral since he was student at the University of North Carolina, but initially wished to avoid dealing with issues of racial equality directly as governor, viewing it as a distraction from his main platform and politically dangerous. He had no planned strategy or agenda for the issue. However, he soon felt that as governor he had to take some action to address the growing tension in the United States due to the increasing activity of the civil rights movement. Shortly after taking office, he began appointing black professionals to state offices. Ultimately, he placed over three dozen blacks on state boards, commissions, and committees. He also consulted black community and business leaders on civil rights issues. In 1961 Sanford and the chairman of the Board of Conservation and Development, Skipper Bowles, decided to integrate North Carolina&#x27;s state parks. Sanford generally believed that the use of persuasion and appeals to decency instead of invoking the law and employing force would mollify segregationists and lead to social change. He thought that the &quot;basic goodness of people&quot; would prevail in racial matters, and was often disappointed to encounter hostility from North Carolinians opposed to desegregation.

In May 1961 a multiracial group of civil rights activists known as Freedom Riders prepared to enter North Carolina on intercity buses to ensure the desegregation of them and related transit facilities in the South. Under Sanford&#x27;s orders, the State Highway Patrol monitored the buses&#x27; movements and guarded against potential violence from angry segregationist whites. Throughout his tenure Sanford would deploy state police at civil rights demonstrations to maintain order and deter violence, but he never used them to disperse demonstrators. He later said, &quot;It was up to us to keep the order and let them demonstrate, which was constitutional. It was unthinkable to put them in jail for that.&quot; He also expressed support for President Kennedy&#x27;s actions to maintain order during the integration of the University of Mississippi. Sanford remained conscious of the desires of the white constituency which had elected him, and in one instance wrote federal officials to request that a group of white North Carolinian army reservists be reassigned from the predominantly black army unit to which they were posted. Sanford let the matter drop after the United States Department of Defense refused to honor his request. Journalists often wrote about Sanford&#x27;s actions regarding racial issues and dubbed him a leading moderate. He enjoyed the media attention, but shied away from being portrayed as party to a conflict with the South&#x27;s more hardline segregationist governors.
Sanford&#x27;s cautious stance on civil rights and racial issues began to change while he traveled across North Carolina to visit schools to promote his education program. Sanford visited both white and black schools and encouraged the students to pursue their education as means of securing economic prosperity in the future. Over time he grew uncomfortable saying this to black schoolchildren, later explaining, &quot;I had the sickening feeling that every time I talked to them I was saying words that were a mockery ... I was talking about opportunities that I knew, and I feared they knew, didn&#x27;t exist, no matter how hard they might work in school.&quot; Sanford was also moved to reconsider his views after discovering that many elderly blacks in Raleigh were—to his surprise—dissatisfied with the status quo and financially supporting student protestors.

Once resolved that he had to take more action to support racial equality, Sanford began making statements in favor of it. In October 1962, he said that poverty in North Carolina was worsened by the lack of economic opportunity for blacks and that whites would have to handle the &quot;difficult problems of race&quot; in a &quot;spirit of Christian fellowship&quot;. He subsequently drafted a speech entitled &quot;Observations for a Second Century&quot; which directly called for the support of civil rights. Sanford shared his work with over 100 of his associates; most were supportive of his aims, but others feared the consequences his statement would have on the Democratic Party. On January 18, 1963, Sanford delivered his address at the Carolina Inn before the North Carolina Press Association. In the speech he called for an end to racially discriminatory employment practices—making him the first Southern governor to do so—saying, &quot;The time has come for American citizens to give up this reluctance, to quit unfair discrimination, and to give the Negro a full chance to earn a decent living for his family and to contribute to higher standards for himself and all men.&quot; The same day Sanford announced the creation of the Good Neighbor Council, a biracial panel aimed at developing voluntary nondiscriminatory hiring practices and encouraging youth to prepare for gainful employment. The council did not have any provision to enforce its recommendations and thus its impact was minimal. Sanford also requested that the heads of state agencies adopt nondiscriminatory hiring policies and supported a bill that reduced racial barriers in the North Carolina National Guard.

Ultimately, Sanford&#x27;s attempts at reform did not significantly alter employment dynamics in the state and only benefited a minority of blacks. The racial integration of public schools also made little progress during his tenure. Many young black people felt Sanford was not doing enough to address their concerns. In May 1963, 500 black student demonstrators gathered on the lawn of the Governor&#x27;s Mansion and chanted for the governor to come out. Sanford told them, &quot;If you want to talk to me at any time about your plans and your problems, let my office know. You have not come to me with any requests.&quot; When one of the demonstrators yelled that Sanford should have already been aware of their grievances without any specific requests, Sanford responded, &quot;I&#x27;m not dictator, son. You&#x27;re in a democracy.&quot; The group booed him and eventually left the premises.

In late May and early June, 400 black students from North Carolina Agricultural and Technical College in Greensboro were arrested for breaking segregationist practices in cafeterias and movie theaters. Sanford arranged for their release and had them returned to the college campus. Later in June, he summoned 150 black civic leaders to the North Carolina State Capitol where he told them that he would not &quot;let mass demonstrations destroy us.&quot; He told them that their enemy was not white people; instead, it was &quot;a system bequeathed to us by a cotton economy, kindled by stubbornness, intolerance, hotheadedness, North and South exploding into war and leaving to our generation the ashes of vengeance, retribution, and poverty. The way to fight this common enemy is education.&quot; In early July, Sanford convened a meeting of over 200 municipal officials and established a Mayors Coordinating Committee to address civil rights concerns.

In January 1964, James Farmer and Floyd McKissick of the Congress of Racial Equality demanded that the city of Chapel Hill, already one of the most integrated communities in the state, fully desegregate by February 1 or face a wave of demonstrations. Sanford released a statement of reproach towards the ultimatum and promised municipal officials his support. He later said, &quot;I felt that I had been pushed around long enough.&quot; The following month activists went through with their protests, heightening local tensions and resulting in numerous arrests. Sanford hosted Farmer and McKissick at the Governor&#x27;s Mansion in an attempt to broker a solution, but the situation was not resolved until a local committee reached an agreement between the demonstrators and municipal officials.

===Later tenure===

Kennedy&#x27;s personal secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, stated that Kennedy told her he was going to remove Johnson as vice president from his electoral ticket in the 1964 presidential election and was considering replacing him with Sanford. Sanford later dismissed these rumors, feeling that such an action was not politically advantageous and would have damaged Kennedy&#x27;s election prospects in the South. Kennedy was assassinated on November 22, 1963. Sanford&#x27;s office issued a brief statement, calling the event &quot;overwhelming&quot;. Sanford and his family attended Kennedy&#x27;s state funeral in Washington, D.C. The assassination came at a time when Sanford had been lobbying Kennedy to consider locating a large environmental research center in North Carolina. The decision then fell to Johnson, who succeeded Kennedy as the president and had to consider pressure from other politicians that wanted the facility in their own respective states.
Sanford&#x27;s racial policies upset North Carolina&#x27;s white populace, though he was able to contain white backlash throughout his administration. During the 1964 North Carolina gubernatorial election, L. Richardson Preyer, a supporter of Sanford, faced conservative Dan K. Moore in the Democratic primary election. Sanford was constitutionally restricted from seeking a successive term. He had originally wanted Lieutenant Governor Philpott to succeed him, but Philpott had unexpectedly died in August 1961. He instead endorsed Preyer while Lake endorsed Moore. At the same time Johnson was running for election as president, and Sanford actively supported him. The gubernatorial contest devolved into a &quot;de facto&quot; referendum on Sanford&#x27;s tenure, particularly his handling of race matters, and Moore secured the nomination. Lake dubbed the outcome a popular rejection of Sanford&#x27;s service. Sanford felt betrayed by civil rights leaders, since he thought that their insistence on continuing demonstrations in Chapel Hill had aggravated white resentment and damaged Preyer&#x27;s electoral prospects.

Anticipating that Moore and his allies would attempt to dismantle some of his initiatives upon assuming office, Sanford spent the last six months of his term trying to ensure the protection of his projects, placing one of Moore&#x27;s top aides on the board of the North Carolina Fund and transferring a summer internship program for college students interested in state politics out of the governor&#x27;s office and into UNC&#x27;s Institute of Government. Sanford also urged the Research Triangle Institute to study affordable housing proposals and established a commission to plan for the future of development and growth in the Piedmont Crescent region. He traveled to Washington, D.C. to have his official portrait made and then went to New York to present Jacqueline Kennedy with North Carolina&#x27;s financial contribution to the construction of the Kennedy Library. In early December, Sanford commuted the sentences of several Chapel Hill protesters. Shortly before leaving office in January 1965, he reached a deal with the Johnson administration for the $25 million environmental research facility to be located at the Research Triangle Park. In his final publicly broadcast address as governor, he asserted, &quot;If our weapon against poverty and bigotry is education, we can conquer all battles and make North Carolina a leader of all the rest of the nation.&quot; He was succeeded as Governor of North Carolina by Moore on January 8, 1965.

== Immediate post-gubernatorial career ==
By the time his term was over, Sanford was very unpopular in North Carolina. Discontent over the sales tax on food gradually faded and his favorability ratings improved over subsequent years. After leaving office, he returned to Fayetteville and opened a new law firm in Raleigh with some of his former colleagues. In 1966, he published &quot;But What About the People?&quot;, a book about his tenure as governor. The following year, he released &quot;Storm Over the States&quot;, a study of the role of state governments in handling American public issues.

In 1967, Sanford mulled over the possibility of challenging conservative Democrat Sam Ervin for his U.S. Senate seat, who he thought of as a &quot;constitutional racist&quot;. He ultimately decided against it after concluding that the contest would divide the Democratic Party and he would lose on account of his civil rights positions. He then agreed to serve as President Johnson&#x27;s campaign manager in the 1968 presidential election just before Johnson&#x27;s withdrawal on March 31. Vice President Hubert Humphrey then became the presumptive Democratic nominee for president, and considered including Sanford on his ticket as the vice presidential candidate. Sanford attended the 1968 Democratic National Convention, and delivered the speech seconding Humphrey&#x27;s nomination for the party&#x27;s endorsement. He was embittered by the disdain with which the delegates treated the outgoing President Johnson, and disapproved of Humphrey&#x27;s choice of Senator Edmund Muskie of Maine for as his vice presidential candidate. Johnson offered to appoint him United States Secretary of Agriculture for the last few months of his term, but Sanford declined. He subsequently served as chairman for the Citizens for Humphrey-Muskie Committee and in that position helped fundraise for Humphrey&#x27;s campaign and encouraged the candidate to break from Johnson&#x27;s views on the controversial Vietnam War. Humphrey lost the election to Republican Richard Nixon.

== President of Duke University ==
=== Selection ===

In 1969, the private Duke University in Durham, North Carolina, was wracked by a wave of student unrest over the Vietnam War and civil rights issues. Unable to contain the situation, University President Douglas Knight resigned and the board of trustees began searching for a new president. Sanford heard rumors of his consideration and, though he thought he would like the job, believed it was unlikely that it would ultimately be offered to him. During this time he focused on work at his law firm while turning down several prospective private sector positions, as he wanted to keep his options open in case he wanted to run for public office again. In late October 1969, the university&#x27;s presidential search committee officially contacted Sanford and began discussing how he would approach the job. On December 13, the committee informed Sanford that he had been chosen for the presidency. He assumed the responsibilities of the job on April 2, 1970, and was officially inaugurated in a ceremony on October 17, 1970. On his first day as university president, Sanford removed a cap on Jewish enrollment, allowing the number of Jewish students to significantly increase over the following years.

=== Finances ===
When Sanford assumed the university&#x27;s presidency he sought to improve the school&#x27;s status. At the time it was experiencing a budget deficit and suffered from a small endowment. Seeking to increase donations, he sought to increase the school&#x27;s enrollment from North Carolinian public school students and private school students from elsewhere. He hired Croom Beatty, a boarding school fundraiser, as associate director for admissions and tasked him with finding children at private schools who came from wealthy backgrounds. Croom would canvas the private schools for such students and, if he determined that their enrollment at Duke would financially benefit the university, he would recommend Sanford personally review their application—even if they had earned lower grades or test scores. Sanford also personally recommended the consideration of applications from children of prospective donors who he had learned of from various contacts. He also directed baseball coach Tom Butters to spend the summer of 1970 fundraising and sought out North Carolinian alumni to ask for their financial support. By the time of his departure, the alumni&#x27;s annual giving total had climbed from $750,000 to almost $6 million, and the school&#x27;s endowment had grown from $80 million to $200 million.

=== Relationship with the student body ===
Since students were generally suspicious of campus administration when Sanford assumed office, he took public actions to try and accommodate their wishes. He declared his opposition to the Vietnam War to assuage student protests and was receptive to a request from antiwar students to invite a war critic to campus. Following the shooting of student protesters at Kent State University in May 1970, Duke students boycotted classes and began planning mass demonstrations to close the school. Determined to prevent the university&#x27;s operations from being interrupted, he refused to call police on campus and instructed his staff to make themselves available to students to hear their grievances while he went to the protestors&#x27; gatherings to engage with them. He encouraged the students to petition the federal government and canvas residents in Durham for their opinions on the war. He objected to Vice President Spiro Agnew&#x27;s criticism of student protestors in a &quot;New York Times&quot; op-ed, writing, &quot;The deep troubles of our society do not begin on college campuses, are not bred there, and are not centered there. Instead, our possibilities for resolving these troubles find their greatest hope on college campuses.&quot;

Sanford sought to increase student involvement in the running of the university, and hired upperclassmen to work in his office as assistants and researchers. He also designated students to serve as greeters and guides for visiting dignitaries and held social meetings with incoming freshmen at his house, eventually known as &quot;Tea with Terry&quot;. From before his tenure students had complained about a lack of representation on the university board of trustees, and after some students refused to leave an early trustee meeting he negotiated a deal with them, whereby they would leave but a reporter from the student newspaper, &quot;The Chronicle&quot;, would stay to report on the proceedings and a committee would be formed to consider making the meetings public. The committee later agreed to the idea, and in late 1970 Sanford recommended a student representative be designated to sit with the board. The &quot;radical&quot; students on campus were surprised by his accommodating style. Duke graduate and local journalist Mark Pinksy told &quot;The New York Times&quot;, &quot;He&#x27;s just plain smarter than the radicals are. He&#x27;s co-opted the hell out of them.&quot;

=== Regional issues and economic and government reform ===
In the fall of 1970, Sanford permitted Duke students leave to participate in congressional campaigns. That election season, numerous New South governors were elected across the Southern United States, including Dale Bumpers in Arkansas, Reubin Askew in Florida, John C. West in South Carolina, and Jimmy Carter in Georgia. Sanford held a grudge against Carter for using race-baiting tactics to defeat his friend Carl Sanders in the Democratic primary. These new governors mostly avoided racial rhetoric in office and advocated for governmental reform, triggering renewed national interest in the region. In a speech in May 1971, &quot;The South&#x27;s time has come after a century of being the whipping boy and the backward child [...] The South can lead the nation, must lead the nation—and all the better, because the nation has never been in greater need of leadership.&quot; Sanford suggested that the Southern states act in concert in their efforts to resolve regional issues; he proposed that a regional body be established to assist in coordinating growth and economic development in the South. Working with academics, he assisted in the foundation of the Southern Growth Policies Board on December 16, 1971.

In 1971 Sanford also recruited Joel Fleishman, one of his former aides in the governor&#x27;s office, to come to Duke and establish a school for public policy. Fleishman created the Institute of Policy Studies and Public Affairs in January 1972. In July 1979 Sanford began a year-long sabbatical and used the time to write &quot;A Danger of Democracy&quot;, a book which proposed reforming political parties&#x27; presidential nomination processes.

=== Nixon presidential library ===
In 1981 Sanford entertained the idea of locating Nixon&#x27;s presidential library and museum at Duke, where it could become a center of research and bolster the university&#x27;s reputation. Sanford raised the subject with Nixon during a visit to the former president at Nixon&#x27;s New York City office on July 28, 1981, and the former president was receptive to the idea. While Sanford tried to win over the faculty to his idea—many of whom disliked Nixon and were worried about his scandal-ridden reputation damaging the university—the media began reporting that Duke was a prospective site for the library. Opposition from professors mounted as they expressed concerns that the museum would become little more than a monument to Nixon while the most sensitive and valuable documents of his public career would not be kept in the library. Some called for Sanford&#x27;s resignation. The Duke Academic Council, a governing body representing the university&#x27;s faculty, voted to eliminate the museum from the offer and scale down the planned size of the library. Discouraged, Nixon declined Sanford&#x27;s offer and established his library in Yorba Linda, California. Sanford originally planned to retire in 1982, but decided to stay longer to finish overseeing some developments and let the acrimony of the Nixon library debate fade. He officially resigned on July 4, 1985 and was replaced by H. Keith H. Brodie, his preferred successor.

===Concurrent political activities===

Upon being invested as president of Duke, Sanford told a &quot;New York Times&quot; reporter that he had decided against any state-related political responsibilities through 1972, but had not pledged similarly about a national office, saying, &quot;I won&#x27;t campaign for it, but I&#x27;ve never made a Sherman-like statement that I wouldn&#x27;t accept it.&quot; Privately, he maintained contact with some of his former political acquaintances such as Bennett, but felt that if he became too politically involved the board of trustees would fire him. Sanford believed that Nixon would be re-elected to the United States presidency and ruled out the possibility of seeking the Democratic nomination in the 1972 presidential primary. That January, several Duke students approached him to request his assent to a petition to put his name on the Democratic ballot, feeling that the slate of candidates in the primary was weak. Sanford himself thought Senator Edmund Muskie—who was gaining endorsements from party stalwarts—was an unremarkable candidate and was worried that liberals were uniting behind Senator George McGovern, and had encouraged Humphrey to re-seek nomination.

Sanford figured that the board of trustees would solve his dilemma by forcing him to stop the petition drive. The board argued over the affair, but ultimately decided to let Sanford launch a candidacy. His friends thought a presidential campaign was ill-advised, and North Carolina Governor Bob Scott—who had already pledged his support to Muskie—was angered when he learned of Sanford possibly entering the race. Sanford claimed to have firmly decided to contest the nomination after seeing Muskie&#x27;s public reaction to the Canuck letter. According to biographers Howard E. Covington Jr. and Marion Ellis, &quot;If there was anything that moved Sanford to make the leap in 1972, it was probably his desire to challenge Wallace and show the nation that all Southern politicians were not demagogues.&quot; George Wallace was the Governor of Alabama and an avowed racial segregationist. Sanford felt that Wallace did not truly believe in segregation and employed race-baiting tactics as an opportunity to gain votes. He later said of Wallace, &quot;I always thought George was just a pure hypocrite [...] George saw it as just a great game, just another issue to be played, and he played it the way it was an advantage to play it.&quot; He publicly declared his candidacy for the Democratic nomination for the presidency on March 8. He stated his intention to stay on Duke&#x27;s campus and campaign on the weekends to aim to get the support of 100 delegates before the Democratic convention.

Some media response was positive, but the press was generally skeptical of Sanford&#x27;s candidacy. He struggled to gain media attention, and ran on a platform of eliminating tax loopholes for rich people, establishing price controls on food, increasing Social Security payments by 25 percent, supporting equal rights for women, creating a national health insurance plan, and devolution of power from the federal government to the states. While focusing most of his efforts on North Carolina, he also built a small national campaign organization. One poll showed Wallace in first place in North Carolina with 33 percent of the vote and Sanford with 28 percent; the latter was encouraged, but anxious that Congresswoman Shirley Chisholm would draw away black voters he needed to overcome Wallace. On the night before the election, he conducted a television appearance where voters asked him questions about his platform. Responding to a question about the seriousness of his candidacy for the presidency or if he was seeking a position to bargain for another office, he said, &quot;I&#x27;d rather be president of Duke University than vice president and furthermore I&#x27;d rather be unemployed than be in the cabinet.&quot;

Wallace won the North Carolina with over 40 percent of the total, securing 408,000 votes. Sanford received 304,000, while Chisholm got 61,000. Sanford&#x27;s friend Sam Poole said that the loss &quot;was really a very low point in his life.&quot; Despite the setback, he decided to continue his campaign to the convention in Miami. He managed only a fifth-place finish with 77.5 delegate votes. Undeterred, Sanford began preparations two years later for a run for the 1976 Democratic presidential nomination. Announcing his candidacy on June 1, 1975, he juggled campaign appearances with his obligations as president of Duke. While campaigning in Massachusetts, he suffered sharp pains and was diagnosed with a heart murmur. On January 25, Sanford withdrew from the primaries, the first Democrat to do so that year. He was left near bankruptcy by his abortive candidacy, though his friend Paul Vick later assisted him in managing his finances and recouping some of his wealth. He thereafter refocused his time on running the university, and in 1977 he rejected President Jimmy Carter&#x27;s offer to appoint him United States Ambassador to France. After retiring as president of Duke University, Sanford made an unsuccessful run for chairman of the Democratic National Committee in 1985, losing to Paul G. Kirk by a vote of 203–150.

== Senate career ==
===1986 campaign and election===
In late 1985 Sanford began consulting his friends on the possibility of running in the 1986 Senate election. Sanford declared his candidacy in January 1986. The announcement surprised and embittered his longtime friend and political ally Lauch Faircloth, who had wanted to run for the seat with Sanford&#x27;s support and was angered by rumors that Sanford had denigrated his own chances in an election. After the misunderstanding, Faircloth and Sanford did not speak with one another until shortly before the latter&#x27;s death. Sanford won the Democratic primary with 409,394 votes, easily defeating the nine other candidates and marking the first time he had won a statewide election since 1960. His opponent in the general election was Republican U.S. House Representative Jim Broyhill as the incumbent senator, Republican John P. East, had declared his intention to retire. After East committed suicide on June 29, 1986, Broyhill was temporarily appointed to the seat on July 3, pending the election to fill it on November 4. During the campaign Sanford stressed his accomplishments as governor and his military service. Critics of Sanford primarily focused on three areas: his promotion of opportunities for minorities, &quot;tax-and-spend&quot; education funding, and his anti-poverty efforts. Sanford initially maintained a positive campaign, but attacked Broyhill as &quot;no friend of education&quot; and criticised his failure to minimize President Ronald Reagan&#x27;s free trade policies which hurt the textiles industry after Broyhill released a television ad that condemned his imposition of the sales tax on food while serving as governor. Sanford defeated Broyhill by three percentage points in the November election earning about 60,000 more votes, securing victory in the contest to serve the last months of East&#x27;s term and the subsequent six-year term. He was sworn in to office on December 10 by his friend and former law partner Judge James Dickson Phillips Jr. on the steps of the United States Capitol. He was sworn in again to the full six-year term on January 6, 1987.

=== Tenure ===
Sanford felt uncomfortable in the Senate after being used to holding executive offices, writing, &quot;We get so little done for all the energy we expend.&quot; He served on multiple Senate committees: Select Committee on Ethics (Chair); Special Committee on Aging; Budget; Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs including the Subcommittee on International Finance and Monetary Policy and Subcommittee on Securities; and Foreign Relations including the Subcommittee on Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Chair), Subcommittee on African Affairs, and Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere and Peace Corps Affairs. As was custom among members of the majority party, Sanford presided over sessions of the Senate on several occasions. He stayed in an apartment near the Capitol, and usually reported to his office by 8:00 am and worked until returning home later in the evening. He usually returned to his house in Durham on the weekends.

During his Senate campaign, Sanford criticized President Reagan&#x27;s policy towards the Contra War in Nicaragua, as the federal government funneled American financial support to the right-aligned Contras while they waged an insurgency against the leftist Sandanista government. Sanford hoped to propose an alternative solution to the conflict based upon the Marshall Plan. In February 1986, Sanford and Senator Chris Dodd traveled to Central America to study the issue. At the same time President Oscar Arias of Costa Rica was hosting a multilateral conference with representatives of nearby countries troubled by the conflict in Nicaragua. Sanford proposed to Arias that after the war ended a multinational working group be created to plan for economic redevelopment of the region. Arias was receptive to the idea, and soon after Sanford returned to the United States he delivered his first major speech before the Senate, supporting a resolution commending Arias&#x27; initiatives to host negotiations and end the Nicaraguan war. The resolution passed, 97 votes to 1. In June, Sanford announced the creation of an International Commission for Central American Recovery and Development to create an outline for regional development under the coordination of Duke University&#x27;s Center for International Development Research. As with the North Carolina Fund, Sanford secured backing from private philanthropic organizations to fund the body&#x27;s work. By the time the group had its first meeting in December, he had recruited 47 members including diplomats, scholars, and economists. Though Sanford was not a member of the body, it became known as the &quot;Sanford Commission&quot; for his role in its creation. He repeatedly returned to Central America to tour Nicaragua and observe Arias&#x27; peace process.

The commission published its report in 1989, recommending action taken to ensure human rights and the fulfillment of the economic necessities of the region&#x27;s population. The document was endorsed by five Central American presidents. Sanford believed the commission&#x27;s work hastened the end of the Contra War and reoriented local focus on economic recovery, reflecting, &quot;I consider it the most significant thing I did in Washington.&quot; Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega personally thanked Sanford for his efforts, and he was commended by his Senate colleagues Bob Dole and John Kerry. Sanford proposed a bill to appropriate federal funds to the commission&#x27;s use, but it was not acted upon for years and was rivaled by North Carolina&#x27;s senior U.S. Senator, Jesse Helms, who sought to attach statements to it calling on Central America to embrace free enterprise initiatives. Sanford found Helms&#x27; actions irksome, and though his bill finally passed the Senate in September 1991, the money it appropriated was never handed over.

Sanford kept a journal during his Senate tenure, and often wrote about his irritation with the body&#x27;s deference to member seniority instead of better ideas, the existence of incomprehensible legislative rules, and jurisdictional feuds between committee chairs. He also perceived an increase in partisanship and a diminishing willingness for compromise. He strongly disliked Helms, writing, &quot;I think his service in the Senate has been largely of zero value to North Carolina...He has a negative attitude about everything, and it is very difficult to find anything up here that he has done that has any lasting value.&quot; The two usually maintained cordial relations, though in one instance Helms angrily denounced Sanford to the press after the latter made a joke at Helms&#x27; expense during a committee hearing. Helms later apologized.

From early on in his tenure Sanford was troubled by the Reagan administration&#x27;s growing deficit spending and Congress&#x27; toleration of it. He crafted an &quot;Honest Budget Bill&quot; that mandated a balanced budget, introduced taxes to increase revenue, and separated the Social Security Trust Fund from other government trusts. A few of his proposals were ultimately incorporated into other measures. During the contentious Robert Bork Supreme Court nomination, Sanford was chosen by Senate Democrats to deliver a televised address explaining their opposition to Bork&#x27;s nomination. Sanford stated that Bork was more interested in affirming his own personal opinions that conducting proper jurisprudence, and when the nomination came to a full vote before the Senate, Sanford voted against his nomination.

As a senator, Sanford was involved in efforts to recruit Democratic candidates for the 1988 United States presidential election. After unsuccessfully attempting to recruit Arkansas Senator Dale Bumpers and New York Governor Mario Cuomo, he endorsed Tennessee Senator Al Gore&#x27;s campaign, privately dismissing Jesse Jackson for running a &quot;purely racist campaign&quot;. Gore later dropped out and Sanford dutifully backed Democratic nominee Michael Dukakis, though he found Dukakis&#x27; campaign staff arrogant and uncooperative. Dukakis lost the election to Republican George H. W. Bush, and Democrats performed poorly in North Carolina elections, leaving Sanford as the leading elected North Carolina Democrat. In the contests&#x27; aftermath he increasingly bemoaned the leftward lean of the national Democratic Party, objecting to Ron Brown&#x27;s assumption of the chair of the Democratic National Committee and expressing concern that the Democrats were &quot;perceived by far too many people as being the black man&#x27;s party&quot;, thus losing support from moderate whites. Sanford wrote in his journal that &quot;the lingering race prejudice does, indeed, drive a great many white people away from the Democratic Party&quot;.
Sanford was initially hopeful that he could influence policy with the incoming Bush administration, but quickly tired of Bush, becoming outraged with his nomination of John Tower as Secretary of Defense and upset with—in his view—Bush&#x27;s focus on trivial affairs meant to garner him short-term electoral support rather than provide long-term benefit to the country. Following the Supreme Court&#x27;s decision to overturn the conviction of a man who had burned a United States Flag as an act of protest, Bush and congressional Republicans proposed a Flag Desecration Amendment to the United States Constitution that would make it illegal for a person to burn American flags. Sanford thought Bush was pursuing a &quot;demagogic, vote-getting, low-principled course&quot; and—though he personally disagreed with flag burning—he thought that such an amendment ran contrary to the ideals of political freedom included in the Bill of Rights. On October 17, 1989, Sanford delivered a speech in the Senate on the issue, saying that a prohibition of flag burning diminished the right to protest and weakened the Bill of Rights. He thought the speech was the best of his time in the Senate, and once he finished John Danforth, a cosponsor of the amendment, rose to say he had not thoughtfully considered the implications of the measure and would vote against it. The amendment ultimately failed to garner the necessary support of two-thirds of the body to pass.

By 1990, Sanford began having doubts about his future and about running for reelection. Reflecting on his past four years in the Senate, he wrote, &quot;Its usefulness, its contribution to the nation and the state...was marginal.&quot; Sanford had a liberal voting record in comparison to his Democratic colleagues from the South, and it was consistently more liberal than that of any of his North Carolinian predecessors, being given an American Conservative Union rating of 12 percent.

Following Iraq&#x27;s August Invasion of Kuwait, Bush moved military forces to the Persian Gulf region. Sanford preferred to impose sanctions against Iraq rather than pursue a military solution, saying to the Senate, &quot;There is no reason for us to get involved in a shooting, killing war to take Kuwait.&quot; He became a leading opponent of American involvement in the ensuing Gulf War while at the same time growing more resolved to retire from the Senate. Several weeks later he became surprised to hear that Faircloth had switched his party registration to Republican and was preparing to challenge Sanford in the 1992 election for his Senate seat. His efforts to recruit his own successor candidate failed. In September, Sanford abruptly changed his mind and decided to run for reelection, saying, &quot;I could find no decent way to be a lame duck.&quot;

===1992 campaign===

Sanford officially announced his campaign for reelection on December 2, 1991. He faced no opposition in the Democratic primary, while Faircloth, enjoying substantial backing from Helms&#x27; National Congressional Club, won the Republican primary. Both men pledged to run issues-oriented campaigns and avoid personal attacks. In June 1992 he became afflicted with illness and was admitted to Duke Medical Center for treatment of a heart valve infection. This delayed his attempts to campaign, but he returned to work in the Senate in late July. Sanford was heavily involved in the direction of his campaign and pledged to tour all 100 North Carolina counties. Early polling suggested he enjoyed a large lead over Faircloth. Faircloth attacked Sanford as beholden to special interests and an advocate of big government and higher taxes. Sanford countered by portraying his opponent as a conservative hard-liner. During a televised debate in September Sanford countered Faircloth&#x27;s accusations that he was a spendthrift by pointing to his efforts at budget reform.

By October Sanford&#x27;s heart infection had grown more serious and he underwent surgery to replace the troubled valve, temporarily preventing him from campaigning. He was released from the hospital two weeks later, but he was noticeably thinner and the surgery had risen public doubts about his health. Without his leadership during the interim, his campaign lost initiative to Faircloth, who questioned his views on the Gulf War and characterized him as a Washington, D.C., insider. On November 3, 1992, Faircloth won the election by a 100,000-vote margin, though Democrat Bill Clinton won national election as United States President, while Jim Hunt was reelected Governor of North Carolina. Sanford celebrated the overall outcome at the North Raleigh Hilton Hotel, declaring, &quot;This is a great night for the Democratic Party. We have the nation on the right track again. We have the state on the right track.&quot;

==Later life and death==
Shortly after the Senate race, Sanford was hired by Duke University to teach a course on state government. In 1993 he formed a law firm with former South Carolina governor Robert Evander McNair, but he eventually withdrew and formed another firm with former North Carolina governor James Holshouser in Raleigh. Sanford also finished his last book, &quot;Outlive Your Enemies: Grow Old Gracefully,&quot; a narrative about aging and health, and began work on a novel about a journalist addressing major issues of the 20th century. He supported several business ventures and remained in contact with various politicians, including President Clinton.

In December 1997 Sanford went to Duke Medical Center after experiencing a low-grade fever for several days, fearing he had a heart infection. Doctors discovered cancer in his esophagus and liver and ruled that it was inoperable. He died on April 18, 1998, at his home. His funeral was held four days later at Duke Chapel, and it was attended by 17 U.S. Senators, four former governors, 100 members of the General Assembly, and the North Carolina Council of State. Soldiers from the 82nd Airborne Division acted as an honor guard. Sanford was entombed in the chapel&#x27;s crypt.

== Legacy ==
Sanford was one of the key figures of the New South, a historical era of social modernization in the region. Journalist John Drescher dubbed him &quot;the first New South governor&quot; while George Wallace called him &quot;the symbol of the New South.&quot; Journalist Rob Christensen credited him with helping to &quot;set a tone of moderation in North Carolina in the sixties&quot;. He is remembered in North Carolina as the &quot;education governor&quot;; historians and journalists have often cited Sanford&#x27;s actions as governor as the source of North Carolina&#x27;s historical policy focus on reforming education. In recognition of his efforts in education and in other areas, a 1981 Harvard University survey named him one of the 10 best governors of the 20th century. A study conducted by political scientist Larry Sabato concluded that Sanford was one of the best 12 governors to serve in the United States between 1950 and 1975. Historian William D. Goldsmith wrote, &quot;Terry Sanford tested the limits of what a governor—or a politician period—could do in North Carolina of the early 1960s to advance human development without federal intervention.&quot; Journalist David Stout characterized Sanford as a &quot;contradictory politician&quot; and a man who &quot;lack[ed] burning desire.&quot;

Political scientist Tom Eamon dubbed Sanford &quot;North Carolina&#x27;s most celebrated liberal politician&quot;. Sanford served as a role model to a number of Southern governors, including his protégé Jim Hunt of North Carolina, William Winter of Mississippi, and Bill Clinton of Arkansas. When Parris Glendening was campaigning to become Governor of Maryland in 1994, he promised voters that would model his administration after Sanford&#x27;s. Upon Sanford&#x27;s death Clinton—then serving as President of the United States—said, &quot;His work and his influence literally changed the face and future of the South, making him one of the most influential Americans of the last 50 years.&quot; Senator John Edwards said that Sanford was his &quot;political hero&quot;. Duke University renamed the institute in public policy the Sanford School of Public Policy. Fayetteville Senior High School was renamed Terry Sanford High School in his honor in 1968. The Terry Sanford Federal Building and Courthouse in Raleigh was named in honor of Sanford in 1999.

== Notes ==
== Citations ==
== General references ==
* 
* 
* 
* - read online, registration required
* - Profile at Google Books
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==

* Guide to the Terry Sanford Papers, 1926–1996, Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Duke University.
* Oral History Interviews with Terry Sanford , , , , from Oral Histories of the American South


|-






|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q878810" start="0" end="19" title="Terry Sanford" label="James Terry Sanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="95" end="109" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="127" end="143" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q878647" start="167" end="198" title="List of governors of North Carolina" label="65th Governor of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="233" end="260" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. presidential candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="291" end="303" title="United States Senator" label="U.S. senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="470" end="486" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="571" end="586" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904873" start="597" end="623" title="Laurinburg, North Carolina" label="Laurinburg, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="642" end="673" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655853" start="674" end="687" title="special agent" label="special agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q192334" start="714" end="757" title="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill" label="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="774" end="786" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="801" end="819" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="842" end="858" title="European Theater of World War II" label="European Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q167102" start="919" end="961" title="University of North Carolina School of Law" label="University of North Carolina School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269863" start="1068" end="1089" title="North Carolina Senate" label="North Carolina Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q885047" start="1102" end="1115" title="W. Kerr Scott" label="W. Kerr Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013679" start="1274" end="1294" title="I. Beverly Lake, Sr." label="I. Beverly Lake, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="1655" end="1663" title="South United States" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="1784" end="1796" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054490" start="1832" end="1851" title="North Carolina Fund" label="North Carolina Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187093" start="1950" end="1972" title="Research Triangle Park" label="Research Triangle Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="2409" end="2416" title="Modern liberalism in the United States" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049407" start="2447" end="2517" title="International Commission for Central American Recovery and Development" label="International Commission for Central American Recovery and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q493960" start="2549" end="2575" title="Flag Desecration Amendment" label="Flag Desecration Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="2621" end="2629" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904873" start="3001" end="3027" title="Laurinburg, North Carolina" label="Laurinburg, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="3263" end="3279" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586947" start="4083" end="4110" title="Presbyterian Junior College" label="Presbyterian Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865512" start="4114" end="4120" title="Maxton, North Carolina" label="Maxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q192334" start="4337" end="4380" title="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill" label="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q167102" start="4589" end="4631" title="University of North Carolina School of Law" label="University of North Carolina School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709944" start="4662" end="4675" title="Albert Coates (professor)" label="Albert Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5021" end="5033" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="5126" end="5133" title="Conscription" label="a draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="5176" end="5188" title="United States Armed Forces" label="Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140008" start="5235" end="5249" title="United States Army Air Corps" label="Army Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q660236" start="5278" end="5298" title="pilot&amp;#x27;s license" label="pilot&amp;#x27;s license"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="5406" end="5418" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5427" end="5431" title="United States" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="5519" end="5550" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655853" start="5713" end="5726" title="special agent" label="special agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="5730" end="5744" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="5750" end="5759" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q106455222" start="5772" end="5792" title="Margaret Rose Sanford" label="Margaret Rose Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q749387" start="6049" end="6060" title="paratrooper" label="paratrooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="6122" end="6126" title="United States Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988949" start="6163" end="6174" title="Camp Toccoa" label="Camp Toccoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639776" start="6247" end="6270" title="501st Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="501st Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438462" start="6351" end="6363" title="Fort Benning" label="Fort Benning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029871" start="6379" end="6391" title="Camp Mackall" label="Camp Mackall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817416" start="6617" end="6650" title="517th Parachute Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="517th Parachute Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q221111" start="6887" end="6904" title="Operation Dragoon" label="Operation Dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715023" start="6946" end="6962" title="first lieutenant" label="first lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q151985" start="7031" end="7039" title="Ardennes" label="Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="7074" end="7093" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q287813" start="7156" end="7159" title="Érezée" label="Soy"/>
<link wikidata="Q476584" start="7556" end="7562" title="Joigny" label="Joigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q928314" start="7790" end="7801" title="Bronze Star Medal" label="Bronze Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q145752" start="7806" end="7818" title="Purple Heart" label="Purple Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="7883" end="7899" title="European theatre of World War II" label="European theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="7985" end="7996" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054599" start="8250" end="8274" title="North Carolina State Bar" label="North Carolina State Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202700" start="8577" end="8603" title="Governor of North Carolina" label="Governor of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q331104" start="8627" end="8639" title="Fayetteville, North Carolina" label="Fayetteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="8887" end="8904" title="company commander" label="company commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036511" start="8922" end="8929" title="Captain (U.S. Army)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054421" start="8977" end="9011" title="North Carolina Army National Guard" label="North Carolina Army National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073591" start="9122" end="9159" title="1948 North Carolina gubernatorial election" label="1948 Democratic gubernatorial primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q885047" start="9179" end="9192" title="W. Kerr Scott" label="W. Kerr Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054612" start="9273" end="9309" title="North Carolina State Ports Authority" label="North Carolina State Ports Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489054" start="9487" end="9506" title="Frank Porter Graham" label="Frank Porter Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="9524" end="9535" title="U.S. Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q829804" start="9664" end="9676" title="Willis Smith" label="Willis Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="10141" end="10153" title="Civil rights movement" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q511834" start="10206" end="10223" title="Cumberland County, North Carolina" label="Cumberland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301455" start="10290" end="10298" title="electoral precinct" label="precinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269863" start="10985" end="11006" title="North Carolina Senate" label="North Carolina Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529401" start="11458" end="11474" title="Sir Walter Hotel" label="Sir Walter Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="11478" end="11485" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566263" start="11496" end="11527" title="North Carolina General Assembly" label="North Carolina General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q104216576" start="11958" end="11972" title="Ralph H. Scott" label="Ralph H. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037138" start="12095" end="12111" title="Capus M. Waynick" label="Capus M. Waynick"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="12709" end="12736" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974008" start="12893" end="12911" title="separate but equal" label="separate but equal"/>
<link wikidata="Q443839" start="12970" end="12982" title="Alton Lennon" label="Alton Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753904" start="13570" end="13593" title="The News &amp;amp; Observer" label="The News &amp;amp; Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q361275" start="13918" end="13934" title="Luther H. Hodges" label="Luther H. Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q93313584" start="14510" end="14530" title="Malcolm Buie Seawell" label="Malcolm Buie Seawell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228838" start="14549" end="14564" title="John D. Larkins" label="John D. Larkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013679" start="14584" end="14604" title="I. Beverly Lake, Sr." label="I. Beverly Lake, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2698984" start="14871" end="14890" title="fiscal conservative" label="fiscal conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689403" start="15694" end="15707" title="Tax and spend" label="spend and tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="15749" end="15807" title="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People" label="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890699" start="17368" end="17375" title="United States Junior Chamber" label="Jaycees"/>
<link wikidata="Q104852283" start="17443" end="17460" title="courthouse clique" label="courthouse clique"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="17463" end="17476" title="Winston-Salem" label="Winston-Salem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17489" end="17501" title="Bert Bennett Jr." label="Bert Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379869" start="17862" end="17873" title="Progressivism in the United States" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569935" start="18263" end="18298" title="1960 Democratic National Convention" label="1960 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="18375" end="18392" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="18441" end="18481" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="1960 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="18508" end="18523" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054469" start="18766" end="18788" title="North Carolina Democratic Party" label="state Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q93501083" start="18950" end="18965" title="Robert L. Gavin" label="Robert L. Gavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003296" start="19961" end="19996" title="United States Secretary of Commerce" label="United States Secretary of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q360381" start="20611" end="20628" title="Charles B. Aycock" label="Charles B. Aycock"/>
<link wikidata="Q155736" start="22792" end="22802" title="good faith" label="good faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677111" start="22866" end="22887" title="Harvey Cloyd Philpott" label="Harvey Cloyd Philpott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574303" start="22932" end="22939" title="Speaker of the North Carolina House of Representatives" label="Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q521389" start="22947" end="22977" title="North Carolina House of Representatives" label="State House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22978" end="22996" title="Joseph M. Hunt Jr." label="Joseph M. Hunt Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7054484" start="23336" end="23359" title="North Carolina Executive Mansion" label="Governor&amp;#x27;s Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q98593676" start="25119" end="25136" title="Irving E. Carlyle" label="Irving E. Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="25428" end="25445" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054453" start="25505" end="25537" title="North Carolina Community College System" label="Department of Community Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895938" start="25630" end="25663" title="University of North Carolina School of the Arts" label="North Carolina School of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210259" start="26468" end="26485" title="political capital" label="political capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231502" start="26948" end="26957" title="John Ehle" label="John Ehle"/>
<link wikidata="Q546113" start="27025" end="27038" title="public policy" label="public policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313036" start="27077" end="27092" title="Ford Foundation" label="Ford Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539026" start="27242" end="27254" title="George Esser" label="George Esser"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062873" start="27595" end="27623" title="Z. Smith Reynolds Foundation" label="Z. Smith Reynolds Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27632" end="27664" title="Mary Reynolds Babcock#Foundation" label="Mary Reynolds Babcock Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47093133" start="27800" end="27815" title="John Hervey Wheeler" label="John H. Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="27902" end="27951" title="U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare" label="U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054490" start="28263" end="28282" title="North Carolina Fund" label="North Carolina Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907322" start="28877" end="28890" title="team teaching" label="team teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824563" start="28954" end="28983" title="Presidency of Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Johnson&amp;#x27;s administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q10973208" start="29008" end="29018" title="Head Start (program)" label="Head Start"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455871" start="29145" end="29153" title="day care" label="day care"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118976" start="29275" end="29289" title="war on poverty" label="war on poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079208" start="29411" end="29441" title="Office of Economic Opportunity" label="Office of Economic Opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980404" start="29951" end="29969" title="voter registration" label="voter registration"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="30931" end="30952" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535784" start="31291" end="31305" title="Skipper Bowles" label="Skipper Bowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q257940" start="31350" end="31361" title="List of North Carolina state parks" label="state parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q538790" start="31802" end="31816" title="Freedom Riders" label="Freedom Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q493016" start="31853" end="31868" title="Intercity bus service" label="intercity buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054606" start="31983" end="32003" title="North Carolina Highway Patrol" label="State Highway Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085899" start="32516" end="32530" title="Ole Miss riot of 1962" label="maintain order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="32561" end="32586" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="32907" end="32942" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044845" start="34851" end="34863" title="Carolina Inn" label="Carolina Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325273" start="35348" end="35369" title="Good Neighbor Council" label="Good Neighbor Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054564" start="35766" end="35795" title="North Carolina National Guard" label="North Carolina National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476484" start="36750" end="36799" title="North Carolina A&amp;amp;T State University" label="North Carolina Agricultural and Technical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49238" start="36803" end="36813" title="Greensboro, North Carolina" label="Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694520" start="37038" end="37066" title="North Carolina State Capitol" label="North Carolina State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806642" start="37670" end="37682" title="James Farmer" label="James Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462491" start="37687" end="37702" title="Floyd McKissick" label="Floyd McKissick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125901" start="37710" end="37737" title="Congress of Racial Equality" label="Congress of Racial Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q671812" start="37764" end="37775" title="Chapel Hill, North Carolina" label="Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q438544" start="38506" end="38520" title="Evelyn Lincoln" label="Evelyn Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="38633" end="38659" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="38890" end="38902" title="Assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133692" start="39049" end="39077" title="State funeral of John F. Kennedy" label="Kennedy&amp;#x27;s state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="39081" end="39097" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q65041209" start="39593" end="39635" title="1964 North Carolina gubernatorial election" label="1964 North Carolina gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797788" start="39637" end="39657" title="L. Richardson Preyer" label="L. Richardson Preyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q882225" start="39702" end="39714" title="Dan K. Moore" label="Dan K. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="40039" end="40047" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277844" start="41038" end="41065" title="Research Triangle Institute" label="Research Triangle Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191505" start="41189" end="41206" title="Piedmont Crescent" label="Piedmont Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q165421" start="41319" end="41337" title="Jacqueline Kennedy" label="Jacqueline Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007919" start="41415" end="41430" title="Kennedy Library" label="Kennedy Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187093" start="41687" end="41709" title="Research Triangle Park" label="Research Triangle Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q322911" start="42696" end="42705" title="Sam Ervin" label="Sam Ervin"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="43027" end="43053" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="43120" end="43135" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q83516" start="43302" end="43337" title="1968 Democratic National Convention" label="1968 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q319867" start="43586" end="43599" title="Edmund Muskie" label="Edmund Muskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029955" start="43680" end="43718" title="United States Secretary of Agriculture" label="United States Secretary of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="44012" end="44023" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="44066" end="44079" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="44157" end="44172" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49229" start="44176" end="44198" title="Durham, North Carolina" label="Durham, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301698" start="44340" end="44354" title="Douglas Knight" label="Douglas Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815161" start="46346" end="46357" title="Tom Butters (baseball)" label="Tom Butters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="46880" end="46890" title="Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="46898" end="46909" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q482635" start="47039" end="47069" title="Kent State shootings" label="shooting of student protesters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473615" start="47073" end="47094" title="Kent State University" label="Kent State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q203433" start="47630" end="47641" title="Spiro Agnew" label="Spiro Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="47692" end="47706" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722794" start="48599" end="48612" title="Duke Chronicle" label="The Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q111944754" start="49339" end="49357" title="New South governor" label="New South governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q881361" start="49417" end="49429" title="Dale Bumpers" label="Dale Bumpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q887146" start="49443" end="49455" title="Reubin Askew" label="Reubin Askew"/>
<link wikidata="Q885391" start="49468" end="49480" title="John C. West" label="John C. West"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="49504" end="49516" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q888924" start="49618" end="49630" title="Carl Sanders" label="Carl Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50370" end="50400" title="Southern Growth Policies Board" label="Southern Growth Policies Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417654" start="50606" end="50652" title="Sanford School of Public Policy" label="Institute of Policy Studies and Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141246" start="50709" end="50719" title="sabbatical" label="sabbatical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754354" start="50971" end="51002" title="Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum" label="presidential library and museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q493518" start="52058" end="52081" title="Yorba Linda, California" label="Yorba Linda, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628339" start="52309" end="52327" title="H. Keith H. Brodie" label="H. Keith H. Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255744" start="53103" end="53128" title="1972 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="1972 presidential primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q319867" start="53353" end="53366" title="Edmund Muskie" label="Edmund Muskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="53505" end="53520" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q262620" start="53865" end="53874" title="Robert W. Scott" label="Bob Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q582195" start="54103" end="54116" title="Canuck letter" label="Canuck letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="54383" end="54397" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q239657" start="55790" end="55806" title="Shirley Chisholm" label="Shirley Chisholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575004" start="56604" end="56618" title="1972 Democratic National Convention" label="the convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255745" start="56765" end="56804" title="1976 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="1976 Democratic presidential nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060911" start="57008" end="57020" title="heart murmur" label="heart murmur"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="57368" end="57380" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q950262" start="57409" end="57443" title="United States Ambassador to France" label="United States Ambassador to France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185863" start="57546" end="57575" title="Democratic National Committee" label="Democratic National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363487" start="57595" end="57607" title="Paul G. Kirk" label="Paul G. Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891841" start="57771" end="57791" title="1986 United States Senate elections in North Carolina" label="1986 Senate election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406773" start="57922" end="57937" title="Lauch Faircloth" label="Lauch Faircloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="58436" end="58461" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689050" start="58462" end="58474" title="Jim Broyhill" label="Jim Broyhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701454" start="58512" end="58524" title="John P. East" label="John P. East"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="59145" end="59158" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089687" start="59647" end="59673" title="James Dickson Phillips Jr." label="James Dickson Phillips Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="59694" end="59715" title="United States Capitol" label="United States Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891349" start="60003" end="60029" title="United States Senate Select Committee on Ethics" label="Select Committee on Ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891353" start="60039" end="60065" title="United States Senate Special Committee on Aging" label="Special Committee on Aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q142538" start="60067" end="60073" title="United States Senate Committee on the Budget" label="Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891260" start="60075" end="60110" title="United States Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs" label="Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891247" start="60125" end="60182" title="United States Senate Banking Subcommittee on Security and International Trade and Finance" label="Subcommittee on International Finance and Monetary Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891246" start="60187" end="60213" title="United States Senate Banking Subcommittee on Securities, Insurance, and Investment" label="Subcommittee on Securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806257" start="60219" end="60236" title="United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations" label="Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891322" start="60251" end="60303" title="United States Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on Near Eastern and South and Central Asian Affairs" label="Subcommittee on Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891315" start="60313" end="60344" title="United States Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on African Affairs" label="Subcommittee on African Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891323" start="60350" end="60408" title="United States Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere, Peace Corps and Narcotics Affairs" label="Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere and Peace Corps Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463516" start="60823" end="60833" title="Contra War" label="Contra War"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="60931" end="60938" title="Contras" label="Contras"/>
<link wikidata="Q27389" start="60990" end="61000" title="Sandanista" label="Sandanista"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="61093" end="61106" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q319111" start="61146" end="61156" title="Chris Dodd" label="Chris Dodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="61169" end="61184" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q49344" start="61232" end="61243" title="Oscar Arias" label="Oscar Arias"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049407" start="61851" end="61921" title="International Commission for Central American Recovery and Development" label="International Commission for Central American Recovery and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="62634" end="62646" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q57402" start="63026" end="63039" title="Daniel Ortega" label="Daniel Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q319079" start="63130" end="63138" title="Bob Dole" label="Bob Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="63143" end="63153" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q503426" start="63336" end="63347" title="Jesse Helms" label="Jesse Helms"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010135" start="64556" end="64572" title="deficit spending" label="deficit spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566674" start="64671" end="64686" title="balanced budget" label="balanced budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550835" start="64744" end="64770" title="Social Security Trust Fund" label="Social Security Trust Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365780" start="64897" end="64908" title="Robert Bork" label="Robert Bork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342219" start="64909" end="64933" title="Robert Bork Supreme Court nomination" label="Supreme Court nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="65371" end="65411" title="1988 United States presidential election" label="1988 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q521145" start="65508" end="65519" title="Mario Cuomo" label="Mario Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="65551" end="65558" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703903" start="65566" end="65574" title="Al Gore 1988 presidential campaign" label="campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q310586" start="65597" end="65610" title="Jesse Jackson" label="Jesse Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q319099" start="65732" end="65747" title="Michael Dukakis" label="Michael Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="65862" end="65879" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193187" start="66127" end="66136" title="Ron Brown" label="Ron Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719914" start="66608" end="66627" title="Presidency of George H. W. Bush" label="Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658030" start="66697" end="66707" title="John Tower" label="John Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="66996" end="67014" title="United States Flag" label="United States Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q493960" start="67083" end="67109" title="Flag Desecration Amendment" label="Flag Desecration Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="67117" end="67143" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426793" start="67343" end="67355" title="flag burning" label="flag burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="67454" end="67468" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333698" start="67603" end="67619" title="right to protest" label="right to protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287554" start="67736" end="67749" title="John Danforth" label="John Danforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614053" start="68425" end="68452" title="American Conservative Union" label="American Conservative Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="68505" end="68523" title="Invasion of Kuwait" label="Invasion of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="68858" end="68866" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q948290" start="69324" end="69333" title="lame duck (politics)" label="lame duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971803" start="69554" end="69581" title="National Congressional Club" label="National Congressional Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q215620" start="69794" end="69805" title="heart valve" label="heart valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q431603" start="70129" end="70146" title="special interests" label="special interests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985410" start="70166" end="70180" title="big government" label="big government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044834" start="70374" end="70385" title="spendthrift" label="spendthrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="71008" end="71020" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q880570" start="71077" end="71085" title="Jim Hunt" label="Jim Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157042" start="71554" end="71575" title="Robert Evander McNair" label="Robert Evander McNair"/>
<link wikidata="Q361695" start="71664" end="71680" title="James Holshouser" label="James Holshouser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312747" start="72339" end="72350" title="Duke Chapel" label="Duke Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054461" start="72461" end="72492" title="North Carolina Council of State" label="North Carolina Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358" start="72512" end="72534" title="82nd Airborne Division" label="82nd Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060409" start="72547" end="72558" title="honor guard" label="honor guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011590" start="72665" end="72674" title="New South" label="New South"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="73319" end="73337" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491061" start="73446" end="73458" title="Larry Sabato" label="Larry Sabato"/>
<link wikidata="Q4101658" start="73808" end="73819" title="David Stout" label="David Stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q889484" start="74167" end="74181" title="William Winter (politician)" label="William Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q650928" start="74233" end="74250" title="Parris Glendening" label="Parris Glendening"/>
<link wikidata="Q217314" start="74641" end="74653" title="John Edwards" label="John Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704982" start="74844" end="74869" title="Terry Sanford High School" label="Terry Sanford High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="75109" end="75121" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423161" wikidata="Q180072" url="?curid=423161" title="Billboard Hot 100">
<text>The &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, also known as simply the Hot 100, is the music industry standard record chart in the United States for songs, published weekly by &quot;Billboard&quot; magazine. Chart rankings are based on sales (physical and digital), online streaming, and radio airplay in the U.S.

A new chart is compiled and released online to the public by &quot;Billboard&quot;&#x27;s website on Tuesdays but post-dated to the following Saturday, when the printed magazine first reaches newsstands. The weekly tracking period for sales is currently Friday–Thursday, after being changed in July 2015. It was initially Monday–Sunday when Nielsen started tracking sales in 1991. This tracking period also applies to compiling online streaming data. Radio airplay is readily available on a real-time basis, unlike sales figures and streaming, but is also tracked on the same Friday–Thursday cycle, effective with the chart dated July 17, 2021. Previously, radio was tracked Monday–Sunday and, before July 2015, Wednesday–Tuesday. 

The first number-one song of the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 was &quot;Poor Little Fool&quot; by Ricky Nelson, on August 4, 1958. As of the issue for the week ending on March 1, 2025, the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 has had 1,179 different number-one entries. The current number-one song on the chart is &quot;Luther&quot; by Kendrick Lamar and SZA.

== History ==

The first chart published by &quot;Billboard&quot; was &quot;Last Week&#x27;s Ten Best Sellers Among the Popular Songs&quot;, a list of best-selling sheet music, in July 1913. Other charts listed popular song performances in theatres and recitals. In 1928, &quot;Popular Numbers Featured by Famous Singers and Leaders&quot; appeared, which added radio performances to in-person performances. On January 4, 1936, Billboard magazine published &quot;Ten Best Records for Week Ending&quot;, which listed the 10 top selling records of three leading record companies, as reported by the companies themselves. In October 1938, a review list, &quot;The Week&#x27;s Best Records&quot;, was retitled &quot;The Billboard Record Buying Guide&quot; by incorporating airplay and sheet music sales, which would eventually become the first trade survey of record popularity. This led to the full-page &quot;Billboard Music Popularity Chart&quot; for the week ending July 20, 1940, and published in the July 27 issue, with lists covering jukebox play, retail sales, sheet music sales, and radio play. Listed were 10 songs of the national &quot;Best Selling Retail Records&quot;, which was the fore-runner of today&#x27;s pop chart, with &quot;I&#x27;ll Never Smile Again&quot; by Tommy Dorsey its first number one.

Starting on March 24, 1945, &quot;Billboard&quot;″s lead popularity chart was the &quot;Honor Roll of Hits&quot;. This chart ranked the most popular songs regardless of performer (it combined different versions of the same song by different artists) based on record and sheet sales, disk jockey, and jukebox performances as determined by &quot;Billboard&quot;″s weekly nationwide survey. At the start of the rock era in 1955, there were three charts that measured songs by individual metrics:

* &quot;Best Sellers in Stores&quot; was the best seller chart first established in July 1940. This chart ranked the biggest selling singles in retail stores, as reported by merchants surveyed throughout the country (20 to 50 positions).
* &quot;Most Played by Jockeys&quot; was &quot;Billboard&quot;″s original airplay chart. It ranked the most played songs on United States radio stations, as reported by radio DJs and radio stations (20 to 25 positions).
* &quot;Most Played in Jukeboxes&quot; ranked the most played songs in jukeboxes across the United States (20 positions). This was one of the main outlets of measuring song popularity with the younger generation of music listeners, as many radio stations resisted adding rock and roll music to their playlists for many years.

&quot;Billboard&quot;″s primary chart among these was the &quot;Best Sellers in Stores&quot; chart, and the magazine refers to that when discussing a song&#x27;s performance before the creation of the Hot 100. In its issue of November 12, 1955, &quot;Billboard&quot; published The Top 100 for the first time (for the survey weeks ending October 26 and November 2). &quot;The Top 100&quot; combined all aspects of a single&#x27;s performance (sales, airplay and jukebox activity), based on a point system that typically gave sales (purchases) more weight than radio airplay. The first No. 1 in that chart was &quot;Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing&quot; by The Four Aces. The &quot;Best Sellers in Stores&quot;, &quot;Most Played by Jockeys&quot; and &quot;Most Played in Jukeboxes&quot; charts continued to be published concurrently with the new &quot;Top 100&quot; chart.

On June 17, 1957, &quot;Billboard&quot; discontinued the &quot;Most Played in Jukeboxes&quot; chart, as the popularity of jukeboxes waned and radio stations incorporated more and more rock-oriented music into their playlists. The week of July 28, 1958, had the final &quot;Most Played by Jockeys&quot; and &quot;Top 100&quot; charts, both of which had Perez Prado&#x27;s instrumental version of &quot;Patricia&quot; ascending to the top.

On August 4, 1958, &quot;Billboard&quot; premiered one main all-genre singles chart: the &quot;Hot 100&quot;, with &quot;Poor Little Fool&quot; by Ricky Nelson its first No. 1. The Hot 100 quickly became the industry standard and &quot;Billboard&quot; discontinued the &quot;Best Sellers In Stores&quot; chart on October 13, 1958.

The Hot 100 was created by journalists Tom Noonan, Paul Ackerman, and Seymour Stein; Stein did not recall who chose the name.

The &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 is still the standard by which a song&#x27;s popularity is measured in the United States. The Hot 100 is ranked by radio airplay audience impressions as measured by Nielsen BDS, sales data compiled by Nielsen Soundscan (both at retail and digitally) and streaming activity provided by online music sources.

There are several component charts that contribute to the overall calculation of the Hot 100. They are:
* Radio Songs: &quot;(per Billboard)&quot; approximately 1,000 stations, &quot;composed of adult contemporary, R&amp;B, hip hop, country, rock, gospel, Latin and Christian formats, digitally monitored twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. Charts are ranked by number of gross audience impressions, computed by cross-referencing exact times of radio airplay with Arbitron listener data.&quot;
* Digital Song Sales: Digital sales are tracked by Nielsen SoundScan and are included as part of a title&#x27;s sales points.
* Streaming Songs: a collaboration between &quot;Billboard&quot;, Nielsen SoundScan and National Association of Recording Merchandisers which measures the top streamed radio songs, on-demand songs and videos on leading online music services.
* Hot Singles Sales (1984–2017): physical single sales were tracked by Nielsen SoundScan.

== Compilation ==
The tracking week for sales, streaming and airplay begins on Friday and ends on Thursday (airplay used to have a tracking week from Monday to Sunday, but effective with the chart dated July 17, 2021, the week was adjusted to align with the other two metrics). A new chart is compiled and officially released to the public by &quot;Billboard&quot; on Tuesday. Each chart is post-dated with the &quot;week-ending&quot; issue date four days after the charts are refreshed online (i.e., the following Saturday). For example:
* Friday, January 1 – tracking-week begins for sales, streaming and airplay
* Thursday, January 7 – tracking-week ends for sales, streaming and airplay
* Tuesday, January 12 – new chart released, with issue post-dated Saturday, January 16

== Policy changes ==
The methods and policies by which this data is obtained and compiled have changed many times throughout the chart&#x27;s history.

Although the advent of a singles music chart spawned chart historians and chart-watchers and greatly affected pop culture and produced countless bits of trivia, the main purpose of the Hot 100 is to aid those within the music industry: to reflect the popularity of the &quot;product&quot; (the singles, the albums, etc.) and to track the trends of the buying public. &quot;Billboard&quot; has (many times) changed its methodology and policies to give the most precise and accurate reflection of what is popular. A very basic example of this would be the ratio given to sales and airplay. During the Hot 100&#x27;s early history, singles were the leading way by which people bought music. At times, when singles sales were robust, more weight was given to a song&#x27;s retail points than to its radio airplay.

As the decades passed, the recording industry concentrated more on album sales than singles sales. Musicians eventually expressed their creative output in the form of full-length albums rather than singles, and by the 1990s many record companies stopped releasing singles altogether (see &quot;Album cuts&quot;, below). Eventually, a song&#x27;s airplay points were weighted more so than its sales. &quot;Billboard&quot; has adjusted the sales/airplay ratio many times to more accurately reflect the true popularity of songs.

=== Double-sided singles ===
&quot;Billboard&quot; has also changed its Hot 100 policy regarding &quot;two-sided singles&quot; several times. The pre-Hot 100 chart &quot;Best Sellers in Stores&quot; listed popular A- and-B-sides together, with the side that was played most often (based on its other charts) listed first. One of the most notable of these, but far from the only one, was Elvis Presley&#x27;s &quot;Don&#x27;t Be Cruel&quot; / &quot;Hound Dog&quot;. During the Presley single&#x27;s chart run, top billing was switched back and forth between the two sides several times. But on the concurrent &quot;Most Played in Juke Boxes&quot;, &quot;Most Played by Jockeys&quot; and the &quot;Top 100&quot;, the two songs were listed separately, as was true of all songs. With the initiation of the Hot 100 in 1958, A- and-B-sides charted separately, as they had on the former Top 100.

Starting with the Hot 100 chart for the week ending November 29, 1969, this rule was altered; if both sides received significant airplay, they were listed together. This started to become a moot point by 1972, as most major record labels solidified a trend they had started in the 1960s by putting the same song on both sides of the singles provided to radio.

More complex issues began to arise as the typical A-and-B-side format of singles gave way to 12 inch singles and maxi-singles, many of which contained more than one B-side. Further problems arose when, in several cases, a B-side would eventually overtake the A-side in popularity, thus prompting record labels to release a new single, featuring the former B-side as the A-side, along with a &quot;new&quot; B-side.

The inclusion of album cuts on the Hot 100 put the double-sided hit issues to rest permanently.

=== Album cuts ===
As many Hot 100 chart policies have been modified over the years, one rule always remained constant: songs were not eligible to enter the Hot 100 unless they were available to purchase as a single. However, on December 5, 1998, the Hot 100 changed from being a &quot;singles&quot; chart to a &quot;songs&quot; chart. During the 1990s, a growing trend in the music industry was to promote songs to radio without ever releasing them as singles. It was claimed by major record labels that singles were cannibalizing album sales, so they were slowly phased out. During this period, accusations began to fly of chart manipulation as labels would hold off on releasing a single until airplay was at its absolute peak, thus prompting a top ten or, in some cases, a number-one debut. In many cases, a label would delete a single from its catalog after only one week, thus allowing the song to enter the Hot 100, make a high debut and then slowly decline in position as the one-time production of the retail single sold out.

It was during this period that several popular mainstream hits never charted on the Hot 100, or charted well after their airplay had declined. During the period that they were not released as singles, the songs were not eligible to chart. Many of these songs dominated the Hot 100 Airplay chart for extended periods of time:
* 1995 The Rembrandts: &quot;I&#x27;ll Be There for You&quot; (number one for eight weeks)
* 1996 No Doubt: &quot;Don&#x27;t Speak&quot; (number one for 16 weeks)
* 1997 Sugar Ray featuring Super Cat: &quot;Fly&quot; (number one for six weeks)
* 1997 Will Smith: &quot;Men in Black&quot; (number one for four weeks)
* 1997 The Cardigans: &quot;Lovefool&quot; (number two for eight weeks)
* 1998 Natalie Imbruglia: &quot;Torn&quot; (number one for 11 weeks)
* 1998 Goo Goo Dolls: &quot;Iris&quot; (number one for 18 weeks)

As debate and conflicts occurred more and more often, &quot;Billboard&quot; finally answered the requests of music industry artists and insiders to include airplay-only songs (or &quot;album cuts&quot;) in the Hot 100, while the retail component was reduced from 40% to 25%.

=== EPs ===
Extended play (EP) releases were listed by &quot;Billboard&quot; on the Hot 100 and in pre-Hot 100 charts (Top 100) until the mid-to-late 1960s. With the growing popularity of albums, it was decided to move EPs (which typically contain four to six tracks) from the Hot 100 to the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, where they are included to this day.

=== Digital downloads, online streaming and bundles ===
Since February 12, 2005, the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 tracks paid digital downloads from such internet services as iTunes, Musicmatch, and Rhapsody. &quot;Billboard&quot; initially started tracking downloads in 2003 with the Hot Digital Tracks chart. However, these downloads did not count towards the Hot 100 and that chart (as opposed to Hot Digital Songs) counted each version of a song separately. This was the first major overhaul of the Hot 100&#x27;s chart formula since December 1998.

The change in methodology has shaken up the chart considerably, with some songs debuting on the chart strictly with robust online sales and others making drastic leaps. In recent years, several songs have been able to achieve 80-to-90 position jumps in a single week as their digital components were made available at online music stores. Since 2006, the all-time record for the biggest single-week upward movement was broken nine times.

In the issue dated August 11, 2007, &quot;Billboard&quot; began incorporating weekly data from streaming media and on-demand services into the Hot 100. The first two major companies to provide their statistics to Nielsen BDS on a weekly basis were AOL Music and Yahoo! Music. On March 24, 2012, Billboard premiered its On-Demand Songs chart, which ranks web radio streams from services such as Spotify, as well as on-demand audio titles. Its data was then incorporated into the equation that compiles the Hot 100, and this was expanded to a broader Streaming Songs chart in January 2013. In February 2013, U.S. views for a song on YouTube were added to the Hot 100 formula. &quot;Harlem Shake&quot; was the first song to reach number one after the changes were made.

In July 2020, &quot;Billboard&quot; announced that they would no longer allow sales of physical/digital bundles to be reported as digital sales. This refers to songs being bought along with merchandise, either from an artists website or through another vendor. The magazine stated that this was a tactic generally used by certain artists to boost their chart positions. Instead, such physical releases are now only counted when they are shipped to the consumer, rendering the tactic &quot;ineffectual&quot;.

=== Remixes ===
A growing trend early in the first decade of the 21st century was to issue a song as a &quot;remix&quot; that was so different in structure and lyrical content from its original version that it was essentially a whole new song. Under normal circumstances, airplay points from a song&#x27;s album version, &quot;radio&quot; mix or dance music remix, etc. were all combined and factored into the song&#x27;s performance on the Hot 100, as the structure, lyrics and melody remained intact. Criticisms began when songs were being completely re-recorded to the point that they no longer resembled the original recording. The first such example of this scenario is Jennifer Lopez&#x27;s &quot;I&#x27;m Real&quot;. Originally entering the Hot 100 in its album version, a &quot;remix&quot; was issued in the midst of its chart run that featured rapper Ja Rule. This new version proved to be more popular than the album version and the track was propelled to number one.

To address this issue, &quot;Billboard&quot; now separates airplay points from a song&#x27;s original version and its remix, if the remix is determined to be a &quot;new song&quot;. Since administering this new chart rule, several songs have charted twice, normally credited as &quot;Part 1&quot; and &quot;Part 2&quot;. The remix rule is still in place.

=== Recurrents ===
&quot;Billboard&quot;, in an effort to allow the chart to remain as current as possible and to give representation to new and developing artists and tracks, has (since 1991) removed titles that have reached certain criteria regarding its current rank and number of weeks on the chart. Recurrent criteria have been modified several times and currently (), a song is permanently moved to &quot;recurrent status&quot; if it has spent 20 weeks on the Hot 100 and fallen below position number 50. Additionally, descending songs are removed from the chart if ranking below number 25 after 52 weeks. Exceptions are made to re-releases and sudden resurgence in popularity of tracks that have taken a very long time to gain mainstream success. These rare cases are handled on a case-by-case basis and ultimately determined by &quot;Billboard&quot;″s chart managers and staff. Older songs are allowed to re-enter the Hot 100 provided they chart higher than number 50. Christmas songs have been a regular presence on the Hot 100 each December since the relaxation of recurrent rules, culminating in Mariah Carey&#x27;s 1994 recording &quot;All I Want for Christmas Is You&quot; reaching No. 1 on the chart in December 2019.

=== Adjustment of tracking week ===
&quot;Billboard&quot; altered its tracking-week for sales, streaming and radio airplay in order to conform to a new Global Release Date, which now falls on Fridays in all major-market territories (United States product was formerly released on Tuesdays before June 2015). This modified tracking schedule took effect in the issue dated July 25, 2015.

== Year-end charts ==
&quot;Billboard&quot;″s &quot;chart year&quot; runs from the first week of December to the final week in November. This altered calendar allows for &quot;Billboard&quot; to calculate year-end charts and release them in time for its final print issue in the last week of December.

Before Nielsen SoundScan, year-end singles charts were calculated by an inverse-point system based solely on a song&#x27;s performance on the Hot 100 (for example, a song would be given one point for a week spent at position 100, two points for a week spent at position 99 and so forth, up to 100 points for each week spent at number one). Other factors including the total weeks a song spent on the chart and at its peak position were calculated into its year-end total.

After &quot;Billboard&quot; began obtaining sales and airplay information from Nielsen SoundScan, the year-end charts are now calculated by a very straightforward cumulative total of yearlong sales, streaming, and airplay points. This gives a more accurate picture of any given year&#x27;s most popular tracks, as the points accrued by one song during its week at number one in March might be less than those accrued by another song reaching number three in January. Songs at the peak of their popularity at the time of the November/December chart-year cutoff many times end up ranked on the following year&#x27;s chart as well, as their cumulative points are split between the two chart-years, but often are ranked lower than they would have been had the peak occurred in a single year.

== Use in media ==
The Hot 100 served for many years as the data source for the weekly radio countdown show &quot;American Top 40&quot;. This relationship ended on November 30, 1991, as &quot;American Top 40&quot; started using the airplay-only side of the Hot 100 (then called Top 40 Radio Monitor). The ongoing splintering of Top 40 radio in the early 1990s led stations to lean into specific formats, meaning that practically no station would play the wide array of genres that typically composed each weekly Hot 100 chart.

An artist or band&#x27;s ability to have hits in the Hot 100 across multiple decades is recognized as a sign of longevity and being able to adapt to changing musical styles. Only five artists had a Hot 100 Top 40 hit in each of the four decades from the 1980s through the 2010s: Michael Jackson, Madonna, &quot;Weird Al&quot; Yankovic, U2, and Kenny G. Mariah Carey is the first artist to have a number-one single in four different decades.

SiriusXM Pop2K uses the Hot 100 charts for the 2000s for the &quot;Pop2Kountdown&quot;, where radio personality Rich Davis plays the top 30 songs on the Hot 100 from that specific week in a specific year from the 2000s. &#x27;90s on 9 also does a similar countdown show called the &quot;Back in the Day Replay Countdown&quot; hosted by Downtown Julie Brown; however, this focuses on the Hot 100 charts from the 1990s.

== Similar charts ==
A new chart, the Pop 100, was created by &quot;Billboard&quot; in February 2005 to answer criticism that the Hot 100 at the time was too dominated by hip hop and R&amp;B. It was discontinued in June 2009 due to the charts becoming increasingly similar.

The Canadian Hot 100 was launched June 16, 2007. Like the Hot 100 chart, it uses sales and airplay tracking compiled by Nielsen SoundScan and BDS.

The &quot;Billboard&quot; Japan Hot 100 was launched in the issue dated May 31, 2008, using the same methodologies as the Hot 100 charts for the U.S. and Canada, using sales and airplay data from SoundScan Japan and radio tracking service Plantech.

The Vietnamese edition of Hot 100, &quot;Billboard&quot; Vietnam Hot 100, was launched on January 14, 2022.

== See also ==

* &quot;American Top 40&quot;
* Bestseller
* &quot;Billboard&quot; charts
* &quot;Billboard&quot; Global 200
* &quot;Billboard&quot; Music Awards
* Chart-topper
* List of artists who reached number one in the United States
* List of best-selling music artists
* List of &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones
* List of &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 number-one singles of the 2020s
* List of &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 top-ten singles
* Lists of &quot;Billboard&quot; number-one singles
* Single certifications
* &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; Top 100

== Notes ==
== References ==
* Bronson, Fred. &quot;Billboard Book of Number 1 Hits, 5th Edition&quot; ()
* Feldman, Christopher G. &quot;The Billboard Book of No. 2 Singles&quot; ()
* Whitburn, Joel. &quot;Top Pop Singles 1955–2008, 12 Edition&quot; ()
* Whitburn, Joel. &quot;The Billboard Pop Charts, 1955–1959&quot; ()
* Whitburn, Joel. &quot;The Billboard Hot 100 Charts: The Sixties&quot; ()
* Whitburn, Joel. &quot;The Billboard Hot 100 Charts: The Seventies&quot; ()
* Whitburn, Joel. &quot;The Billboard Hot 100 Charts: The Eighties&quot; ()
* Whitburn, Joel. &quot;The Billboard Hot 100 Charts: The Nineties&quot; ()
== Further reading ==
* – retrospective reviews of every song to top the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="4" end="33" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="60" end="67" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="76" end="90" title="music industry" label="music industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q373899" start="100" end="112" title="record chart" label="record chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="120" end="133" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="171" end="180" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473564" start="245" end="252" title="Music download" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="255" end="271" title="online streaming" label="online streaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q408978" start="277" end="290" title="radio airplay" label="radio airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q540891" start="645" end="652" title="Nielsen Holdings PLC" label="Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228786" start="1110" end="1126" title="Poor Little Fool" label="Poor Little Fool"/>
<link wikidata="Q303207" start="1136" end="1148" title="Ricky Nelson" label="Ricky Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q131356037" start="1351" end="1357" title="Luther (song)" label="Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q130798" start="1367" end="1381" title="Kendrick Lamar" label="Kendrick Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210722" start="1386" end="1389" title="SZA" label="SZA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123494" start="2633" end="2660" title="I&amp;#x27;ll Never Smile Again" label="I&amp;#x27;ll Never Smile Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q313529" start="2670" end="2682" title="Tommy Dorsey" label="Tommy Dorsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q815249" start="3729" end="3736" title="jukebox" label="jukebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="3929" end="3942" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436994" start="4599" end="4630" title="Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing (song)" label="Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423593" start="4640" end="4653" title="The Four Aces" label="The Four Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q154809" start="5210" end="5221" title="Perez Prado" label="Perez Prado"/>
<link wikidata="Q16740380" start="5259" end="5267" title="Patricia (Perez Prado song)" label="Patricia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228786" start="5418" end="5434" title="Poor Little Fool" label="Poor Little Fool"/>
<link wikidata="Q303207" start="5444" end="5456" title="Ricky Nelson" label="Ricky Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058628" start="5680" end="5693" title="Paul Ackerman" label="Paul Ackerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275956" start="5699" end="5712" title="Seymour Stein" label="Seymour Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067041" start="5991" end="6008" title="Nielsen Soundscan" label="Nielsen Soundscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356902" start="6204" end="6215" title="Radio Songs (chart)" label="Radio Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="6293" end="6311" title="adult contemporary" label="adult contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="6313" end="6320" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="6322" end="6329" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="6331" end="6338" title="Country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="6340" end="6344" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="6346" end="6352" title="Gospel music" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345375" start="6354" end="6359" title="Latin music (genre)" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452410" start="6364" end="6373" title="Christian music" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q629981" start="6570" end="6578" title="Arbitron" label="Arbitron"/>
<link wikidata="Q862769" start="6602" end="6620" title="Digital Song Sales" label="Digital Song Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q10374292" start="6728" end="6743" title="Streaming Songs" label="Streaming Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970743" start="6814" end="6861" title="National Association of Recording Merchandisers" label="National Association of Recording Merchandisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630676" start="6970" end="6987" title="Hot Singles Sales" label="Hot Singles Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="7001" end="7016" title="single (music)" label="physical single"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="8100" end="8111" title="popular culture" label="pop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="9715" end="9728" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q918887" start="10672" end="10687" title="12 inch singles" label="12 inch singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356902" start="12401" end="12416" title="Radio Songs (chart)" label="Hot 100 Airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334434" start="12460" end="12474" title="The Rembrandts" label="The Rembrandts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006198" start="12482" end="12508" title="I&amp;#x27;ll Be There for You (The Rembrandts song)" label="I&amp;#x27;ll Be There for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q43259" start="12551" end="12559" title="No Doubt" label="No Doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q908516" start="12567" end="12583" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Speak" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Speak"/>
<link wikidata="Q575400" start="12623" end="12632" title="Sugar Ray" label="Sugar Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q385650" start="12643" end="12652" title="Super Cat" label="Super Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463103" start="12660" end="12663" title="Fly (Sugar Ray song)" label="Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q40096" start="12704" end="12714" title="Will Smith" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854600" start="12722" end="12734" title="Men in Black (song)" label="Men in Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q106379" start="12776" end="12789" title="The Cardigans" label="The Cardigans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547704" start="12797" end="12805" title="Lovefool" label="Lovefool"/>
<link wikidata="Q488353" start="12848" end="12865" title="Natalie Imbruglia" label="Natalie Imbruglia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12873" end="12877" title="Torn (Ednaswap song)#Natalie Imbruglia version" label="Torn"/>
<link wikidata="Q730046" start="12917" end="12930" title="Goo Goo Dolls" label="Goo Goo Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932351" start="12938" end="12942" title="Iris (Goo Goo Dolls song)" label="Iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="13264" end="13277" title="Extended play" label="Extended play"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="13544" end="13569" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q9593" start="13785" end="13791" title="iTunes Store" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954896" start="13793" end="13803" title="Musicmatch" label="Musicmatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q64577763" start="13809" end="13817" title="Rhapsody (online music service)" label="Rhapsody"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="13895" end="13913" title="Hot Digital Tracks" label="Hot Digital Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q862769" start="14010" end="14027" title="Hot Digital Songs" label="Hot Digital Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="14698" end="14713" title="streaming media" label="streaming media"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="14851" end="14854" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710782" start="14865" end="14877" title="Yahoo! Music" label="Yahoo! Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="14997" end="15004" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q10374292" start="15152" end="15167" title="Streaming Songs" label="Streaming Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="15234" end="15241" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840274" start="15283" end="15295" title="Harlem Shake (song)" label="Harlem Shake"/>
<link wikidata="Q740777" start="15561" end="15572" title="merchandising" label="merchandise"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="16226" end="16237" title="dance music" label="dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q40715" start="16555" end="16569" title="Jennifer Lopez" label="Jennifer Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058134" start="16583" end="16596" title="I&amp;#x27;m Real (Jennifer Lopez song)" label="I&amp;#x27;m Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q309843" start="16740" end="16747" title="Ja Rule" label="Ja Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q41076" start="18322" end="18334" title="Mariah Carey" label="Mariah Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q653991" start="18363" end="18394" title="All I Want for Christmas Is You" label="All I Want for Christmas Is You"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035104" start="19040" end="19055" title="Billboard Year-End" label="year-end charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q467079" start="20514" end="20529" title="American Top 40" label="American Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356902" start="20632" end="20664" title="Billboard Hot 100 Airplay" label="airplay-only side of the Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q427487" start="20728" end="20740" title="Contemporary hit radio" label="Top 40 radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="21207" end="21222" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="21224" end="21231" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349" start="21233" end="21262" title="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic" label="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="21264" end="21266" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q295777" start="21272" end="21279" title="Kenny G" label="Kenny G"/>
<link wikidata="Q41076" start="21281" end="21293" title="Mariah Carey" label="Mariah Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228949" start="21370" end="21384" title="Pop2K" label="SiriusXM Pop2K"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540401" start="21590" end="21604" title="&amp;#x27;90s on 9" label="&amp;#x27;90s on 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303476" start="21706" end="21726" title="Downtown Julie Brown" label="Downtown Julie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750857" start="21827" end="21834" title="Pop 100" label="Pop 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q472737" start="22068" end="22084" title="Canadian Hot 100" label="Canadian Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q7031609" start="22206" end="22209" title="Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems" label="BDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q848647" start="22216" end="22251" title="Billboard Japan Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Japan Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q110551297" start="22497" end="22534" title="Billboard Vietnam Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Vietnam Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q467079" start="22595" end="22610" title="American Top 40" label="American Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997853" start="22619" end="22629" title="Bestseller (music)" label="Bestseller"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="22632" end="22660" title="Billboard charts" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q99337381" start="22663" end="22695" title="Billboard Global 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Global 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q392565" start="22698" end="22732" title="Billboard Music Awards" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q373899" start="22735" end="22747" title="Chart-topper" label="Chart-topper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845766" start="22750" end="22809" title="List of artists who reached number one in the United States" label="List of artists who reached number one in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="22812" end="22846" title="List of best-selling music artists" label="List of best-selling music artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q176752" start="22849" end="22920" title="List of Billboard Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones" label="List of &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones"/>
<link wikidata="Q82342523" start="22923" end="22992" title="List of Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles of the 2020s" label="List of &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100 number-one singles of the 2020s"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640370" start="22995" end="23048" title="List of Billboard Hot 100 top-ten singles" label="List of &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100 top-ten singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q105771224" start="23051" end="23100" title="Lists of Billboard number-one singles" label="Lists of &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; number-one singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q30303916" start="23103" end="23124" title="Single certifications" label="Single certifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073626" start="23127" end="23160" title="Rolling Stone Top 100" label="&amp;quot;Rolling Stone&amp;quot; Top 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494702" start="23193" end="23206" title="Fred Bronson" label="Bronson, Fred"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251475" start="23347" end="23361" title="Joel Whitburn" label="Whitburn, Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251475" start="23418" end="23432" title="Joel Whitburn" label="Whitburn, Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251475" start="23487" end="23501" title="Joel Whitburn" label="Whitburn, Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251475" start="23562" end="23576" title="Joel Whitburn" label="Whitburn, Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251475" start="23639" end="23653" title="Joel Whitburn" label="Whitburn, Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251475" start="23715" end="23729" title="Joel Whitburn" label="Whitburn, Joel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423164" wikidata="Q751137" url="?curid=423164" title="Joint Aviation Authorities">
<text>The Joint Aviation Authorities (JAA) was an associated body of the European Civil Aviation Conference representing the civil aviation regulatory authorities of a number of European States who had agreed to co-operate in developing and implementing common safety regulatory standards and procedures. It was not a regulatory body, regulation being achieved through the member authorities. It was in existence from 1970 until disbanded in 2009. Its headquarters were located in Hoofddorp near Schiphol airport in Netherlands.

JAA issued the Joint Aviation Requirements (JAR), intended to establish minimum requirements for air safety.

In implementing the so-called FUJA Report, JAA entered into a new phase as of 1 January 2007. In this new phase the former &quot;JAA&quot; became &quot;JAA T&quot; (Transition). JAA T consisted of a Liaison Office (JAA LO) and a Training Office (JAA TO). The offices of JAA LO were located in the premises of the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) in Cologne, Germany.

==History==
The JAA started as Joint Airworthiness Authorities in 1970. Original objectives were only to produce common certification codes for large aeroplanes and for engines in order to meet the needs of European industry and international consortia (e.g., Airbus). After 1987, its work was extended to operations, maintenance, licensing and certification/design standards for all classes of aircraft.

The adoption of the Regulation (EC) No 1592/2002 by the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union (EU) and the subsequent establishment of the EASA created a Europe-wide regulatory authority which has absorbed most functions of the JAA (in the EASA Members states). With the introduction of the EASA some non-EU members of the JAA became non-voting members of the EASA, while others were completely excluded from the legislative and executive process. Among the functions transferred is safety and environmental type-certification of aircraft, engines and parts and approval. Additional responsibilities have been subsequently added over time.

In 2009, JAA was disbanded. Only the training organisation, JAA-TO, remains.

== JAA member states ==

=== Non-EU members ===
:Candidate members marked with * (as of January 2008)
:EFTA countries are members of EASA.
**
*
* (EFTA member)
* (EFTA member)
*
*
* (EFTA member)
* (EFTA member)
**

=== EU members ===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
== See also ==
*Eurocontrol
*European Union Aviation Safety Agency
*European Civil Aviation Conference
*Federal Aviation Administration

==References==
== External links ==
* JAA historical reference
* JAA Training Organisation Web site
* SKYbrary: The single point of reference in the network of aviation safety knowledge</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q751137" start="4" end="30" title="Joint Aviation Authorities" label="Joint Aviation Authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q751137" start="32" end="35" title="Joint Aviation Authorities" label="JAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377616" start="67" end="101" title="European Civil Aviation Conference" label="European Civil Aviation Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q206814" start="119" end="133" title="civil aviation" label="civil aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="172" end="178" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491415" start="539" end="566" title="Joint Aviation Requirements" label="Joint Aviation Requirements"/>
<link wikidata="Q276255" start="947" end="984" title="European Union Aviation Safety Agency" label="European Union Aviation Safety Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="995" end="1002" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1004" end="1011" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="1274" end="1280" title="Airbus" label="Airbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="1476" end="1495" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="1504" end="1533" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q276255" start="1579" end="1583" title="European Union Aviation Safety Agency" label="EASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="2262" end="2266" title="EFTA" label="EFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="2306" end="2310" title="EFTA" label="EFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="2322" end="2326" title="EFTA" label="EFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="2342" end="2346" title="EFTA" label="EFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="2358" end="2362" title="European Free Trade Association" label="EFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q663492" start="2438" end="2449" title="Eurocontrol" label="Eurocontrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q276255" start="2451" end="2488" title="European Union Aviation Safety Agency" label="European Union Aviation Safety Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377616" start="2490" end="2524" title="European Civil Aviation Conference" label="European Civil Aviation Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="2526" end="2557" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423165" wikidata="Q6017091" url="?curid=423165" title="Independent Radio News">
<text>Independent Radio News provides a service of news bulletins, audio and copy to commercial radio stations in the United Kingdom and beyond. The managing director, Tim Molloy, succeeded long-term MD John Perkins in November 2009. Perkins had been MD of IRN since 1989. IRN&#x27;s shareholders are Global (54.6%), Bauer Radio (22.3%), ITN (19.7%) and News Broadcasting (3.4%).

==History and background==
IRN launched on 8 October 1973, with the first bulletin read at 06:00 by Australian newsreader Ken Guy on the opening morning of Britain&#x27;s first commercial radio station, LBC. IRN was based at LBC studios in Gough Square, just off Fleet Street in Central London. The service was funded by cash payments from subscribing radio stations. On 5 October 1992, ITN took over the running of the IRN operation from LBC and IRN relocated into ITN&#x27;s headquarters on Gray&#x27;s Inn Road in London.

Until the early 1990s, stations took the hourly bulletins by opting into LBC&#x27;s normal broadcast output. One second of silence was provided before and after the bulletins on LBC to allow stations to opt in and out.

Computer technology was introduced in 1985 and in 1987, the Newslink advertising scheme (a national single advertisement, broadcast by IRN immediately adjacent to the news bulletin) was launched which funded the service and provided cash dividends of the surplus to client stations. Newslink adverts are broadcast by client stations around weekday bulletins from 06:00 to 11:00 and 13:00, and at weekends between 07:00 and 12:00. Sales of Newslink commercial spots are managed by Global.

In 1989, satellite distribution of bulletins and audio was introduced, and this was also the year that IRN and LBC moved into new studios on Hammersmith Road in West London. The satellite service was managed by Satellite Media Services who were based on the ground floor of Euston Tower. In 1991, the Sunrise Radio IRN service was introduced. The hourly news bulletins were broadcast on Sunrise Radio&#x27;s channel on the Astra satellite, in a move designed to serve smaller commercial, RSL and hospital stations who struggled to afford the expensive standard IRN satellite equipment. This continued until 31 August 2004, upon which the service moved to a dedicated channel on the Hot Bird 4 satellite at 13.0° East. From March 2009, bulletins are broadcast via the main Sky Digital Astra satellite at 28.2° East.

In 2001, audio cuts began to be distributed via the Internet and from 2 October 2005, audio cuts and packages ceased being distributed via the satellite audio channels and switched entirely to the IRN Net Newsroom Internet system.

IRN bulletins had a major overhaul in September 2002. The bulletin outcue for many years, &quot;Independent Radio News&quot;, was dropped and all bulletins were of three minutes duration. All IRN branding was removed, and the outcue reverted to a time check: &quot;It&#x27;s three minutes past [the hour].&quot; The three-minute bulletin, known as IRN 180, was broadcast on the IRN1 channel and the Astra (Sunrise Radio) feed 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. A shorter 90-second bulletin, known as IRN 90, was introduced on the IRN2 channel comprising stories aimed at younger, pop music stations. This was broadcast on the hour from 19:00 to 06:00 on weekdays, and from 14:00 to 06:00 at weekends. This replaced the previous 60-second overnight bulletin service.

IRN launched its first bespoke bulletin service in September 2003, with an hourly bulletin service for Magic 105.4 and a breakfast news service for Kiss 100.

On 1 October 2003, satellite distribution of the main IRN service switched from SMS and the Intelsat 707 satellite at 1.0° West to Kingston Communications and the Sirius 4 satellite at 4.8° East. On 1 January 2021, the service was switched to Eutelsat 9B satellite at 9.0° East.

In June 2008, IRN started supplying a feed of news, sport and entertainment stories and video to the websites of client radio stations.

During the ITN era, most audio came from ITV News and Channel 4 News television bulletins. Client stations contributed audio to the service and IRN also had agreements to use audio from CNN Radio and Sky Sports News. On 15 October 2008, IRN announced that Sky News Radio was to replace ITN as its contracted news supplier from March 2009 on a three-year contract. The final ITN-produced bulletin was broadcast at 13:00 on Tuesday 2 March 2009 and was read by Moira Alderson. The bulletin finished: &quot;... From ITN this is Independent Radio News&quot;.

Sky News Radio&#x27;s first bulletin was at 14:00 on the same day. The bulletin was read by Ursula Hansford and was simulcast on the Sky News television channel. All IRN hourly bulletins carry Sky News branding and bulletins start with a time check intro: &quot;From the Sky News Centre at [hour]&quot;. IRN agreed a further two-year contract with Sky News from March 2012, with a subsequent reported contract extension until March 2016 and March 2018.

No known challengers to the contract have since emerged and Sky News continues to supply IRN to this day. In March 2022, it was announced that a further &quot;multi-year&quot; contract extension was agreed between Sky News and IRN.

==Competitors to IRN==
IRN has faced many competitors during its history. ITN briefly ran ITN Radio News, which broadcast hourly news bulletins on the Astra satellite daily from 06:00 to 23:00. The service ran from 4 March 1990 until 4 July 1991 and clients included Jazz FM in London, East End Radio in Glasgow and a number of other small, incremental radio stations.

On 5 July 1991, Chiltern Radio launched Network News, which broadcast hourly news bulletins and audio cuts on Chiltern&#x27;s Supergold audio channel on the Astra satellite. Bulletins were broadcast 24 hours a day from Chiltern studios in Dunstable utilising audio from Sky News and CNN Radio. Copy and scripts were distributed by stations via fax and a premium rate fax-back service. Network News enjoyed considerable success and won the contract to supply news to Virgin Radio upon its launch in April 1993. However, it suffered a major blow when it lost the Virgin Radio contract to Reuters Radio News in April 1995 and GWR chose to close Network News in April 1996 when it took over the Chiltern Radio network.

Reuters Radio News ran from 1994 until June 1996 from studios at Gray&#x27;s Inn Road in London. It supplied news to its own London Radio stations (formerly LBC), plus Scot FM, Heart FM, and Virgin Radio. Audio was mostly sourced from Sky News who Reuters had a news supply agreement with at the time.

Traffic information service Metro Networks took over the Virgin Radio news contract following the closure of Reuters Radio News. Audio was sourced from Sky News and CNN Radio and Virgin bulletins were branded as &quot;News from Sky&quot;. It provided bespoke bulletins to stations including Beat 106, Vibe FM, Kiss 100 and Magic 105.4 but did not provide syndicated hourly news bulletins. The news service closed down in November 2002 following the decision by Virgin Radio to produce their news in-house.

BSkyB launched Sky News Radio in June 1999 as a rival to the ITN-operated IRN service. It initially provided bulletins to Talksport and subsequently around eighty radio stations before taking over the IRN contract in March 2009.

Current competitors to IRN are Feature Story News and Radio News Hub.

Feature Story News supplies hourly international news bulletins from studios in London and Washington DC. Thirty-second, three-minute and five-minute bulletins are distributed via FTP to clients including digital, community and online stations.

Radio News Hub supplies UK and international news bulletins from studios in Leeds. Hourly bulletins are distributed via FTP to clients including Dee Radio plus Radio One Mallorca in Spain and digital station Love 80s.

No live bulletins are provided, although occasional special live programming, such as election night coverage, is distributed to client stations via digital station News Radio UK.

==Content and bulletins==
IRN&#x27;s editorial services are provided by Sky News Radio, who distribute national and international news and sport audio and copy to all UK commercial radio stations, plus a number of international clients. Dave Terris is the Executive Producer for Sky News Radio and Editor of IRN. He is supported by a team of over twenty journalists based at the Sky News&#x27; headquarters in Osterley. There are four radio studios at Sky News Radio in Osterley and one in Westminster for political coverage.

IRN transmits a live two-minute national and international news bulletin on the hour, 24 hours a day. Many stations take the national IRN bulletin during evenings and weekends when local newsrooms are unstaffed. Other stations such as Fix Radio, Boom Radio and Sunrise Radio, along with numerous community stations, use the hourly IRN bulletins as their sole source of news. The UK&#x27;s largest commercial radio group, Global, does not broadcast IRN bulletins on its radio stations, instead using its own bespoke local and national bulletins.

A two-minute recorded bulletin is offered during off-peak periods which is distributed to stations just before the top of the hour. This contains largely similar content to the live network bulletin. Bulletins are broadcast across the Bauer Radio network as well as on a number of other stations.

==Serial data==
In addition to a satellite feed with three separate channels, IRN also operates a serial data channel. This communicates with the IRN Demux 2 unit which the majority of commercial radio clients have.

This demultiplexer allows up to eight serial data channels of text information to be transmitted. Client stations can (and normally do) have a Major Story Alarm (also known as an OBIT Alarm) in their newsrooms and studios. The IRN news desk can trigger an alert at any time, which will be picked up by the demux units and set off the alert. Reasons for doing this include a major incident/terror attack or the death of a member of the Royal Family (see Obituary procedure).

IRN&#x27;s serial data channel was previously used to trigger radio station idents during the &quot;Big Top 40&quot; chart show, which was distributed via the IRN3 stereo programme channel. On receiving the corresponding command, the three-second localisers would play from each client station&#x27;s play-out system.

As of 6 January 2019, IRN is no longer used to distribute the &quot;Big Top 40&quot;, as it is exclusively broadcast on Global&#x27;s Heart and Capital stations and is no longer syndicated to the wider network.

==Obituary procedure==
Most client stations have blue &quot;obit lights&quot; installed in their studios which are automatically triggered by IRN in the event of the death of a member of the Royal Family or other major national (and in some cases international) figure. This is designed to give stations warning of such an event and allow them to adjust their output accordingly.

Formerly, there was a strictly defined protocol for such occasions that all ILR stations were required to follow which included suspending normal programming and advertising. IRN would broadcast a news flash after confirmation of the death, then a five-minute news bulletin on the next hour followed by a one-minute version of the national anthem. The IRN network channel would then switch to special programming which consisted of light instrumental music and announcements every ten minutes, with extended news bulletins on the hour and half-hour. The special service of music programming would normally last for three hours, although extended and additional bulletins would continue for the next 24–48 hours.

Over time, however, the status of the obituary protocol has declined to the point where there is no longer any statutory instruction, obligation or procedure defined anywhere, either in the Ofcom code nor any station&#x27;s licence. It is generally accepted that broadcasters will adopt a suitable tone of some kind, but there is no formal requirement for them to do so, and the nature of any obituary response is entirely down to the individual stations.

Although there is no formal obituary list of members of the royal family, it is widely accepted to include King Charles and Prince William.

In the event of a major news story or royal death, most commercial stations in recent years have produced their own programming with suitably adjusted music and news bulletins every 15–30 minutes.

IRN was strongly criticised by many of its client stations for its handling of the death of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother on 30 March 2002. A staff member pressed the wrong button and failed to alert the 258 stations on the network to the news, resulting in many presenters and newsreaders first hearing about the death from other news sources. IRN editor Jon Godel subsequently issued an apology in a memo addressed to &quot;all news editors and programme controllers&quot; in which he admitted this was &quot;not IRN&#x27;s finest hour&quot;.

The most recent obituary procedures have been activated following the death of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh on 9 April 2021, and the death of Elizabeth II on 8 September 2022.

==Special bulletins==

===Remembrance Sunday===
The 11:00 bulletin on Remembrance Sunday includes coverage of the national two minutes&#x27; silence at The Cenotaph in London.

On Astra and IRN1, the bulletin starts at 10:59:00, with the newsreader crossing to Big Ben in London at 10:59:55 for the two minutes&#x27; silence and the Last Post. At approximately 11:03:27, the newsreader resumes with a brief summary of other news before finishing the bulletin at 11:04:00.

On the IRN2 channel, a clean feed of Big Ben, atmosphere from the two minutes silence and the Last Post is broadcast.

On Armistice Day, the standard two-minute IRN bulletin is broadcast at 11:00 on IRN1. &quot;Ambient silence&quot; is transmitted on IRN2 for stations wishing to observe two minutes&#x27; silence. In the case of Armistice Day falling on a Sunday, the above Remembrance Sunday arrangements apply.

===Royal Christmas Message===

The Royal Christmas Message is broadcast on the Astra and IRN1 channel at 15:00 on Christmas Day.

There is no news bulletin or introduction to the speech, and the five-minute-long broadcast ends with the National Anthem.

==Audio and copy==

All audio and copy is distributed by Sky News via the IRN website. In addition to scripts and copy written by IRN journalists, access is also available to Press Association news wires, weather forecasts from the Met Office and a breakfast showprep service from Murf Media.

Stations can also source their own audio cuts from Sky News and Sky Sports News television channels. IRN also provide a feed of Sky News national news and sports stories to radio station websites.

IRN operates two audio channels on the Eutelsat 9B satellite: IRN1 transmits the hourly news bulletins, live sports reports and the classified football results. IRN2 transmits live press conferences, Prime Minister&#x27;s Questions and other significant Parliamentary events.

IRN1 is also broadcast on an audio channel on the Astra 2B satellite.

In the event of a major news story (e.g. royal death or major terrorist incident), audio from Sky News television will be relayed on IRN1.

The Sky News audio feed will be interrupted with the normal hourly news bulletins, which may be extended to three minutes duration, along with additional one-minute bulletins on the half-hour.

A continuous audio feed of Sky News television without interruption for news bulletins will be relayed on IRN2.

Many community, student and hospital radio stations around the UK take the hourly bulletin service. Copy and audio cuts are also used by BFBS Radio in addition to stations in the Republic of Ireland, Spain, Cyprus, UAE, South Africa and Australia.

==IRN Sport==

IRN&#x27;s sports output includes weekday breakfast, lunchtime and afternoon sports bulletins, audio cuts and packages and a full Saturday afternoon sports service. Joe Rawson is the editor of IRN Sport.

IRN supplies match reports from every English Premier League football match with reporters supplied by sports radio agency World Sports Communications and also sells licences to local stations to allow them to broadcast football match reports and commentaries.

Up to three reports each half, plus previews, goal flashes and half-time and full-time reports are sent from each match via the IRN1, IRN2 and Astra satellite channels. One featured match each Saturday features live clockstart reports at 15:14, 15:26, 15:38, 16:14, 16:26 and 16:38.

A classified football results check is broadcast every Saturday at 17:10.

The service also includes reports from Six Nations Rugby matches, Wimbledon, England home football and any other major sporting events.

==References==
==External links==
*Independent Radio News
*Sky News Radio
*Latest Bulletin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6017091" start="0" end="22" title="Independent Radio News" label="Independent Radio News"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="90" end="103" title="radio station" label="radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="112" end="126" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570585" start="295" end="301" title="Global Media &amp;amp; Entertainment" label="Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873460" start="311" end="322" title="Bauer Radio" label="Bauer Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210241" start="332" end="335" title="ITN" label="ITN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876052" start="348" end="365" title="News Broadcasting" label="News Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457273" start="578" end="581" title="LBC" label="LBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q846686" start="638" end="650" title="Fleet Street" label="Fleet Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210241" start="762" end="765" title="ITN" label="ITN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457273" start="814" end="817" title="LBC" label="LBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389056" start="1884" end="1896" title="Euston Tower" label="Euston Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900906" start="1911" end="1924" title="Sunrise Radio" label="Sunrise Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q448693" start="2292" end="2302" title="Hot Bird 4" label="Hot Bird 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q12496071" start="3524" end="3535" title="Magic 105.4" label="Magic 105.4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416895" start="3569" end="3577" title="Kiss 100" label="Kiss 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665702" start="3672" end="3684" title="Intelsat 707" label="Intelsat 707"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995238" start="3711" end="3734" title="Kingston Communications" label="Kingston Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348862" start="3743" end="3751" title="Sirius 4" label="Sirius 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q848336" start="3823" end="3834" title="Eutelsat 9B" label="Eutelsat 9B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210241" start="4008" end="4011" title="ITN" label="ITN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4189762" start="4038" end="4046" title="ITV News" label="ITV News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707372" start="4051" end="4065" title="Channel 4 News" label="Channel 4 News"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="4183" end="4192" title="CNN" label="CNN Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962638" start="4197" end="4212" title="Sky Sports News" label="Sky Sports News"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021068" start="4253" end="4267" title="Sky News Radio" label="Sky News Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021068" start="4553" end="4567" title="Sky News Radio" label="Sky News Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q217228" start="4686" end="4694" title="Sky News" label="Sky News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210241" start="5314" end="5317" title="ITN" label="ITN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546378" start="5507" end="5514" title="102.2 Jazz FM" label="Jazz FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339390" start="5581" end="5598" title="Incremental Radio (IBA)" label="incremental radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691957" start="5626" end="5640" title="Chiltern Radio" label="Chiltern Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099211" start="5650" end="5662" title="Network News" label="Network News"/>
<link wikidata="Q217228" start="5880" end="5888" title="Sky News" label="Sky News"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="5893" end="5902" title="CNN" label="CNN Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513066" start="6233" end="6236" title="GWR Group" label="GWR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099211" start="6301" end="6323" title="Chiltern Radio network" label="Chiltern Radio network"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="6326" end="6344" title="Reuters" label="Reuters Radio News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457273" start="6483" end="6486" title="LBC" label="LBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435464" start="6494" end="6501" title="Scot FM" label="Scot FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129015" start="6503" end="6511" title="Heart FM" label="Heart FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560650" start="6517" end="6529" title="Virgin Radio" label="Virgin Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q217228" start="6561" end="6569" title="Sky News" label="Sky News"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="6574" end="6581" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832534" start="6657" end="6671" title="Trafficlink" label="Metro Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590187" start="6686" end="6698" title="Absolute Radio" label="Virgin Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q217228" start="6781" end="6789" title="Sky News" label="Sky News"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="6794" end="6803" title="CNN" label="CNN Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035660" start="6920" end="6928" title="Beat 106" label="Beat 106"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416904" start="6930" end="6937" title="Vibe FM 105-108" label="Vibe FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416895" start="6939" end="6947" title="Kiss 100" label="Kiss 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q12496071" start="6952" end="6963" title="Magic 105.4" label="Magic 105.4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="7136" end="7141" title="BSkyB" label="BSkyB"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021068" start="7151" end="7165" title="Sky News Radio" label="Sky News Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210241" start="7197" end="7200" title="ITN" label="ITN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679885" start="7258" end="7267" title="Talksport" label="Talksport"/>
<link wikidata="Q96400953" start="7420" end="7434" title="Radio News Hub" label="Radio News Hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249872" start="7828" end="7837" title="Dee 106.3" label="Dee Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q118410913" start="8845" end="8854" title="Fix Radio" label="Fix Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q105807037" start="8856" end="8866" title="Boom Radio" label="Boom Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900906" start="8871" end="8884" title="Sunrise Radio" label="Sunrise Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873460" start="9391" end="9402" title="Bauer Radio" label="Bauer Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q189434" start="9676" end="9689" title="demultiplexer" label="demultiplexer"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="10106" end="10118" title="British royal family" label="Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10124" end="10142" title="#Obituary procedure" label="Obituary procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772947" start="10246" end="10256" title="Big Top 40" label="Big Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129015" start="10599" end="10604" title="Heart (radio network)" label="Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035441" start="10609" end="10616" title="Capital (radio network)" label="Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q40807" start="11389" end="11404" title="God Save the King" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="12335" end="12347" title="Charles III" label="King Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q36812" start="12352" end="12366" title="William, Prince of Wales" label="Prince William"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="12659" end="12691" title="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother" label="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q106434434" start="13186" end="13227" title="death of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="death of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q113846055" start="13253" end="13274" title="Death and state funeral of Elizabeth II" label="death of Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770490" start="13367" end="13385" title="Remembrance Sunday" label="Remembrance Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896743" start="13449" end="13461" title="The Cenotaph" label="The Cenotaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624210" start="13630" end="13639" title="Last Post" label="Last Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597183" start="13892" end="13905" title="Armistice Day" label="Armistice Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q767054" start="14216" end="14243" title="Royal Christmas Message" label="The Royal Christmas Message"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402475" start="14614" end="14631" title="Press Association" label="Press Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851405" start="14671" end="14681" title="Met Office" label="Met Office"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423166" wikidata="Q10298580" url="?curid=423166" title="Hot 100 (disambiguation)">
<text>The [[Billboard Hot 100|&quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100]] is a U.S. weekly music chart.

Hot 100 may also refer to:

==Record charts==
* The Argentina Hot 100
* The Brasil Hot 100
* The Canadian Hot 100
* Eurochart Hot 100 Singles
* The Japan Hot 100
* The Korea K-Pop Hot 100
* The Philippines Hot 100
* The Vietnam Hot 100

==Radio==
===Radio stations===
* Hot 100 FM, Darwin, Australia
* WALY (FM), Altoona, Pennsylvania, formerly branded as Hot 100

===Radio programs===
* Hot 100 (Japan FM League)

==Other uses==
* Phillips&#x27; Hot 100, a hundred-proof (50% ABV), cinnamon-flavored schnapps produced by the Phillips Distilling Company
* &quot;Maxim Hot 100&quot;, &quot;Maxim&quot; magazine&#x27;s annual list that features the 100 hottest women of the year

==See also==
* The Triple J Hottest 100, an annual music listener poll</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10298580" start="4" end="55" title="Hot 100 (disambiguation)" label="[[Billboard Hot 100|&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q10298580" start="87" end="94" title="Hot 100 (disambiguation)" label="Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q63524736" start="139" end="156" title="Argentina Hot 100" label="Argentina Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q122205451" start="163" end="177" title="Brasil Hot 100" label="Brasil Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q472737" start="184" end="200" title="Canadian Hot 100" label="Canadian Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q266102" start="203" end="228" title="Eurochart Hot 100 Singles" label="Eurochart Hot 100 Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q848647" start="235" end="248" title="Japan Hot 100" label="Japan Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q497699" start="255" end="274" title="Korea K-Pop Hot 100" label="Korea K-Pop Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q30243179" start="281" end="300" title="Philippine Hot 100" label="Philippines Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q110551297" start="307" end="322" title="Vietnam Hot 100" label="Vietnam Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909694" start="357" end="367" title="Hot 100 (Darwin radio station)" label="Hot 100 FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957409" start="389" end="398" title="WALY (FM)" label="WALY (FM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q843788" start="475" end="500" title="Hot 100 (Japan FM League)" label="Hot 100 (Japan FM League)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185897" start="613" end="640" title="Phillips Distilling Company" label="Phillips Distilling Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="649" end="662" title="Maxim (magazine)#Maxim Hot 100" label="Maxim Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036134" start="784" end="804" title="Triple J Hottest 100" label="Triple J Hottest 100"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423167" wikidata="Q5160557" url="?curid=423167" title="Congolese music">
<text>Congolese music can refer to:
*Music of the Republic of the Congo (Congo-Brazzaville)
*Music of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Zaire, Congo-Kinshasa)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3328656" start="31" end="65" title="Music of the Republic of the Congo" label="Music of the Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955040" start="87" end="132" title="Music of the Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Music of the Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423188" wikidata="Q206930" url="?curid=423188" title="Catarrhini">
<text>The parvorder Catarrhini (known commonly as catarrhine monkeys, Old World anthropoids, or Old World monkeys) consists of the Cercopithecoidea and apes (Hominoidea). In 1812, Geoffroy grouped those two groups together and established the name Catarrhini, &quot;Old World monkeys&quot;, (&quot;singes de l&#x27;Ancien Monde&quot; in French). Its sister in the infraorder Simiiformes is the parvorder Platyrrhini (New World monkeys). There has been some resistance to directly designate apes (and thus humans) as monkeys despite the scientific evidence, so &quot;Old World monkey&quot; may be taken to mean the Cercopithecoidea or the Catarrhini. That apes are monkeys was already realized by Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon in the 18th century. Linnaeus placed this group in 1758 together with what we now recognise as the tarsiers and the New World monkeys, in a single genus &quot;Simia&quot; (sans &quot;Homo&quot;). The Catarrhini are all native to Africa and Asia. Members of this parvorder are called catarrhines.

The Catarrhini are the sister group to the New World monkeys, the Platyrrhini. Some six million years before the ape - Cercopithecoidea bifurcation, the Platyrrhini emerged within &quot;monkeys&quot; by migration to South America from Afro-Arabia (the Old World), likely by ocean.

==Description==
The technical distinction between the New World platyrrhines and Old World catarrhines is the shape of their noses. The platyrrhines (from Ancient Greek &quot;platy-&quot;, &quot;flat&quot;, and &quot;rhin-&quot;, &quot;nose&quot;) have nostrils which face sideways. The catarrhines (from Ancient Greek &quot;katà-&quot;, &quot;down&quot;, and &quot;rhin-&quot;, &quot;nose&quot;) have nostrils that face downwards. Catarrhines also never have prehensile tails, and have flat fingernails and toenails, a tubular ectotympanic (ear bone), and eight, not 12, premolars, giving them a dental formula of , indicating 2 incisors, 1 canine, 2 premolars, and 3 molars on each side of the upper and lower jaws.

Most catarrhine species show considerable sexual dimorphism and do not form a pair bond. Most, but not all, species live in social groups. Like the platyrrhines, the catarrhines are generally diurnal, and have grasping hands and (with the exception of bipedal humans) grasping feet.

The apes – in both traditional and phylogenic nomenclature – are exclusively catarrhine species. In traditional usage, ape describes any tailless, larger, and more typically ground-dwelling species of catarrhine. &quot;Ape&quot; may be found as part of the common name of such species, such as the Barbary ape. In phylogenic usage, the term ape applies only to the superfamily Hominoidea. This grouping comprises the two families: Hylobatidae, the lesser apes or gibbons; and Hominidae, the great apes, including orangutans, gorillas, chimpanzees, humans, and related extinct genera, such as the prehuman australopithecines and the giant orangutan relative &quot;Gigantopithecus&quot;.

==Classification and evolution==
According to Schrago &amp; Russo, New World monkeys split from their Old World kin about 35 million years ago (Mya). They use the major catarrhine division between cercopithecoids and hominoids of about 25 Mya (which they argue is strongly supported by the fossil evidence), as a calibration point, and from this also calculate the gibbons separating from the great apes (including humans) about 15-19 Mya.

According to Begun and Harrison, the Catarrhini split from their New World monkey kin about 44 - 40 Mya, with the first catarrhines appearing in Africa and Arabia, and not appearing in Eurasia (outside Arabia) until 18-17 Mya.

Catarrhini lost the enzyme Alpha-galactosidase, present in all other mammal lineages, sometime after the split from platyrrhini. It is hypothesized that an ancient pathogen containing Alpha-galactosidase may be responsible, as only individuals with mutations that &quot;turned off&quot; the gene for Alpha-galactosidase would have produced antibodies against the pathogen and survived.

The distinction between apes and monkeys is complicated by the traditional paraphyly of monkeys: apes emerged as a sister group of Old World monkeys in the catarrhines, which are a sister group of New World monkeys. Therefore, cladistically, apes, catarrhines and related contemporary extinct groups such as Parapithecidae are monkeys as well, for any consistent definition of &quot;monkey&quot;. &quot;Old World Monkey&quot; may also legitimately be taken to be meant to include all the catarrhines, including apes and extinct species such as &quot;Aegyptopithecus&quot;, in which case the apes, Cercopithecoidea and &quot;Aegyptopithecus&quot; emerged within the Old World Monkeys. Although the colloquial usage of terms like &quot;ape&quot; and &quot;monkey&quot; in English reflects a misconception about their true biological relationship, this is not the case in some other languages; for example, in Russian, is used to describe all simians, both with and without tails, including apes.
* Order Primates
** Suborder Strepsirrhini: lemurs, lorises, etc.
** Suborder Haplorhini: tarsiers + monkeys, including apes
*** Infraorder Tarsiiformes
**** Family Tarsiidae: tarsiers
*** Infraorder Simiiformes : simians (monkeys, including apes), or higher primates
****Parvorder Catarrhini
***** Superfamily †Propliopithecoidea
****** Family †Propliopithecidae (includes &quot;Aegyptopithecus&quot;)
***** Superfamily †Pliopithecoidea
****** Family †Dionysopithecidae 
****** Family †Pliopithecidae 
***** Superfamily †Dendropithecoidea
****** Family †Dendropithecidae
***** Superfamily †Saadanioidea
****** Family †Saadaniidae
***** Superfamily Cercopithecoidea
****** Family Cercopithecidae
***** Superfamily Hominoidea : apes 
****** Family Hylobatidae: gibbons
****** Family Hominidae: great apes (including humans)
**** Parvorder Platyrrhini: New World monkeys

===Cladogram===
Below is a cladogram with extinct species in which the crown Catharrhini, which emerged in the Propliopithecoidea. Also, Saadanioidea is sister of the Cercopithecoidea rather than of the Crown Catarrhini here. It is indicated how many million years ago (Mya) the clades diverged into newer clades.

The Platyrrhini may have emerged in e.g. the Oligopithecidae. The Saadanioidea may be sister to the Propliopithecoidea s.s., and Micropithecus may be sister to the Taqah Propliopithecids.

==References==
== Further reading ==
*

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="4" end="13" title="parvorder" label="parvorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q206930" start="14" end="24" title="Catarrhini" label="Catarrhini"/>
<link wikidata="Q206930" start="44" end="62" title="Catarrhini" label="catarrhine monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q206930" start="64" end="85" title="Catarrhini" label="Old World anthropoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q206930" start="90" end="107" title="Catarrhini" label="Old World monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q182968" start="125" end="141" title="Cercopithecoidea" label="Cercopithecoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="146" end="149" title="ape" label="ape"/>
<link wikidata="Q192428" start="174" end="182" title="Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire" label="Geoffroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="331" end="337" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452918" start="369" end="380" title="Simiiformes" label="Simiiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q237157" start="398" end="409" title="Platyrrhini" label="Platyrrhini"/>
<link wikidata="Q229264" start="690" end="728" title="Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon" label="Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="750" end="758" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114471" start="828" end="835" title="tarsier" label="tarsier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427112" start="888" end="893" title="Simia" label="Simia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="912" end="916" title="Homo" label="Homo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="958" end="964" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="969" end="973" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="991" end="1000" title="parvorder" label="parvorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q206930" start="1012" end="1023" title="Catarrhini" label="catarrhines"/>
<link wikidata="Q237157" start="1092" end="1103" title="Platyrrhini" label="Platyrrhini"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="1362" end="1371" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="1389" end="1398" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1463" end="1476" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085221" start="1768" end="1778" title="prehensile" label="prehensile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334314" start="1836" end="1848" title="ectotympanic" label="ectotympanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q641973" start="1905" end="1919" title="dental formula" label="dental formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="2069" end="2086" title="sexual dimorphism" label="sexual dimorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028500" start="2105" end="2114" title="pair bond" label="pair bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284186" start="2219" end="2226" title="diurnality" label="diurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976606" start="2346" end="2369" title="Phylogenetic nomenclature" label="phylogenic nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q199962" start="2609" end="2620" title="Barbary ape" label="Barbary ape"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2676" end="2687" title="Taxonomic rank#Ranks in zoology" label="superfamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="2688" end="2698" title="Hominoidea" label="Hominoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q185939" start="2742" end="2753" title="Hylobatidae" label="Hylobatidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="2787" end="2796" title="Hominidae" label="Hominidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q41050" start="2824" end="2833" title="orangutan" label="orangutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36611" start="2836" end="2843" title="gorilla" label="gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q80174" start="2846" end="2857" title="pan (genus)" label="chimpanzees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="2859" end="2864" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q511893" start="2916" end="2933" title="australopithecine" label="australopithecine"/>
<link wikidata="Q310434" start="2974" end="2989" title="Gigantopithecus" label="Gigantopithecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182968" start="3195" end="3209" title="cercopithecoid" label="cercopithecoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="3215" end="3223" title="hominoid" label="hominoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q878467" start="3363" end="3370" title="Hylobates" label="gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="3391" end="3400" title="great ape" label="great ape"/>
<link wikidata="Q83170235" start="3694" end="3713" title="Alpha-galactosidase" label="Alpha-galactosidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367" start="4087" end="4094" title="monkeys" label="monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="4129" end="4138" title="paraphyly" label="paraphyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367" start="4142" end="4149" title="monkeys" label="monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="4281" end="4294" title="Cladistics" label="cladistically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443383" start="4362" end="4376" title="Parapithecidae" label="Parapithecidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131676" start="4604" end="4619" title="Aegyptopithecus" label="Aegyptopithecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="5056" end="5063" title="Primate" label="Primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q82265" start="5077" end="5090" title="Strepsirrhini" label="Strepsirrhini"/>
<link wikidata="Q82261" start="5126" end="5136" title="Haplorhini" label="Haplorhini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703853" start="5188" end="5200" title="Tarsiiformes" label="Tarsiiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114471" start="5213" end="5222" title="Tarsier" label="Tarsiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452918" start="5248" end="5259" title="Simian" label="Simiiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18604607" start="5360" end="5378" title="Propliopithecoidea" label="Propliopithecoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359124" start="5394" end="5411" title="Propliopithecus" label="Propliopithecidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131676" start="5428" end="5443" title="Aegyptopithecus" label="Aegyptopithecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10350553" start="5470" end="5485" title="Pliopithecoidea" label="Pliopithecoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q21220687" start="5501" end="5518" title="Dionysopithecidae" label="Dionysopithecidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q596739" start="5535" end="5549" title="Pliopithecidae" label="Pliopithecidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5802631" start="5570" end="5587" title="Dendropithecoidea" label="Dendropithecoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5802631" start="5603" end="5619" title="Dendropithecidae" label="Dendropithecidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618800" start="5639" end="5651" title="Saadanioidea" label="Saadanioidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18618800" start="5667" end="5678" title="Saadaniidae" label="Saadaniidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q182968" start="5697" end="5713" title="Old World monkey" label="Cercopithecoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q182968" start="5728" end="5743" title="Old World monkey" label="Cercopithecidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="5762" end="5772" title="Hominoidea" label="Hominoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q185939" start="5795" end="5806" title="Hylobatidae" label="Hylobatidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="5830" end="5839" title="Hominidae" label="Hominidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q237157" start="5886" end="5897" title="Platyrrhini" label="Platyrrhini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="5945" end="5954" title="cladogram" label="cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q18604607" start="6029" end="6047" title="Propliopithecoidea" label="Propliopithecoidea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423190" wikidata="Q1853526" url="?curid=423190" title="Normalization (Czechoslovakia)">
<text>In the history of Czechoslovakia, normalization (, ) is a name commonly given to the period following the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968 and up to the &quot;glasnost&quot; era of liberalization that began in the Soviet Union and its neighboring nations in 1987. It was characterized by the restoration of the conditions prevailing before the Prague Spring reform period led by the First Secretary Alexander Dubček of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia (KSČ) earlier in 1968 and the subsequent preservation of the new &quot;status quo&quot;. Some historians date the period from the signing of the Moscow Protocol by Dubček and the other jailed Czechoslovak leaders on 26 August 1968, while others date it from the replacement of Dubček by Gustáv Husák on 17 April 1969, followed by the official normalization policies referred to as Husakism. The policy ended either with Husák&#x27;s removal as leader of the Party on 17 December 1987, or with the beginning of the Velvet Revolution on 17 November 1989, which would see the resignation of the entire Communist Party leadership within a week and an end to Communist rule in Czechoslovakia.

==1969–1971 (Removing the reforms and reformers)==

When Husák replaced Dubček as leader of the KSČ in April 1969, his regime acted quickly to ‘normalize’ the country&#x27;s political situation. The chief objectives of Husák&#x27;s normalization were the restoration of firm party rule and the reestablishment of Czechoslovakia&#x27;s status as a committed member of the socialist bloc. The normalization process involved five interrelated steps:
*consolidate Husák&#x27;s leadership and remove reformers from leadership positions;
*revoke or modify the laws enacted by the reform movement;
*reestablish centralized control over the economy;
*reinstate the power of police authorities; and
*expand Czechoslovakia&#x27;s ties with other socialist nations.

Within a week of assuming power, Husák began to consolidate his leadership by ordering extensive purges of reformists still occupying key positions in the mass media, judiciary, social and mass organizations, lower party organs, and, finally, the highest levels of the KSČ. In the fall of 1969, twenty-nine liberals on the Central Committee of the KSČ were replaced by conservatives. Among the liberals ousted was Dubček, who was dropped from the Presidium (the following year Dubček was expelled from the party; he subsequently became a minor functionary in Slovakia). Husák also consolidated his leadership by appointing potential rivals to the new government positions created as a result of the 1968 Constitutional Law of Federation (which created the Czech Socialist Republic and the Slovak Socialist Republic).

Once it had consolidated power, the regime moved quickly to implement other normalization policies. In the two years following the invasion, the new leadership revoked some reformist laws (such as the National Front Act and the Press Act) and simply did not enforce others. It returned economic enterprises, which had been given substantial independence during the Prague Spring, to centralized control through contracts based on central planning and production quotas. It reinstated extreme police control, a step that was reflected in the harsh treatment of demonstrators marking the first anniversary of the August intervention.

Finally, Husák stabilized Czechoslovakia&#x27;s relations with its allies by arranging frequent intrabloc exchanges and visits and redirecting Czechoslovakia&#x27;s foreign economic ties toward greater involvement with socialist nations.

By May 1971, Husák could report to the delegates attending the officially sanctioned Fourteenth Party Congress that the process of normalization had been completed satisfactorily and that Czechoslovakia was ready to proceed toward higher forms of socialism.

==1971–1987 (Preserving the status quo)==

The method by which the KSČ under Husák ruled was commonly summed up as ‘reluctant terror.’ It involved careful adherence to the Soviet Union&#x27;s policy objectives and the use of what was perceived as the minimum amount of repression at home necessary to fulfill these objectives and prevent a return to Dubček-style reformism. The result was a regime that, while not a complete return to Stalinism, was far from being a liberal one either.

The membership of the KSČ&#x27;s Presidium changed very little after 1971. The Sixteenth Party Congress in 1981 reelected the incumbent members of the Presidium and Secretariat and elevated one candidate member, Miloš Jakeš, to full membership in the Presidium. The Seventeenth Party Congress in 1986 retained the incumbent Secretariat and Presidium and added three new candidate members to the Presidium. In March 1987, Josef Korčák retired from the Presidium and was replaced by Ladislav Adamec. At the same time, Hoffman, a Presidium member, was also appointed a Central Committee secretary. In December 1987, Husák was forced to retire, and Jakeš became general secretary of the KSČ.

Popular control during this era of orthodoxy was maintained through various means. Repeated arrests and imprisonment of persons opposing the regime, such as members of Charter 77 and religious activists, continued throughout the 1970s and into the 1980s. Less coercive controls, such as punishment through job loss, demotion, denial of employment, denial of educational opportunities, housing restrictions, and refusal to grant travel requests, also prevailed. The level of repression increased over the years as Husák grew more conservative, and in the cultural realm sometimes approached the levels seen in Erich Honecker&#x27;s East Germany and even Nicolae Ceauşescu&#x27;s Romania.

Another means by which the Husák regime maintained control was to offer considerable consumer gains as a substitute for the loss of personal freedom. Government policies in the first half of the 1970s resulted in high economic growth and large increases in personal consumption. The widespread availability of material goods placated the general populace and promoted overall acceptance of Husák&#x27;s stringent political controls. During the late 1970s, however, Czechoslovakia&#x27;s economy began to stagnate, and the regime&#x27;s ability to appease the population by providing material benefits diminished.

Although the Husák regime succeeded in preserving the status quo in Czechoslovakia for nearly two decades, the 1980s brought internal and external pressures to reform. Domestically, poor economic performance hindered the government&#x27;s ability to produce the goods needed to satisfy consumer demands. Pressure for political change continued from activists representing, for example, the Roman Catholic Church and the Charter 77 movement. Externally, Czechoslovakia struggled to find a suitable response to the changes introduced by the new leadership in Moscow under Mikhail Gorbachev. Czechoslovakia&#x27;s initial (1985–1987) response to the reformist trends in the Soviet Union focused on voicing public support for Gorbachev&#x27;s new programs while steadfastly avoiding introducing similar programs within Czechoslovakia. In April 1987, Husák finally announced a half-hearted program of reform starting in 1991, but it was too late.

==Persons==
A remarkable feature of the KSČ leadership under Husák was the absence of significant changes in personnel. The stability of the leadership during the late 1970s and the first half of the 1980s could be attributed not to unanimity in political opinion but rather to practical compromise among different factions vying to retain their leadership positions. Husák&#x27;s leadership, then, was based not on any ability he may have had to rally opinion but rather on his skill in securing consensuses that were in the mutual interest of a coalition of party leaders.
After the 1968 invasion, Husák successfully ruled over what was essentially a coalition of the conservative and hard-line factions within the top party leadership. (see KSČ-History for details)

==Objectives==
The official objectives of normalization (in the narrower sense) were the restoration of firm KSČ rule and the reestablishment of Czechoslovakia&#x27;s position in the socialist bloc. Its result, however, was a political environment that placed primary emphasis on the maintenance of a stable party leadership and its strict control over the population.

==Reactions==
The absence of popular support for the Husák leadership was an inevitable reaction to the repressive policies instituted during the normalization process. Early post-invasion efforts to keep alive the spirit of the Prague Spring were quashed through a series of subversion trials in 1972 that led to jail sentences ranging from nine months to six and one-half years for the opposition leaders. Czechoslovak citizens over the age of fifteen were required to carry a small red identification book, containing an array of information about the individual and a number of pages to be stamped by employers, health officials, and other authorities. All citizens also had permanent files at the office of their local KSČ neighborhood committee, another at their place of employment, and another at the Ministry of Interior.

The most common attitudes toward political activity since the 1968 Warsaw Pact invasion have been apathy, passivity, and escapism. For the most part, citizens of Czechoslovakia retreated from public political concern during the 1970s into the pursuit of the private pleasures of consumerism. Individuals sought the material goods that remained available during the 1970s, such as new automobiles, houses in the country, household appliances, and access to sporting events and entertainment. As long as these consumer demands were met, the populace for the most part tolerated the stagnant political climate.

Another symptom of the political malaise during the 1970s was the appearance of various forms of antisocial behavior. Petty theft and wanton destruction of public property reportedly were widespread. Alcoholism, already at levels that alarmed officials, increased; absenteeism and declining worker discipline affected productivity; and emigration, the ultimate expression of alienation, surpassed 100,000 during the 1970s.

==Neonormalization==
Czech philosophers Václav Bělohradský and Stanislav Komárek use the term ‘neonormalization’ (&quot;neonormalizace&quot;) for a stage of Czech society in the post-communist period, which is compared with the torpidity and hypocrisy of the 1970s and 1980s.

Bělohradský in his book &quot;Společnost nevolnosti&quot; (Slon, 2007) calls ‘neonormalization’ the direction since 1992 that all alternative opinions are crowded out, a culture shifts into the trash of entertainers, next the deepening of democracy is blocked, the public space is infested with right-wing ideology and Czech Republic participated in all sorts of nefarious wars.

Komárek, a philosopher and biologist, in many his articles since 2006 popularizes his opinion that in certain stages of society development, the administrative and formalistic aspect (or the ‘power of mediocres’) outweighs a common sense, creativity and utility. Pressure for conformity intensely rises and everyone is obliged to &quot;sell his soul&quot; to keep up in social structures. This neonormalistic period in the Czech Republic began ‘after 20 years of freedom’, it means about in 2010 year, in Komárek&#x27;s view.

This term is discussed and used by many other authors.

==See also==
*Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
*Brezhnev stagnation
*History of Czechoslovakia (1948–1989)
*Prague underground (culture)
**Mánička

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1517186" start="7" end="32" title="history of Czechoslovakia" label="history of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853526" start="34" end="47" title="Normalization (Czechoslovakia)" label="normalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773668" start="106" end="144" title="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia" label="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="180" end="188" title="glasnost" label="glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q162401" start="365" end="378" title="Prague Spring" label="Prague Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q150543" start="420" end="436" title="Alexander Dubček" label="Alexander Dubček"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="444" end="477" title="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia" label="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201610" start="549" end="559" title="status quo" label="status quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131080" start="623" end="638" title="Moscow Protocol" label="Moscow Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q157651" start="765" end="777" title="Gustáv Husák" label="Gustáv Husák"/>
<link wikidata="Q5948916" start="859" end="867" title="Husakism" label="Husakism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182817" start="992" end="1009" title="Velvet Revolution" label="Velvet Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991965" start="2679" end="2703" title="Czech Socialist Republic" label="Czech Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751495" start="2712" end="2737" title="Slovak Socialist Republic" label="Slovak Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q162401" start="3106" end="3119" title="Prague Spring" label="Prague Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="3939" end="3942" title="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia" label="KSČ"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="4307" end="4316" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q551665" start="4572" end="4583" title="Miloš Jakeš" label="Miloš Jakeš"/>
<link wikidata="Q725653" start="4841" end="4856" title="Ladislav Adamec" label="Ladislav Adamec"/>
<link wikidata="Q729362" start="5217" end="5227" title="Charter 77" label="Charter 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607" start="5658" end="5672" title="Erich Honecker" label="Erich Honecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="5680" end="5692" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="5702" end="5719" title="Nicolae Ceauşescu" label="Nicolae Ceauşescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="5727" end="5734" title="Socialist Republic of Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="6921" end="6938" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="8038" end="8041" title="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia" label="KSČ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974658" start="10339" end="10357" title="Václav Bělohradský" label="Václav Bělohradský"/>
<link wikidata="Q174437" start="10362" end="10379" title="Stanislav Komárek" label="Stanislav Komárek"/>
<link wikidata="Q221284" start="11232" end="11242" title="conformity" label="conformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773668" start="11553" end="11591" title="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia" label="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416215" start="11593" end="11612" title="Brezhnev stagnation" label="Brezhnev stagnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359848" start="11614" end="11651" title="History of Czechoslovakia (1948–1989)" label="History of Czechoslovakia (1948–1989)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379448" start="11653" end="11681" title="Prague underground (culture)" label="Prague underground (culture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6949625" start="11684" end="11691" title="Mánička" label="Mánička"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423192" wikidata="Q1213374" url="?curid=423192" title="Opportunity">
<text>Opportunity may refer to:

==Places==
* Opportunity, Montana, an unincorporated community, United States
* Opportunity, Nebraska, an unincorporated community, United States
* Opportunity, Washington, a former census-designated place, United States
* 39382 Opportunity, an asteroid

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
===Music===
* &quot;Opportunity&quot; (Pete Murray song), 2006
* &quot;Opportunity&quot;, a song by The Charlatans
* &quot;Opportunity&quot;, a song from &quot;Annie&quot;
* &quot;Opportunities (Let&#x27;s Make Lots of Money)&quot;, a song by Pet Shop Boys
* &quot;Oppurtunities&quot;, by Jesper Kyd from the 2018 Indian film &quot;Tumbbad&quot;

===Other uses in arts, entertainment, and media===
* &quot;Opportunity&quot; (film), a 1918 film
* &quot;&quot;, a literary periodical of the Harlem Renaissance
* &quot;The Opportunity&quot;, a 17th-century play

==Finance==
* Opportunity International, a microfinance network that lends to the working poor
* Opportunity NYC, a 2007–2012 experimental conditional cash transfer program in New York City

==Other uses==
* &quot;Opportunity&quot; (rover), a robotic rover on Mars
* Business opportunity
* Equal opportunity
* Market opportunity
* Means, motive, and opportunity, a popular cultural summation of the three aspects of a crime needed to convince a jury of guilt
* Political opportunity
* Window of opportunity

== See also ==

* Crisis
* Danger (disambiguation)
* Launch window
* Opportunism
* Opportunity cost</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1213374" start="0" end="11" title="Opportunity" label="Opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q85791073" start="40" end="60" title="Opportunity, Montana" label="Opportunity, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357836" start="107" end="128" title="Opportunity, Nebraska" label="Opportunity, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510586" start="175" end="198" title="Opportunity, Washington" label="Opportunity, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710379" start="250" end="267" title="39382 Opportunity" label="39382 Opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q85791075" start="331" end="373" title="Opportunity (Pete Murray song)" label="&amp;quot;Opportunity&amp;quot; (Pete Murray song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542958" start="417" end="431" title="The Charlatans (English band)" label="The Charlatans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039835" start="477" end="482" title="Annie (2014 film)" label="Annie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884230" start="497" end="542" title="Opportunities (Let&amp;#x27;s Make Lots of Money)" label="Opportunities (Let&amp;#x27;s Make Lots of Money)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="643" end="662" title="Tumbbad#Music" label="&amp;quot;Tumbbad&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q21183873" start="717" end="747" title="Opportunity (film)" label="&amp;quot;Opportunity&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755219" start="833" end="848" title="The Opportunity" label="The Opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q877991" start="891" end="916" title="Opportunity International" label="Opportunity International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098596" start="974" end="989" title="Opportunity NYC" label="Opportunity NYC"/>
<link wikidata="Q193538" start="1085" end="1116" title="Opportunity (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Opportunity&amp;quot; (rover)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001907" start="1144" end="1164" title="Business opportunity" label="Business opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q912512" start="1167" end="1184" title="Equal opportunity" label="Equal opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901028" start="1187" end="1205" title="Market opportunity" label="Market opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964968" start="1208" end="1238" title="Means, motive, and opportunity" label="Means, motive, and opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534219" start="1338" end="1359" title="Political opportunity" label="Political opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q23900955" start="1362" end="1383" title="Window of opportunity" label="Window of opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q381072" start="1403" end="1409" title="Crisis" label="Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013486" start="1412" end="1435" title="Danger (disambiguation)" label="Danger (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q855377" start="1438" end="1451" title="Launch window" label="Launch window"/>
<link wikidata="Q334173" start="1454" end="1465" title="Opportunism" label="Opportunism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185715" start="1468" end="1484" title="Opportunity cost" label="Opportunity cost"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423205" wikidata="Q309309" url="?curid=423205" title="Barkudia insularis">
<text>Barkudia insularis, commonly known as the Madras spotted skink, is a critically endangered limbless skink which was described in 1917 by Nelson Annandale and rediscovered in the wild in 2003. Little is known about the species but it was previously believed to be found only in the mangrove habitats near Barkuda Island in Chilka Lake, Odisha, India. Later observations in adjoining parts of Odisha indicate a larger range within the state. The lizard looks like a large earthworm and lives in the subsoil and probably feeds on small arthropods.

The holotype was found in loose earth near the roots of a banyan tree of Badakuda Island of Chilka lake in 1917. Only four reports of the species have been made since its description, all within Odisha: observations in 1917 and 2003 at Barkuda Island in Chilka Lake, a 1979 observation in Nandankanan Zoological Park, and a 2022 observation made near the vicinity of Buguda. The 2022 observation marked the first photograph taken of a live individual of the species.

==Taxonomic description==
&quot;Barkudia&quot; (Annandale, Rec. Ind. Mus. xiii, 1917 p. 20 - type species &quot;insularis&quot;) is characterised by the palatine bones not meeting on the mid-line of the palate, which is toothless; nostril between the nasal and the rostral in an emargination of the latter; supranasals present; pre-frontals and frontoparietals absent; body elongated; no limbs;

&quot;Barkudia insularis&quot; has the snout depressed, obtusely pointed, projecting strongly beyond the labial margin; rostral large, emarginate laterally to receive the nasal shield; supranasals large, in contact with one another and with the first labial; fronto-nasal broader than long, larger than the frontal; interparietal much larger than the frontal; parietals narrow, obliquely placed, in contact with one another behind it; 3 supraoculars, the first entering the supraciliary margin, the first two in contact with the frontal; 1 large supraciliary in the angle formed by the 3 suboculars; nasal shield comparatively large, the nostril at its anterior extremity; 1 large loreal; a preocular; lower eyelid composed of 2 or 3 opaque scales; upper eyelid vestigial; 4 supralabials, the third below the eye; ear-opening minute; a singly azygous postmental; body elongate with 140 ventral scales between the post-mental and pre-anal plates; 20 smooth scales round the mid body. Tip of the tail blunt and not much narrower than the base of the tail.

Light brown above, each dorsal scale with a central dot; altogether there form 12 or 14 longitudinal lines down the back and along the tail; lower parts whitish; top of head clouded with brown. The type was dug from loose earth at the root of a banyan tree. A second was seen in the same locality by Frederic Henry Gravely in the rainy season of 1919. It burrowed rapidly into the ground.

==References==
==Notes==
* Annandale, N. 1917 A new Genus of Limbless skinks from an Island in the Chilka Lake Rec.Ind. Mus. 13: 20
* Biswas, S. or Acharjyo, L.N. (1979) A Note on the Distribution of &quot;Barkudia insularis&quot;, a Rare Limbless Lizard from Orissa J. Bombay Nat. Hist. Soc. 76: 524-525
* Das, Indraneil; Dattagupta, Basudeb 1997 Rediscovery of the holotypes of &quot;Ophisops jerdoni&quot; Blyth, 1853 and &quot;Barkudia insularis&quot; Annandale, 1917. Hamadryad 22 (1): 53-55

==External links==
* Rediscovery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q309309" start="42" end="62" title="Barkudia insularis" label="Madras spotted skink"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="69" end="90" title="critically endangered" label="critically endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q272206" start="100" end="105" title="skink" label="skink"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337949" start="137" end="153" title="Nelson Annandale" label="Nelson Annandale"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="281" end="289" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="304" end="318" title="Barkuda Island" label="Barkuda Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047322" start="322" end="333" title="Chilka Lake" label="Chilka Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="335" end="341" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="343" end="348" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q124378" start="470" end="479" title="earthworm" label="earthworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q681004" start="497" end="504" title="subsoil" label="subsoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="533" end="542" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061403" start="550" end="558" title="holotype" label="holotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275145" start="835" end="862" title="Nandankanan Zoological Park" label="Nandankanan Zoological Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q858514" start="913" end="919" title="Buguda" label="Buguda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423907" start="2765" end="2787" title="Frederic Henry Gravely" label="Frederic Henry Gravely"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423207" wikidata="Q5358190" url="?curid=423207" title="Electron spiral toroid">
<text>Electron Power Systems, Inc. of Acton, Massachusetts, United States, claims to have developed a technology for maintaining small stable plasma toroids called electron spiral toroids (ESTs) which remain stable in Earth&#x27;s atmosphere without the use of any special magnetic fields. They claim to have created these toroids in the laboratory, and to have developed a mathematical model for them that is similar to some explanations for ball lightning. An EST may be a special case of a spheromak.

Because of EST&#x27;s claimed lack of need for an external stabilizing magnetic field, EPS hope to be able to create small efficient fusion reactors by colliding magnetically accelerated ESTs together at speeds high enough to induce ballistic nuclear fusion.

Their model for their reported toroidal phenomena was extensively criticised by a December 2000 technical report commissioned by NASA. , EPS claim to have met the criticisms of the NASA report, and to have demonstrated that their model is mathematically sound, and state that they are ready to proceed with development of their technology.

== References ==

* Jean-Luc Cambier and David A. Micheletti. Theoretical Analysis of the Electron Spiral Toroid Concept NASA/CR-2000-210654.
* C. Chen, R. Pakter, and D. C. Seward. Equilibrium and stability properties of self-organized electron spiral toroids. &quot;Physics of Plasmas&quot; Vol 8(10) pp. 4441–4449. October 2001.

==External links==
*Electron Power Systems: The official web site of Electron Power Systems.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5358190" start="0" end="28" title="Electron spiral toroid" label="Electron Power Systems, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q344431" start="32" end="52" title="Acton, Massachusetts" label="Acton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="54" end="67" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="136" end="142" title="Plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358190" start="158" end="181" title="Electron spiral toroid" label="electron spiral toroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358190" start="183" end="187" title="Electron spiral toroid" label="ESTs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="212" end="235" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="267" end="281" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q192962" start="437" end="451" title="ball lightning" label="ball lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966636" start="487" end="496" title="spheromak" label="spheromak"/>
<link wikidata="Q641442" start="632" end="646" title="fusion reactor" label="fusion reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="742" end="756" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423215" wikidata="Q370671" url="?curid=423215" title="Battle of Franklin">
<text>The Battle of Franklin was fought on November 30, 1864, in Franklin, Tennessee, as part of the Franklin–Nashville Campaign of the American Civil War. It was one of the worst disasters of the war for the Confederate States Army. Confederate Lieutenant General John Bell Hood&#x27;s Army of Tennessee conducted numerous frontal assaults against fortified positions occupied by the Union forces under Major General John Schofield and was unable to prevent Schofield from executing a planned, orderly withdrawal to Nashville.

The Confederate assault of six infantry divisions containing eighteen brigades with 100 regiments numbering almost 20,000 men, sometimes called the &quot;Pickett&#x27;s Charge of the West&quot;, resulted in devastating losses to the men and the leadership of the Army of Tennessee—fourteen Confederate generals (six killed, seven wounded, and one captured) and 55 regimental commanders were casualties. After its defeat against George H. Thomas in the subsequent Battle of Nashville, the Army of Tennessee retreated with barely half the men with which it had begun the short offensive, and was effectively destroyed as a fighting force for the remainder of the war.

The 1864 Battle of Franklin was the second military action in the vicinity; a battle fought there on April 10, 1863, was a minor action associated with a reconnaissance in force by Confederate cavalry under Major General Earl Van Dorn.

==Background==

===Military situation===


Following his defeat in the Atlanta Campaign, Hood had hoped to lure Major General William T. Sherman into battle by disrupting his railroad supply line from Chattanooga to Atlanta. After a brief period in which he pursued Hood, Sherman decided instead to cut his main army off from these lines and &quot;live off the land&quot; in his famed March to the Sea from Atlanta to Savannah. By doing so, he would avoid having to defend hundreds of miles of supply lines against constant raids, through which he predicted he would lose &quot;a thousand men monthly and gain no result&quot; against Hood&#x27;s army.

Sherman&#x27;s march left the aggressive Hood unoccupied, and his Army of Tennessee had several options in attacking Sherman or falling upon his rear lines. The task of defending Tennessee and the rearguard against Hood fell to Major General George H. Thomas, commander of the Army of the Cumberland. The principal forces available in Middle Tennessee were IV Corps of the Army of the Cumberland, commanded by Major General David S. Stanley, and XXIII Corps of the Army of the Ohio, commanded by Major General John Schofield, with a total strength of about 30,000. Another 30,000 troops under Thomas&#x27;s command were in or moving toward Nashville.

Rather than trying to chase Sherman in Georgia, Hood decided that he would attempt a major offensive northward, even though his invading force of 39,000 would be outnumbered by the 60,000 Union troops in Tennessee. He would move north into Tennessee and try to defeat portions of Thomas&#x27;s army in detail before they could concentrate, seize the important manufacturing and supply center of Nashville, and continue north into Kentucky, possibly as far as the Ohio River.

Hood even expected to pick up 20,000 recruits from Tennessee and Kentucky in his path of victory and then join up with Robert E. Lee&#x27;s army in Virginia, a plan that historian James M. McPherson describes as &quot;scripted in never-never land.&quot; Hood had recovered from but was affected by a couple of serious physical battle wounds to a leg and arm, which caused him pain and limited his mobility. Hood spent the first three weeks of November quietly supplying the Army of Tennessee in northern Alabama in preparation for his offensive.

===Road to Franklin, November 21–29===
The Army of Tennessee marched north from Florence, Alabama, on November 21, and indeed managed to surprise the Union forces, the two halves of which were apart at Pulaski, Tennessee and at Nashville. With a series of fast marches that covered in three days, Hood tried to maneuver between the two armies to destroy each in detail. But Union general Schofield, commanding Stanley&#x27;s IV Corps as well as his own XXIII Corps, reacted correctly with a rapid retreat from Pulaski to Columbia, which held an important bridge over the Duck River on the turnpike north. Despite suffering losses from MGEN Nathan Bedford Forrest&#x27;s cavalry along the way, the Federals were able to reach Columbia and erect fortifications just hours before the Confederates arrived on November 24. From November 24 to 29, Schofield managed to block Hood at this crossing, and the &quot;Battle of Columbia&quot; was a series of mostly bloodless skirmishes and artillery bombardments while both sides re-gathered their armies.

On November 28, Thomas directed Schofield to begin preparations for a withdrawal north to Franklin. He was incorrectly expecting that Major General A. J. Smith&#x27;s XVI Corps arrival from Missouri was imminent and he wanted the combined force to defend against Hood on the line of the Harpeth River at Franklin instead of the Duck River at Columbia. Meanwhile, early on the morning of November 29, Hood sent Benjamin F. Cheatham&#x27;s and Alexander P. Stewart&#x27;s corps north on a flanking march. They crossed the Duck River at Davis&#x27;s Ford east of Columbia, while two divisions of Stephen D. Lee&#x27;s corps and most of the army&#x27;s artillery remained on the southern bank to deceive Schofield into thinking a general assault was planned against Columbia.

Now that Hood had outflanked him by noon on November 29, Schofield&#x27;s army was in critical danger. His command was split at that time between his supply wagons and artillery and part of the IV Corps, which he had sent to Spring Hill nearly ten miles north of Columbia, and the rest of the IV and XXIII corps marching from Columbia to join them. In the Battle of Spring Hill that afternoon and night, Hood had a golden opportunity to intercept and destroy the Union troops and their supply wagons, as his forces had already reached the turnpike separating the Union forces by nightfall. However, because of a series of command failures along with Hood&#x27;s premature confidence that he had trapped Schofield, the Confederates failed to stop or even inflict much damage to the Union forces during the night.

Schofield was criticized by the Lost Cause myth for moving slowly in reaction to Hood and being only lucky to escape, but his subordinates defended his reaction as a careful balance between the safety of his army and his mission to delay Hood from striking Nashville before Thomas had amassed all his forces. Through decisive leadership and good luck, both the Union infantry and supply train managed to pass Spring Hill unscathed by dawn on November 29, and soon occupied the town of Franklin to the north. That morning, Hood was surprised and furious to discover Schofield&#x27;s unexpected escape. Hood ordered his army to resume its pursuit north to Franklin.

===Union defensive plans===
Schofield&#x27;s advance guard arrived in Franklin at about 4:30 a.m. on November 30, after a forced march north from Spring Hill. Brigadier General (BGEN) Jacob Cox, commander of the 3rd Division, temporarily assumed command of the XXIII Corps and immediately began preparing strong defensive positions around the deteriorated entrenchments originally constructed for a previous engagement in 1863.

Schofield decided to defend at Franklin with his back to the river because he had no pontoon bridges available that would enable his men to cross the river. The bridges had been left behind in his retreat from Columbia because they lacked wagons to transport them, and pontoons requested from Thomas in Nashville had not arrived. Schofield needed time to repair the permanent bridges spanning the river—a burned wagon bridge and an intact railroad bridge. He ordered his engineers to rebuild the wagon bridge and to lay planking over the undamaged railroad bridge to enable it to carry wagons and troops. His supply train parked in the side streets to keep the main pike open, while wagons continued to cross the river, first via a ford next to the burned-out pike bridge, and later in the afternoon by the two makeshift bridges. By the beginning of the assault, nearly all the supply wagons were across the Harpeth and on the road to Nashville.

By noon, the Union works were ready. The line, based on the prior year&#x27;s fortifications, formed an approximate semicircle around the town from northwest to southeast. The other half of the circle was the Harpeth River. Counterclockwise from the northwest were the divisions of Kimball (IV Corps), Ruger (XXIII Corps), and Reilly (XXIII Corps). There was a gap in the line where the Columbia Pike (present day U.S. Route 31) entered the outskirts of the town, left open to allow passage of the wagons. About behind this gap, a 150-yard &quot;retrenchment&quot; line was constructed of dirt and rails, which was intended to be a barrier to traffic, not a full-fledged defensive earthwork. (The gap was also defended by the guns of Battery A, 1st Kentucky Artillery. The men of the 44th Missouri also extended the retrenchment line to the west along their front with hastily dug trenches.) The actual earthworks in the southern portion of the line were formidable. Attacking infantry would be confronted by a ditch about four feet wide and two to three feet deep, then a wall of earth and wooden fence rails four feet above normal ground level, and finally a trench three to four feet deep in which the defenders stood, aiming their weapons through narrow &quot;head gaps&quot; formed by logs. In the southeast portion of the line, Osage-orange shrubs formed an almost impenetrable abatis. Just behind the center of the line stood the Carter House, appropriated as Cox&#x27;s headquarters. Just east of the pike was the Carter cotton gin building, around which a minor salient occurred in the Union earthworks. Schofield established his headquarters in the Alpheus Truett House, a half mile north of the Harpeth on the Nashville Pike, although he would spend most of his time during the battle in Fort Granger, built in 1863 as an artillery position northeast of the town.

Two Union brigades were positioned about a half mile forward of the main line. George D. Wagner&#x27;s division had been the last to arrive from Spring Hill, and after briefly stopping at Winstead Hill before Hood arrived, he ordered his brigades under COLs Emerson Opdycke, John Q. Lane, and Joseph Conrad (who had replaced Luther Bradley, wounded at Spring Hill) to stop halfway to the Union line and dig in as best they could on the flat ground. Stanley had earlier ordered Wagner to hold Winstead Hill with two brigades and relieve Opdycke (who had been the tail end of the rear guard) until dark unless he was pressed, and it is possible that Wagner somehow translated these orders into the notion that he was supposed to hold a line south of the main position with all his division. Opdycke considered Wagner&#x27;s order to be ridiculous and had already been directed by Stanley to retire within the works; he marched his brigade through the Union line and into a reserve position behind the gap through which the Columbia Pike passed. At 12:00, when the other U.S. forces had finished their fortifications, these two brigades had not even started digging in. Conrad&#x27;s and Lane&#x27;s brigades had few entrenching tools and used mainly bayonets, cups, and their hands.

Wood&#x27;s division of IV Corps and all of Wilson&#x27;s cavalry were posted north of the Harpeth to watch for any flanking attempt. Schofield planned to withdraw his infantry across the river by 18:00. if Hood had not arrived by then. As Hood approached, Schofield initially assumed the Confederates were demonstrating as they had at Columbia, planning to cross the Harpeth and turn the Union position. He did not suspect that Hood would be rash enough to attack the strong defensive line.

===Hood&#x27;s arrival and plan===
Hood&#x27;s army began to arrive on Winstead Hill, two miles (3 km) south of Franklin, around 13:00 Hood ordered a frontal assault in the dwindling afternoon light—sunset would be at 16:34 that day—against the Union force, a decision that caused dismay among his top generals. Forrest argued unsuccessfully that if he were given a division of infantry to accompany his cavalry, he could flank Schofield out of his position &quot;within an hour.&quot; Frank Cheatham told Hood, &quot;I do not like the looks of this fight; the enemy has an excellent position and is well fortified.&quot; But Hood countered that he would rather fight a Federal force that had had only a few hours to build defenses, instead of Nashville where &quot;they have been strengthening themselves for three years.&quot; Patrick Cleburne observed the enemy fortifications as being formidable, but he told the commanding general that he would either take the enemy&#x27;s works or fall in the attempt. He later remarked to Brigadier General (BGEN) Daniel C. Govan, &quot;Well, Govan, if we are to die, let us die like men.&quot;

Some popular histories assert that Hood acted rashly in a fit of rage, resentful that the Federal army had slipped past his troops the night before at Spring Hill and that he wanted to discipline his army by ordering them to assault against strong odds. Recent scholarship discounts this as unlikely, as it was not only militarily foolish, but Hood was observed to be determined, not angry, by the time he arrived in Franklin. His move was very much in keeping with the behavior of Lee and his subordinates in the Army of Northern Virginia in that aggressive action frequently gains one the initiative in combat.

Regardless of Hood&#x27;s personal motivations, his specific objective was to try to crush Schofield before he and his troops could escape to Nashville. He was concerned that if he attempted to turn Schofield by crossing the Harpeth and getting between him and Nashville, the maneuver would be time-consuming and the open terrain of the area would reveal his movements prematurely, causing Schofield to simply withdraw again. The Confederates began moving forward at 16:00, with Cheatham&#x27;s corps on the left of the assault and Stewart&#x27;s on the right. Bate&#x27;s division, on the left, was delayed in reaching its starting point as it marched around Winstead Hill, a movement that delayed the start of the entire army. Hood divided Forrest&#x27;s cavalry—Chalmer&#x27;s division on the far left, beyond Bate, and Buford and Jackson with Forrest, covering Stewart and facing the fords on the Harpeth. Lee&#x27;s corps, and almost all of the army&#x27;s artillery, had not yet arrived from Columbia. Hood&#x27;s attacking force, about 19–20,000 men, was arguably understrength for the mission he assigned—traversing two miles (3 km) of open ground with only two batteries of artillery support and then assaulting prepared fortifications.

==Opposing forces==

===Union===

MGEN John M. Schofield, commander of the Army of the Ohio, led a force of about 27,000 consisting of:
* IV Corps, commanded by MGEN David S. Stanley, with divisions commanded by BGENs Nathan Kimball, George D. Wagner, and Thomas J. Wood.
* XXIII Corps, normally commanded by Schofield, but temporarily commanded at Franklin by BGEN Jacob D. Cox, with divisions commanded by BGENs Thomas H. Ruger and James W. Reilly.
* Cavalry Corps, commanded by MGEN James H. Wilson, with divisions commanded by BGEN Edward M. McCook, Edward Hatch, Richard W. Johnson, and Joseph F. Knipe. 

===Confederate===

LTG John Bell Hood&#x27;s Army of Tennessee, at 39,000 men, constituted the second-largest remaining army of the Confederacy, ranking in strength only after Gen. Robert E. Lee&#x27;s Army of Northern Virginia. The army consisted of the corps of:
* MGEN Benjamin F. Cheatham, with divisions commanded by Maj. Gens. Patrick R. Cleburne, John C. Brown, and William B. Bate.
* LTG Stephen D. Lee, with divisions commanded by Maj. Gens. Edward &quot;Allegheny&quot; Johnson, Carter L. Stevenson, and Henry D. Clayton. (Only Johnson&#x27;s division played an active role at Franklin.)
* LTG Alexander P. Stewart, with divisions commanded by MGEN William W. Loring, Samuel G. French, and Edward C. Walthall.
* Cavalry forces under MGEN Nathan Bedford Forrest, with divisions commanded by BGEN James R. Chalmers, Abraham Buford, and William H. Jackson.

At Franklin, about 27,000 Confederates were engaged, primarily from the corps of Cheatham, Stewart, and Forrest, and Johnson&#x27;s division of Lee&#x27;s corps.

==Battle==

===Initial contact===
Hood&#x27;s attack initially enveloped the 3,000 men in two brigades under Lane and Conrad, which attempted to stand their ground behind inadequate fieldworks and without anchored flanks, but quickly collapsed under the pressure. As Wagner exhorted his men to stand fast, they let loose a single strong volley of rifle fire, and a two-gun section of Battery G, 1st Ohio Light Artillery, fired canister, but then many of the veteran soldiers of the two brigades stampeded back on the Columbia Pike to the main breastworks, while some untried replacements were reluctant to move under fire and were captured. Nearly 700 of Wagner&#x27;s men were taken prisoner. The fleeing troops were closely pursued by the Confederates, and a cry was repeated along the line, &quot;Go into the works with them.&quot; The pursued and pursuers were so intermingled that defenders in the breastworks had to hold their fire to avoid hitting their comrades.

===Breakthrough and repulse in the Federal center===
The Union&#x27;s momentary inability to defend the opening in the works caused a weak spot in its line at the Columbia Pike from the Carter House to the cotton gin. The Confederate divisions of Cleburne, Brown, and French converged on this front and a number of their troops broke through the now not-so-solid Federal defenses on either side. The 100th Ohio Infantry, of Reilly&#x27;s brigade, was driven back from its position to the east of the pike and Colonel (COL) Silas A. Strickland&#x27;s brigade (Ruger&#x27;s division) was forced to withdraw back to the Carter House. The left wing of the 72nd Illinois Infantry was swept away and rallied on the 183rd Ohio Infantry, in reserve at the retrenchment, which prompted the remainder of the 72nd to withdraw back to that line. In a matter of minutes, the Confederates had penetrated 50 yards deep into the center of the Federal line.

As the Confederates poured men into the breach, reserve regiments on both sides of the pike, the 44th Missouri and 100th Ohio stood their ground, but were in danger of being overwhelmed. At this time, Emerson Opdycke&#x27;s brigade was in reserve, positioned in columns of regiments facing north in a meadow about 200 yards north of the Carter House. Opdycke quickly repositioned his veterans into line of battle, straddling the road, and they were confronted by masses of fleeing Union soldiers, pursued by Confederates. Opdycke ordered his brigade forward to the works. At the same time, his corps commander, David Stanley, arrived on the scene. He later wrote, &quot;I saw Opdycke near the center of his line urging his men forward. I gave the Colonel no orders as I saw him engaged in doing the very thing to save us, to get possession of our line again.&quot; As he rode forward, Stanley had his horse shot out from under him and a bullet passed through the back of his neck, putting him temporarily out of action.

At the same time as Opdycke&#x27;s counterattack west of the pike, the reserve elements of Reilly&#x27;s division (the 12th Kentucky Infantry, 16th Kentucky Infantry, and 175th Ohio Infantry Regiment) had stood their ground and served as a rally line for survivors of Strickland&#x27;s and Wagner&#x27;s divisions. Together they sealed the breach. Hand-to-hand fighting around the Carter House and the pike was furious and desperate, employing such weapons as bayonets, rifle butts, entrenching tools, axes, and picks. When they ran out of cannonballs, they began to use pine cones from the surrounding trees.

For years afterward, the ferocity of the combat at extremely close quarters made the battle stand out in many of the veterans&#x27; memories. The historian, Jonathan Steplyk noted that the involvement of the field officers alongside their troops in the &quot;frenzied brawl&quot; showed the desperation with which they fought as regimental officers were normally expected to lead and inspire their men instead of getting directly involved. Many a field-grade officer in the U.S. forces actually used their swords as weapons that day. After having his horse shot out from under him and taking a bullet, Arthur MacArthur ran through a Confederate major who had just shot him in the chest. Opdycke riding his horse emptied his pistol at the Rebels and then dismounted to use it as club until it broke; grabbing a musket, he began clubbing the enemy with that. Steplyk writes that a reason the combat may have stood out so vividly for veterans was because the closeness was so exceptional; many of the Army of the Ohio and the Army of Tennessee had fought since Shiloh, but this combat was the first time they saw the bayonet and musket butt used with such abandon.

Firing continued around the Carter house and gardens for hours. Many in Brown&#x27;s division were driven back to the Federal earthworks, where many were pinned down for the remainder of the evening, unable to either advance or flee. Each side fired through embrasures or over the top of the parapets at close range in an attempt to dislodge the other. Brown&#x27;s division suffered significant losses, including Brown, who was wounded, and all four of his brigade commanders were casualties. Brown&#x27;s brigade under BGEN George W. Gordon had angled to the right during the advance, joining Cleburne&#x27;s division to the east of the pike. Their attack near the cotton gin was driven back from the breastworks and was then subjected to devastating cross fire from Reilly&#x27;s brigade to their front and the brigade of COL John S. Casement, on Reilly&#x27;s right. Cleburne was killed in the attack and 14 of his brigade and regimental commanders were casualties.

That some Union troops were armed with Spencer and Henry repeating rifles added to the otherwise considerable advantages of the defenders. Near the Carter House, 350 men of the 12th Kentucky and 65th Illinois fired 16-shot, lever-action Henry rifles, the predecessors to the Winchester repeating rifle. These rifles were capable of at least 15 to 30 shots per minute, which gave these men several times more firepower than typical infantrymen with more common muzzle-loading rifle-muskets.

===Repulse on the Federal left===
While fighting raged at the center of the Union line, the Confederates of Stewart&#x27;s corps also advanced against the Union left. Because the Harpeth River flowed in that area from southeast to northwest, the brigade found itself moving through a space getting progressively narrower, squeezing brigades together into a compressed front, delaying their movements and reducing their unit cohesion. Walthall&#x27;s division was pressured so much from the right that it temporarily fell in front of Cleburne&#x27;s advance. They were all subjected to fierce artillery fire not only from the main Union line, but also from the batteries across the river at Fort Granger. They also had significant difficulty pushing through the strong osage-orange abatis.
Loring&#x27;s division launched two attacks against the Union brigade of COL Israel N. Stiles and both were repulsed with heavy losses. Artillery firing canister rounds directly down the railroad cut prevented any attempt to flank the Union position. BGEN John Adams attempted to rally his brigade by galloping his horse directly onto the earthworks. As he attempted to seize the flag of the 65th Illinois, he and his horse were both shot and killed. The brigade of BGEN Winfield S. Featherston began falling back under heavy fire when its division commander, MGEN William W. Loring, confronted them, shouting, &quot;Great God. Do I command cowards?&quot; He attempted to inspire his men by sitting on his horse in full view of the Federal lines for over a minute and amazingly emerged unharmed, but the brigade made no further progress.

Walthall&#x27;s division, intermixed partially with Loring&#x27;s division because of the confusion that resulted from the narrow space, struck Casement&#x27;s and Reilly&#x27;s brigades in multiple waves of brigade assaults—probably as many as six distinct attacks. All of these assaults were turned back with heavy losses. The brigade of BGEN William A. Quarles was able to push through the abatis and reached the Federal earthworks, where it was pinned down by murderous crossfire. Quarles was wounded in the left arm and at the end of the battle the highest-ranking officer standing in his brigade was a captain.

===Failures on the Confederate left and center===
MGEN William B. Bate&#x27;s division had a long distance to march to reach its assigned objective on the Union right and when he gave the final order to attack it was almost dark. First contact with the enemy came around the Everbright Mansion, the home of Rebecca Bostick, and the Confederates pushed aside Union sharpshooters and swept past the house. However, Bate&#x27;s left flank was not being protected as he expected by Chalmers&#x27;s cavalry division, and they received enfilade fire. To protect the flank, Bate ordered the Florida Brigade, temporarily commanded by COL Robert Bullock, to move from its reserve position to his left flank. This not only delayed the advance, but provided only a single line to attack the Union fortifications, leaving no reserve. Chalmers&#x27;s troopers had actually engaged the Federal right by this time (the brigades of COL Isaac M. Kirby and BGEN Walter C. Whitaker of Kimball&#x27;s division), fighting dismounted, but Bate was unaware of it because the two forces were separated by rolling ground and orchards. Neither Bate nor Chalmers made any progress and they withdrew.

Hood, who remained at his headquarters on Winstead Hill, was still convinced that he could pierce the Federal line. At about 19:00, he deployed the only division of Stephen D. Lee&#x27;s corps that had arrived, commanded by MGEN Edward &quot;Allegheny&quot; Johnson, to assist Cheatham&#x27;s effort. They moved north on the west side of the Columbia Turnpike and passed around Privet Knob, Cheatham&#x27;s headquarters, but were unfamiliar with the terrain in the dark and Cheatham told Lee he had no staff officer left who could guide them. Both Bate and Cheatham warned Lee not to fire indiscriminately against the Federal works because Confederates were pinned down there on the outside. Johnson&#x27;s men lost their unit alignments in the dark and had significant difficulties attacking the works just to the west of the Carter House. They were repulsed after a single assault with heavy losses.

===Cavalry actions===
In addition to Chalmers&#x27;s actions in the west, across the river to the east Confederate cavalry commander Forrest attempted to turn the Union left. His two divisions on Stewart&#x27;s right (BGENs Abraham Buford II and William H. Jackson) engaged some Federal cavalry pickets and pushed them back. They crossed the Harpeth at Hughes Ford, about upstream from Franklin. When Union cavalry commander BGEN James H. Wilson learned at 15:00 that Forrest was crossing the river, he ordered his division under BGEN Edward Hatch to move south from his position on the Brentwood Turnpike and attack Forrest from the front. He ordered BGEN John T. Croxton&#x27;s brigade to move against Forrest&#x27;s flank and held COL Thomas J. Harrison&#x27;s brigade in reserve. The dismounted cavalrymen of Hatch&#x27;s division charged the Confederate cavalrymen, also dismounted, and drove them back across the river. Some of Croxton&#x27;s men were armed with seven-shot Spencer carbines, which had a devastating effect on the Confederate line. Wilson was proud of his men&#x27;s accomplishment because this was the first time that Forrest had been defeated by a smaller force in a standup fight during the war.

==Aftermath==

Following the failure of Johnson&#x27;s assault, Hood decided to end offensive actions for the evening and began to plan for a resumed series of attacks in the morning. Schofield ordered his infantry to cross the river, starting at 23:00, despite objections from Cox that withdrawal was no longer necessary and that Hood was weakened and should be counter-attacked. Schofield had received orders from Thomas to evacuate earlier that day—before Hood&#x27;s attack began—and he was happy to take advantage of them despite the changed circumstances. Although there was a period in which the Union army was vulnerable, outside its works and straddling the river, Hood did not attempt to take advantage of it during the night. The Union army began entering the breastworks at Nashville at noon on December 1, with Hood&#x27;s damaged army in pursuit.

The damaged Confederate force was left in control of Franklin, but its enemy had escaped again. Although he had briefly come close to breaking through in the vicinity of the Columbia Turnpike, Hood was unable to destroy Schofield or prevent his withdrawal to link up with Thomas in Nashville. And his unsuccessful result came with a frightful cost. The Union commanding general claimed that the Confederates suffered 6,252 casualties, including 1,750 killed and 3,800 wounded, but this is not corroborated by Confederate reports. An estimated 2,000 others suffered less serious wounds and returned to duty before the Battle of Nashville.

More importantly, the military leadership in the West was decimated, including the loss of perhaps the best division commander of either side, Patrick Cleburne, who was killed in action. Fourteen Confederate generals (six killed, seven wounded, and one captured) and 55 regimental commanders were casualties. Five generals killed in action at Franklin were Cleburne, John Adams, Hiram B. Granbury, States Rights Gist, and Otho F. Strahl. A sixth general, John C. Carter, was mortally wounded and died later on December 10. The wounded generals were John C. Brown, Francis M. Cockrell, Zachariah C. Deas, Arthur M. Manigault, Thomas M. Scott, and Jacob H. Sharp. One general, BGEN George W. Gordon, was captured. Also among the dead was Tod Carter, the middle child of the Carter family. Having enlisted in the Confederate army three years earlier, Carter had returned to his hometown for the first time since then, only to be wounded in battle just a few hundred yards away from his own house. He was found by his family after the battle, and died early in the next day.

Historian Andrew Bledsoe writes that the &quot;wastage&quot; of the officer corps &quot;irreparably harmed [Hood&#x27;s] army&#x27;s morale, disrupted its command structure, and deprived it of talented and experienced commanders.&quot;&quot; He further cites the timing of the attack, just before twilight, as a key factor combined with the fact that most officers were mounted to preserve their command and control in the fading light, a &quot;result of logical, and terrible, deliberation&quot;.

Union losses were reported as only 189 killed, 1,033 wounded, and 1,104 missing. It is possible that the number of casualties was under-reported by Schofield because of the confusion during his army&#x27;s hasty nighttime evacuation of Franklin. The Union wounded were left behind in Franklin. Many of the prisoners, including all captured wounded and medical personnel, were recovered on December 18 when Union forces re-entered Franklin in pursuit of Hood.

The Army of Tennessee was badly damaged at Franklin. Nevertheless, rather than retreat and risk the army dissolving through desertions, Hood advanced his 26,500 man force against the Union army now combined under Thomas, firmly entrenched at Nashville which numbered more than 60,000. Hood and his department commander Gen. P.G.T. Beauregard requested reinforcements, but none were available. Strongly outnumbered and exposed to the elements, Hood was attacked by Thomas on December 15–16 at the Battle of Nashville, defeated decisively and pursued aggressively, retreating to Mississippi with just under 20,000 men. The Army of Tennessee never fought again as an effective force and Hood&#x27;s career was ruined.

Perhaps surprisingly, some Confederate soldiers claimed that Franklin was a victory. James Lanning of the 25th Alabama Infantry wrote in his diary, “victory is ours but very dearly bought.” Confederate artilleryman William Ritter believed, “the charge was a brilliant one and was successful, as part of the enemy’s line was captured.” Joseph Boyce of the 1st Missouri Infantry acknowledged that many men considered Franklin a victory for the Confederate army since it held the battlefield at the end of the fighting. However, Boyce, who was wounded at Franklin, also noted “two such victories will wipe out any army.”

Hood&#x27;s continued pursuit of Schofield after suffering defeat at Franklin and his refusal to withdraw before the battle of Nashville caused Schofield to remark &quot;I doubt if any soldiers in the world ever needed more cumulative evidence to convince them that they were beaten.&quot;

In his Pulitzer Prize-winning book &quot;Battle Cry of Freedom&quot;, James M. McPherson wrote, &quot;Having proved even to Hood&#x27;s satisfaction that they could assault breastworks, the Army of Tennessee had shattered itself beyond the possibility of ever doing so again. David J. Eicher wrote that Hood &quot;had in effect mortally wounded his army at Franklin.&quot;

===Battlefield today===

The Carter House, which stands today and is open to visitors, was located at the center of the Union position. The site covers about . The house and outbuildings still show hundreds of bullet holes. The Carnton Plantation, home to the McGavock family during the battle, also still stands and is likewise open to the public. The Carnton Plantation home was one of 44 Franklin homes serving as a hospital, often with 30 wounded in each small room of the house. Confederate soldiers of Stewart&#x27;s Corps swept past Carnton toward the left wing of the Union army and the house and outbuildings were converted into the largest field hospital present after the battle. Adjacent to Carnton is the McGavock Confederate Cemetery, where 1,481 Southern soldiers killed in the battle are buried. Adjacent to the surrounding Carnton is another of battlefield, formerly the Franklin Country Club golf course, which is currently being converted to a city park.

Much of the rest of the Franklin battlefield has been lost to commercial development. The spot where Gen. Cleburne fell, for instance, was covered until late 2005 by a Pizza Hut restaurant. City officials and historic-preservation groups have recently placed a new emphasis on saving what remains of the land over which the battle raged.

In 2006, of land bordering the southwestern end of the Carter House property was acquired with help of the American Battlefield Trust and local organizations. This land was part of that made up the Carter Family Garden, which during the battle saw tremendous fighting and was part of a brief Confederate breakthrough. After the purchase, a house, out-buildings, and a swimming pool were removed. During excavation of the original Federal entrenchments some human bones were found.

Starting in 2005, the area around the intersection of Columbia Ave. and Cleburne St. has seen a serious renewed effort to reclaim that area to be the heart of a future battlefield park. The location of the former Pizza Hut is now the home to Cleburne Park. The property where the Carter Cotton Gin was located during the battle was purchased in 2005. In 2008 the property behind this location and where the Federal line crossed Columbia Ave. was purchased and in May 2010 the property east of the Gin location and where part of the Gin may have stood was also purchased. All these locations have houses on them that will be either sold and moved or torn down. Preservation organizations plan to reconstruct both the Carter Cotton Gin and some of the Federal entrenchments.

On November 24, 2010, the State of Tennessee awarded a $960,000 enhancement grant from the Tennessee Department of Transportation to help purchase the property where the Domino&#x27;s Pizza and mini-mart is located. A local preservation organization is also hoping to purchase 16 acres of land in two parcels: five acres located southwest of what is now a small park called the Collin&#x27;s Farm located at the southeast corner of the Lewisburg Pike and the Nashville and Decatur Railroad that was preserved a few years ago; and 11 acres located near the corner of Lewisburg Pike and Carnton Lane. The American Battlefield Trust and its federal, state and local partners have acquired and preserved more than of the battlefield in more than a dozen different transactions since 1996

Hugh A. Garland Jr., the son of slavery advocate and Andrew Jackson supporter Hugh A. Garland was a Confederate casualty in the battle.

==In popular culture==
In the book &quot;Gone with the Wind&quot; by Margaret Mitchell, the character Rhett Butler mentions that he fought at Franklin. In the film of the same name, Mrs Mead remarks to Mrs Meriwether that Rhett Butler was decorated by the Confederate Congress for his services at the Battle of Franklin.

==See also==

* Armies in the American Civil War
* Franklin-Nashville campaign
* List of costliest American Civil War land battles
* Sherman&#x27;s March
* Troop engagements of the American Civil War, 1864

==References==
Footnotes
Citations
Bibliography
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

::Memoirs and primary sources
* . First published 1880 for the Hood Orphan Memorial Fund by G.T. Beauregard.


Further reading
* 


==External links==

* Battle of Franklin: Battle Maps, histories, photos, and preservation news (Civil War Trust)
*Animated map of the Battle of Franklin (Civil War Trust)
* A blog-database for descendants of the Battle of Franklin
* Google Map of the Battle of Franklin 
* Battle of Franklin.net
* Animated history of the Franklin-Nashville Campaign 
* Save the Franklin Battlefield, Inc.
* Carter House Museum
* Carnton Plantation
* McGavock Confederate Cemetery
* &quot;West Point Atlas&quot; map, Battles of Spring Hill and Franklin
* Historic map of Franklin, Tennessee Civil War Preservation Association
* John Bell Hood Society&#x27;s defense of Hood&#x27;s 1864 Tennessee campaign
* On this date in Civil War history – Battle of Franklin – November 30, 1864</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q370671" start="4" end="22" title="Battle of Franklin" label="Battle of Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q984264" start="59" end="78" title="Franklin, Tennessee" label="Franklin, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522212" start="95" end="122" title="Franklin–Nashville Campaign" label="Franklin–Nashville Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="130" end="148" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="203" end="226" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135313" start="240" end="258" title="Lieutenant General (CSA)" label="Lieutenant General"/>
<link wikidata="Q553533" start="259" end="273" title="John Bell Hood" label="John Bell Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q689849" start="281" end="298" title="Army of Tennessee" label="Army of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470138" start="318" end="333" title="frontal assault" label="frontal assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="379" end="384" title="Union Army" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="398" end="411" title="Major General (United States)" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q996047" start="412" end="426" title="John Schofield" label="John Schofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="511" end="520" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="593" end="600" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="611" end="619" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152440" start="677" end="698" title="Pickett&amp;#x27;s Charge" label="Pickett&amp;#x27;s Charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q740330" start="951" end="967" title="George H. Thomas" label="George H. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752689" start="986" end="1005" title="Battle of Nashville" label="Battle of Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955319" start="1268" end="1305" title="Battle of Franklin (1863)" label="battle fought there on April 10, 1863"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246956" start="1411" end="1424" title="Earl Van Dorn" label="Earl Van Dorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q756118" start="1498" end="1514" title="Atlanta Campaign" label="Atlanta Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="1553" end="1571" title="William T. Sherman" label="William T. Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="1628" end="1639" title="Chattanooga, Tennessee" label="Chattanooga"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="1643" end="1650" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052780" start="1812" end="1828" title="Sherman&amp;#x27;s March to the Sea" label="March to the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="1845" end="1853" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q740330" start="2322" end="2338" title="George H. Thomas" label="George H. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q689891" start="2357" end="2379" title="Army of the Cumberland" label="Army of the Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392739" start="2437" end="2445" title="IV Corps (Union Army)" label="IV Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018803" start="2504" end="2520" title="David S. Stanley" label="David S. Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042579" start="2526" end="2537" title="XXIII Corps (Union Army)" label="XXIII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q689900" start="2545" end="2561" title="Army of the Ohio" label="Army of the Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q996047" start="2590" end="2604" title="John Schofield" label="John Schofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="3127" end="3136" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="3162" end="3170" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="3195" end="3205" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio River"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="3327" end="3340" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q709723" start="3388" end="3406" title="James M. McPherson" label="James M. McPherson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3593" end="3613" title="John Bell Hood#Atlanta Campaign and the Army of Tennessee" label="limited his mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q79743" start="3835" end="3852" title="Florence, Alabama" label="Florence, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410885" start="3957" end="3975" title="Pulaski, Tennessee" label="Pulaski, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5675279" start="4276" end="4284" title="Columbia, Tennessee" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q652618" start="4326" end="4336" title="Duck River (Tennessee)" label="Duck River"/>
<link wikidata="Q366102" start="4395" end="4417" title="Nathan Bedford Forrest" label="Nathan Bedford Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870777" start="4661" end="4679" title="Battle of Columbia" label="Battle of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757475" start="4949" end="4960" title="Andrew Jackson Smith" label="A. J. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042550" start="4968" end="4977" title="XVI Corps (Union Army)" label="XVI Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663540" start="5088" end="5101" title="Harpeth River" label="Harpeth River"/>
<link wikidata="Q326749" start="5211" end="5231" title="Benjamin F. Cheatham" label="Benjamin F. Cheatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610793" start="5243" end="5263" title="Alexander P. Stewart" label="Alexander P. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q327002" start="5394" end="5408" title="Stephen D. Lee" label="Stephen D. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443232" start="5416" end="5421" title="Second Corps, Army of Tennessee" label="corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872423" start="5930" end="5951" title="Battle of Spring Hill" label="Battle of Spring Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q840191" start="6419" end="6434" title="Lost Cause of the Confederacy" label="Lost Cause myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="7211" end="7235" title="Brigadier general (United States)" label="Brigadier General (BGEN)"/>
<link wikidata="Q177350" start="7236" end="7245" title="Jacob Dolson Cox" label="Jacob Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955319" start="7451" end="7470" title="Battle of Franklin (1863)" label="previous engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q58819376" start="8842" end="8855" title="U.S. Route 31 in Tennessee" label="U.S. Route 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066106" start="9762" end="9774" title="Osage-orange" label="Osage-orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q91713" start="9812" end="9818" title="abatis" label="abatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047176" start="9865" end="9877" title="Carter House (Franklin, Tennessee)" label="Carter House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136790" start="9957" end="9967" title="cotton gin" label="cotton gin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030752" start="9999" end="10006" title="Salients, re-entrants and pockets" label="salient"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471240" start="10227" end="10239" title="Fort Granger" label="Fort Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538332" start="10383" end="10399" title="George D. Wagner" label="George D. Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370910" start="10562" end="10577" title="Emerson Opdycke" label="Emerson Opdycke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256317" start="11893" end="11906" title="demonstration (military)" label="demonstrating"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958684" start="11966" end="11970" title="turning movement" label="turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470138" start="12229" end="12244" title="frontal assault" label="frontal assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358961" start="12908" end="12924" title="Patrick Cleburne" label="Patrick Cleburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135313" start="13109" end="13133" title="Brigadier General (CSA)" label="Brigadier General (BGEN)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014114" start="13134" end="13149" title="Daniel C. Govan" label="Daniel C. Govan"/>
<link wikidata="Q689847" start="13730" end="13755" title="Army of Northern Virginia" label="Army of Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q996047" start="15116" end="15133" title="John M. Schofield" label="John M. Schofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q689900" start="15152" end="15168" title="Army of the Ohio" label="Army of the Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392739" start="15215" end="15223" title="IV Corps (Union Army)" label="IV Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018803" start="15243" end="15259" title="David S. Stanley" label="David S. Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="15289" end="15294" title="Brigadier general (United States)" label="BGENs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969177" start="15295" end="15309" title="Nathan Kimball" label="Nathan Kimball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538332" start="15311" end="15327" title="George D. Wagner" label="George D. Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990662" start="15333" end="15347" title="Thomas J. Wood" label="Thomas J. Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042579" start="15351" end="15362" title="XXIII Corps (Union Army)" label="XXIII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q177350" start="15443" end="15455" title="Jacob Dolson Cox" label="Jacob D. Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q889329" start="15491" end="15506" title="Thomas H. Ruger" label="Thomas H. Ruger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144890" start="15511" end="15526" title="James W. Reilly" label="James W. Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806582" start="15563" end="15578" title="James H. Wilson" label="James H. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q882617" start="15613" end="15629" title="Edward M. McCook" label="Edward M. McCook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343364" start="15631" end="15643" title="Edward Hatch" label="Edward Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329710" start="15645" end="15663" title="Richard W. Johnson" label="Richard W. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282983" start="15669" end="15684" title="Joseph F. Knipe" label="Joseph F. Knipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q689849" start="15733" end="15750" title="Army of Tennessee" label="Army of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135313" start="15864" end="15868" title="General (CSA)" label="Gen."/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="15869" end="15882" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q689847" start="15890" end="15915" title="Army of Northern Virginia" label="Army of Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135313" start="15955" end="15959" title="Maj. Gen. (CSA)" label="MGEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q326749" start="15960" end="15980" title="Benjamin F. Cheatham" label="Benjamin F. Cheatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358961" start="16021" end="16040" title="Patrick R. Cleburne" label="Patrick R. Cleburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q210555" start="16042" end="16055" title="John C. Brown" label="John C. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q276604" start="16061" end="16076" title="William B. Bate" label="William B. Bate"/>
<link wikidata="Q327002" start="16084" end="16098" title="Stephen D. Lee" label="Stephen D. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321489" start="16139" end="16175" title="Edward Johnson (general)" label="Edward &amp;quot;Allegheny&amp;quot; Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442572" start="16177" end="16196" title="Carter L. Stevenson" label="Carter L. Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606663" start="16202" end="16218" title="Henry DeLamar Clayton (general)" label="Henry D. Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610793" start="16292" end="16312" title="Alexander P. Stewart" label="Alexander P. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356926" start="16347" end="16364" title="William W. Loring" label="William W. Loring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218305" start="16366" end="16382" title="Samuel G. French" label="Samuel G. French"/>
<link wikidata="Q369143" start="16388" end="16406" title="Edward C. Walthall" label="Edward C. Walthall"/>
<link wikidata="Q366102" start="16436" end="16458" title="Nathan Bedford Forrest" label="Nathan Bedford Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q975506" start="16493" end="16510" title="James R. Chalmers" label="James R. Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q329839" start="16512" end="16526" title="Abraham Buford II" label="Abraham Buford"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012314" start="16532" end="16550" title="William Hicks Jackson" label="William H. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q91745" start="17259" end="17270" title="breastwork (fortification)" label="breastworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546239" start="18088" end="18107" title="100th Ohio Infantry" label="100th Ohio Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984198" start="18197" end="18210" title="Colonel (United States)" label="Colonel (COL)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18211" end="18230" title="50th Ohio Infantry#Commanders" label="Silas A. Strickland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554536" start="18397" end="18416" title="183rd Ohio Infantry" label="183rd Ohio Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q97703935" start="18727" end="18740" title="44th Missouri Infantry Regiment (Union)" label="44th Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546239" start="18745" end="18755" title="100th Ohio Infantry Regiment" label="100th Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548915" start="19770" end="19792" title="12th Regiment Kentucky Volunteer Infantry" label="12th Kentucky Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552229" start="19794" end="19816" title="16th Regiment Kentucky Volunteer Infantry" label="16th Kentucky Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552968" start="19822" end="19850" title="175th Ohio Infantry Regiment" label="175th Ohio Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q710526" start="20864" end="20880" title="Arthur MacArthur Jr." label="Arthur MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q452920" start="21951" end="21967" title="George Gordon (Civil War General)" label="George W. Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256201" start="22254" end="22270" title="John S. Casement" label="John S. Casement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095719" start="22435" end="22442" title="Spencer repeating rifle" label="Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606404" start="22447" end="22452" title="Henry rifle" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570235" start="22671" end="22697" title="Winchester repeating rifle" label="Winchester repeating rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066106" start="23655" end="23667" title="osage-orange" label="osage-orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q91713" start="23668" end="23674" title="abatis" label="abatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427237" start="23829" end="23844" title="Canister shot" label="canister rounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699093" start="23932" end="23942" title="John Adams (Confederate Army officer)" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584141" start="24147" end="24170" title="Winfield S. Featherston" label="Winfield S. Featherston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356926" start="24241" end="24258" title="William W. Loring" label="William W. Loring"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004442" start="24860" end="24878" title="William Andrew Quarles" label="William A. Quarles"/>
<link wikidata="Q276604" start="25188" end="25203" title="William B. Bate" label="William B. Bate"/>
<link wikidata="Q125182" start="25763" end="25777" title="Robert Bullock" label="Robert Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321489" start="26536" end="26572" title="Edward Johnson (general)" label="Edward &amp;quot;Allegheny&amp;quot; Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q329839" start="27434" end="27451" title="Abraham Buford II" label="Abraham Buford II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012314" start="27456" end="27474" title="William Hicks Jackson" label="William H. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806582" start="27640" end="27655" title="James H. Wilson" label="James H. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343364" start="27745" end="27757" title="Edward Hatch" label="Edward Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623614" start="27867" end="27882" title="John T. Croxton" label="John T. Croxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752689" start="29911" end="29930" title="Battle of Nashville" label="Battle of Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358961" start="30076" end="30092" title="Patrick Cleburne" label="Patrick Cleburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699093" start="30300" end="30310" title="John Adams (Confederate Army officer)" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769023" start="30312" end="30329" title="Hiram B. Granbury" label="Hiram B. Granbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636744" start="30331" end="30349" title="States Rights Gist" label="States Rights Gist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108704" start="30355" end="30369" title="Otho F. Strahl" label="Otho F. Strahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645749" start="30388" end="30402" title="John C. Carter" label="John C. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q210555" start="30482" end="30495" title="John C. Brown" label="John C. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259413" start="30497" end="30516" title="Francis M. Cockrell" label="Francis M. Cockrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q116473" start="30518" end="30535" title="Zachariah C. Deas" label="Zachariah C. Deas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799721" start="30537" end="30556" title="Arthur Middleton Manigault" label="Arthur M. Manigault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792071" start="30558" end="30573" title="Thomas M. Scott" label="Thomas M. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118700" start="30579" end="30593" title="Jacob H. Sharp" label="Jacob H. Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q452920" start="30613" end="30629" title="George Gordon (Civil War General)" label="George W. Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752689" start="32460" end="32479" title="Battle of Nashville" label="Battle of Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="33597" end="33611" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870033" start="33631" end="33652" title="Battle Cry of Freedom (book)" label="Battle Cry of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q709723" start="33660" end="33678" title="James M. McPherson" label="James M. McPherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235417" start="33866" end="33881" title="David J. Eicher" label="David J. Eicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047176" start="33993" end="34005" title="Carter House (Franklin, Tennessee)" label="Carter House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044173" start="34192" end="34210" title="Carnton" label="Carnton Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801211" start="34682" end="34711" title="McGavock Confederate Cemetery" label="McGavock Confederate Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q191615" start="35107" end="35116" title="Pizza Hut" label="Pizza Hut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124628" start="35385" end="35411" title="American Battlefield Trust" label="American Battlefield Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124628" start="37137" end="37163" title="American Battlefield Trust" label="American Battlefield Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q27859385" start="37397" end="37412" title="Hugh A. Garland" label="Hugh A. Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870" start="37497" end="37515" title="Gone with the Wind (novel)" label="Gone with the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q173540" start="37525" end="37542" title="Margaret Mitchell" label="Margaret Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875" start="37615" end="37619" title="Gone with the Wind (movie)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778688" start="37794" end="37826" title="Armies in the American Civil War" label="Armies in the American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522212" start="37829" end="37856" title="Franklin-Nashville campaign" label="Franklin-Nashville campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165129" start="37859" end="37908" title="List of costliest American Civil War land battles" label="List of costliest American Civil War land battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052780" start="37911" end="37931" title="Sherman&amp;#x27;s March" label="Sherman&amp;#x27;s March"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845554" start="37934" end="37983" title="Troop engagements of the American Civil War, 1864" label="Troop engagements of the American Civil War, 1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q313976" start="38168" end="38183" title="P. G. T. Beauregard" label="G.T. Beauregard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124628" start="38305" end="38320" title="Civil War Trust" label="Civil War Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124628" start="38363" end="38378" title="Civil War Trust" label="Civil War Trust"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423219" wikidata="Q665499" url="?curid=423219" title="CKS">
<text>CKS may refer to:

== Transport ==
* Clarkston railway station, which has the National Rail code CKS
* The former IATA airport code for Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport (IATA: TPE), which was formerly known as Chiang Kai-shek International Airport
* The ICAO code for Kalitta Air 
* Chu Kong Passenger Transport Co., Ltd (CKS), a Hong Kong ferry company

== Other uses ==
*CKS Group, an American advertising company
* Checksum, to detect data errors
* Chiang Kai-shek (1887–1975), Chinese politician and military leader
* Chiyoda Kogaku Seiko, a Japanese camera manufacturer
* Ciné-Kodak Special, a series of video cameras (made 1930s–1960s)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q665499" start="0" end="3" title="CKS" label="CKS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869792" start="37" end="62" title="Clarkston railway station" label="Clarkston railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q44856" start="136" end="172" title="Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport" label="Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368443" start="272" end="283" title="Kalitta Air" label="Kalitta Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115145" start="287" end="324" title="Chu Kong Passenger Transport Co., Ltd" label="Chu Kong Passenger Transport Co., Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012563" start="377" end="386" title="CKS Group" label="CKS Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q218341" start="422" end="430" title="Checksum" label="Checksum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="456" end="471" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q354578" start="526" end="546" title="Chiyoda Kogaku Seiko" label="Chiyoda Kogaku Seiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110411" start="581" end="599" title="Ciné-Kodak Special" label="Ciné-Kodak Special"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423221" wikidata="Q3132987" url="?curid=423221" title="North Dundas, Ontario">
<text>North Dundas is a township in Eastern Ontario, Canada, in the United Counties of Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry.

North Dundas is located approximately south of downtown Ottawa, midway between Ottawa and Morrisburg. It is primarily rural with a few small villages. It is spread across the South Nation River and the East Castor River watersheds.

The township was incorporated on January 1, 1998, by amalgamating the former townships of Mountain and Winchester with the independent villages of Chesterville and Winchester. The village of Winchester is the township&#x27;s primary administrative centre.

==Communities==
The township of North Dundas comprises a number of villages and hamlets, including the following communities:

*In the former Mountain Township: Hallville, Harmony, Inkerman, Mountain, South Mountain; &quot;Belmeade&quot;, &quot;Inkerman Station&quot;, &quot;North Mountain&quot;, &quot;Reid&#x27;s Mills&quot;, &quot;Rosehaven&quot;, &quot;Van Camps&quot;; &quot;Baldwins Bridge&quot;, &quot;Cloverdale&quot;, &quot;Mulloys&quot;, &quot;Oak Valley&quot;, &quot;Vinegar Hill&quot;; &quot;Hyndman&#x27;s Ridge&quot;, &quot;Kerr&#x27;s Ridge&quot;
*In the former Winchester Township: Chesterville, Marionville (partially), Morewood, Mountain, Ormond, Winchester; &quot;Cannamore&quot; (partially), &quot;Cass Bridge&quot;, &quot;Connaught&quot;, &quot;Melvin&quot;, &quot;North Winchester&quot;, &quot;Winchester Springs&quot; (partially); &quot;Annable&quot;, &quot;Bethune Bush&quot;, &quot;Forward&quot;, &quot;Limerick&quot;, &quot;Maple Ridge&quot;, &quot;Nation Valley&quot;, &quot;The Boyne&quot;, &quot;The Ninth&quot;, Toyes Hill.

The township administrative offices are located in Winchester.
==Demographics==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, North Dundas had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.


==Politics==
With the amalgamation in 1998 of the villages of Winchester and Chesterville and Winchester and Mountain Townships, the former various municipal councils were replaced by a single township council. The township has since been represented by many Mayors and Councillors: 
==Events==
There are a number of major summer fairs and festivals that take place in the Township of North Dundas. Every summer, Chesterville holds a summer agricultural fair. The Village of Winchester hosts &quot;Dairyfest&quot; in early August and the Village of South Mountain hosts their summer agricultural fair also in August.

The Village of Chesterville hosts the Chesterville Farmer&#x27;s Market on the waterfront every Saturday during the summer months, and an annual Art on the Waterfront in June.

==Education==
There are three public elementary schools, one Catholic elementary school, and one public high school in North Dundas:
*Winchester Public School (JK-Grade 6): 547 Louise Street South, Winchester. Winchester Public School was founded in 1890. The original building burned down in 1927 and a new school was built on the same lot later that year.
*Chesterville Public School (JK-Grade 6): 38 College Street, Chesterville. Chesterville Public School was founded in 1902. The original building was demolished in 1963 to make way for a larger, more modern school. Happy Face Nursery School operates out of this location, offering the following programs: Toddler (18–30 months of age), Preschool (2.5–6 years of age), Kindergarten (6–8 years of age), and School Age (8–13 years of age).
*Nationview Public School (JK-Grade 6): 3045 County Road 1, South Mountain. Nationview Public School was founded in 1971. The school formerly taught students from kindergarten to grade 8, but this ended in June 2011 due to declining enrolment. After this, grade 7 and 8 students were primarily split between North Dundas Intermediate School in Chesterville and Seaway High School in Iroquois. Happy Face Nursery School operates out of this location, offering the following programs: Infant (0–18 months of age), Toddler (18–30 months of age), Preschool (2.5–6 years of age), Kindergarten (6–8 years of age), and School Age (8–13 years of age).
*St. Mary&#x27;s Catholic School (JK-Grade 6): 67 Main Street South, Chesterville. St. Mary&#x27;s Catholic School was founded in 1903. From 1907 to 1972, the Sisters of Providence taught at the school. The original school was demolished in 1963 to make way for a larger, more modern school.
*North Dundas District High School (Grades 7–12): 12835 County Road 43, Chesterville. North Dundas District High School was founded in 1963. Following a fire in 1962 that destroyed Winchester High School (founded 1914), the North Dundas District High School Board (later part of the SDG Board of Education, then the Upper Canada District School Board) built an amalgamated high school to service both Winchester and Chesterville, as well as the surrounding areas. As a consequence, Chesterville High School (founded 1911), was demolished in 1963. Due to declining enrolment, Maple Ridge Senior Elementary School closed in 2011 and the North Dundas Intermediate School was created for grades 7 and 8. The Intermediate School is located on the second floor of NDDHS.

==Media==
The community has been served by a number of newspapers over the years.
*&quot;Winchester Press&quot; (1888–2020). The &quot;Winchester Press&quot; was a weekly newspaper founded by Byron Lane that was first published on 1 May 1888. George H. Challies, who later served as MPP for the area, was a newspaper boy for the &quot;Press&quot; in 1894. The &quot;Press&quot; was sold in 1912 to George C. Lacey, who later sold it in 1915 to James H. Ross after buying the &quot;Chesterville Record&quot;. The business was devastated in 1921 when a fire destroyed their office, which was located on the south side of Main Street West, directly beside the store owned by Aaron Sweet (now Sweet Corner Park). For the next 30 years, it had several homes, including the Legion building and the Lannin Block (north side of Main Street West). William Fernland &quot;Fern&quot; Workman, who had worked at the &quot;Press&quot; since 1918, purchased the newspaper in 1942 from Ross&#x27;s widow, Blanche Gardner Ross. In October 1951, the Press was given a new home with the completion of its office on the north-east corner of St. Lawrence and Clarence Streets. Following Workman&#x27;s death on March 30, 1957, his sons Reginald and Ronald became co-owners. They sold the newspaper in August 1981 to John and Robin Morris, who co-owned 2woMor Publications Inc. Robin eventually left to create his own company, leaving John as the sole owner. John Morris died on June 5, 2004. At the time of his death, in addition to the &quot;Winchester Press&quot;, he owned the &quot;Leeds &amp; Grenville Business News&quot;, the &quot;Manotick Messenger&quot;, the &quot;Barrhaven Independent&quot;, the &quot;Osgoode &amp; Rideau Packet&quot;, the &quot;Tupper Lake Free Press&quot;, and the &quot;Gouverneur Tribune Press&quot;. Ownership of the &quot;Press&quot; then transferred to Morris&#x27; wife, Beth, who owned it until the newspaper&#x27;s closure in January 2020. The last edition was published on January 1, 2020.
*&quot;Chesterville Record&quot; (1894–present). The Chesterville Record is a weekly newspaper that was founded by Robert L. Harrop, the Chesterville station master. It was first published on December 12, 1894, and Thomas T. Shaw purchased the newspaper the following year. The Record office burned in the Great Fire of 1909 and was given a new home in 1910 when an office was built on King Street, where the business remained until 2018. T. T. Shaw sold the Record to George C. Lacey in 1915, who owned it until 1950. Lacey&#x27;s daughter Helen, along with her husband Keith Graham, then became the co-publishers until they sold the newspaper to Blake Feeley and Wayne LaPrade in 1969. In 1976, the Record was sold to 2woMor Publications Inc., co-owned by brothers John and Robin Morris. Robin Morris eventually split from the St. Lawrence Printing Company and established Etcetera Publications, under which he continued to publish the Chesterville Record. Robin Morris acted as editor of the Record for many years until his death on December 9, 2014. In August 2018, the newspaper was purchased by Linda Vogel, AJ Al-Rajab, and Donald Good. In June of that year, the business moved to 29 King Street and in December, the long-time office at 7 King Street was demolished.
*&quot;Eastern Ontario Agri-News&quot; (1978–present). Eastern Ontario Agri-News is a monthly tabloid published by Etcetera Publications (owner of the Chesterville Record). It was first published in late February 1978 by John and Robin Morris, who at the time were co-owners of 2woMor Publications Inc. When Robin Morris broke off from the company and established Etcetera Publications, he continued to publish Agri-News.
*&quot;Nation Valley News&quot; (2016–present). &quot;Nation Valley News&quot; is an all-digital news and advertising company founded and operated by Nelson Zandbergen.

==Notable people==
*Lorne W. R. Mulloy (1876–1932), Military hero in the Boer War, professor at the Royal Military College of Canada, and lawyer. He was born on a farm near Winchester and Chesterville. 
*Hudson Allison (1881–1912), Montreal stock-broker and victim of the disaster. He was born in Chesterville in 1881 and worked as a clerk in Chester Casselman&#x27;s general store. His wife, Bess Waldo Daniels, and their daughter, Helen &quot;Lorainne&quot;, also perished in the sinking. Their infant son, Hudson &quot;Trevor&quot; Allison, survived the sinking. Hudson&#x27;s body was recovered by the and interred at Maple Ridge Cemetery, Chesterville.
*Larry Robinson, Stanley Cup winner and Hockey Hall of Fame member, was born in Winchester in 1951.
*George Beverly &quot;Bev&quot; Shea (1909–2013) was born on February 1, 1909, in Winchester. He is a Grammy Award-winning gospel singer and hymn composer. Shea has often been described as &quot;America&#x27;s beloved Gospel singer&quot; and is considered &quot;the first international singing &#x27;star&#x27; of the gospel world&quot; as a consequence of his solos at Billy Graham Crusades and his exposure on radio, records, and television. According to the Guinness Book of Records Shea holds the world record for singing in person to the most people ever, with an estimated cumulative live audience of 220 million people.
*Dewey Martin of the rock band Buffalo Springfield was born in Chesterville in 1940.
*Matt Carkner, a former professional hockey player who played for the National Hockey League (NHL)&#x27;s Ottawa Senators, San Jose Sharks and New York Islanders and scored one of the greatest goals in Ottawa Senators history, a triple overtime winner in the 2010 playoffs vs the Pittsburgh Penguins
*Slater Koekkoek, a professional hockey player who grew up in the Township and was born in Winchester, Ontario, was selected tenth overall by Tampa Bay Lightning during the 2012 NHL entry draft. He currently plays for the Edmonton Oilers and made his NHL debut on March 31, 2015, against the Toronto Maple Leafs.

===Politicians===
*Andrew Broder (1845–1918), MPP for Dundas (1875–1886), MP for Dundas (1896–1917). He was a long-time merchant in Winchester. His store was located on the south-west corner of Main and St. Lawrence Streets, the current site of Sweet Corner Park. He was the uncle of Aaron Sweet.
*Jacob Erratt (1847–1928), 18th mayor of the city of Ottawa from 1889 to 1890. 
*Aaron Sweet (1854–1937), MPP for Dundas (1923–1926). In 1888, he served as the first Reeve of the newly incorporated village of Winchester. He was a merchant in Winchester for many years. His store, formerly located on the south-west corner of Main and St. Lawrence Streets, was previously owned by his uncle, Andrew Broder. Sweet Corner Park, which now occupies the space where the store was, was named in his honour.
*Alexander Cameron Rutherford (1857–1941), first Premier of Alberta, MLA for Strathcona was born in Ormond.
*Orren D. Casselman (1861–1950), MP for Dundas (1917–1921), was born in Chesterville. He was the half-brother of William H. Casselman.
*William H. Casselman (1868–1941), MPP for Dundas (1919–1923). He was born in Chesterville and served as Reeve from 1931 until his death. He was the half-brother of Orren D. Casselman.
*Preston Elliott (1876–1939), MP for Dundas (1921–1925), was born in Chesterville.
*George Holmes Challies (1884–1976), MPP for Dundas (1929–1934) and Grenville-Dundas (1934–1955), was born in Winchester. He was active in the establishment of the Winchester District Memorial Hospital.
*Frederick McIntosh Cass (1913–2000), MPP for Grenville-Dundas (1955–1971), Minister of Highways (1959–1961), Minister of Municipal Affairs (1961–1962), Attorney-General of Ontario (1962–1964), and Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario (1968–1971), was born in Chesterville.
*Eric Duncan (born 1987), MP for Stormont-Dundas-South Glengarry (2019–present), was born in North Dundas. He served as the mayor of North Dundas from 2010 to 2018.

==See also==
*Winchester District Memorial Hospital
*List of townships in Ontario
*List of francophone communities in Ontario

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3132987" start="0" end="12" title="North Dundas, Ontario" label="North Dundas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936646" start="18" end="26" title="township (Canada)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058779" start="30" end="45" title="Eastern Ontario" label="Eastern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065651" start="62" end="111" title="United Counties of Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry" label="United Counties of Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303535" start="161" end="176" title="downtown Ottawa" label="downtown Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="193" end="199" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11883244" start="204" end="214" title="Morrisburg, Ontario" label="Morrisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304550" start="289" end="307" title="South Nation River" label="South Nation River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941483" start="316" end="333" title="Castor River (Ontario)" label="East Castor River"/>
<link wikidata="Q17519561" start="494" end="506" title="Chesterville, Ontario" label="Chesterville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073750" start="1058" end="1068" title="Oak Valley, Ontario" label="Oak Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17519561" start="1202" end="1214" title="Chesterville, Ontario" label="Chesterville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293692" start="1216" end="1227" title="Marionville, Ontario" label="Marionville"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="1746" end="1771" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="1785" end="1802" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055166" start="4596" end="4629" title="North Dundas District High School" label="North Dundas District High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540691" start="5519" end="5537" title="George Challies" label="George H. Challies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662471" start="5948" end="5959" title="Aaron Sweet" label="Aaron Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q112686151" start="9173" end="9191" title="Lorne W. R. Mulloy" label="Lorne W. R. Mulloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="9226" end="9234" title="Boer War" label="Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565941" start="9253" end="9285" title="Royal Military College of Canada" label="Royal Military College of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q949168" start="9357" end="9371" title="Allison family" label="Hudson Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806113" start="9812" end="9826" title="Larry Robinson" label="Larry Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="9828" end="9839" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="9851" end="9870" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q888118" start="9912" end="9947" title="George Beverly Shea" label="George Beverly &amp;quot;Bev&amp;quot; Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="10034" end="10047" title="Gospel music" label="gospel singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11734671" start="10281" end="10302" title="List of Billy Graham&amp;#x27;s crusades" label="Billy Graham Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="10372" end="10396" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness Book of Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872228" start="10539" end="10551" title="Dewey Martin (musician)" label="Dewey Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48992" start="10569" end="10588" title="Buffalo Springfield" label="Buffalo Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q346225" start="10624" end="10636" title="Matt Carkner" label="Matt Carkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="10660" end="10666" title="Ice hockey" label="hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="10693" end="10715" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="10729" end="10744" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="10746" end="10761" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="10766" end="10784" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="10903" end="10922" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q616441" start="10924" end="10939" title="Slater Koekkoek" label="Slater Koekkoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="11065" end="11084" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337897" start="11096" end="11116" title="2012 NHL entry draft" label="2012 NHL entry draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="11145" end="11160" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="11215" end="11234" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756431" start="11256" end="11269" title="Andrew Broder" label="Andrew Broder"/>
<link wikidata="Q30598322" start="11291" end="11297" title="Dundas (provincial electoral district)" label="Dundas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041273" start="11318" end="11324" title="Dundas (federal electoral district)" label="Dundas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118590" start="11535" end="11547" title="Jacob Erratt" label="Jacob Erratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="11587" end="11593" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662471" start="11615" end="11626" title="Aaron Sweet" label="Aaron Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381136" start="12035" end="12063" title="Alexander Cameron Rutherford" label="Alexander Cameron Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401750" start="12083" end="12101" title="Premier of Alberta" label="Premier of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622065" start="12111" end="12121" title="Strathcona (provincial electoral district)" label="Strathcona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104071" start="12143" end="12161" title="Orren D. Casselman" label="Orren D. Casselman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010355" start="12278" end="12298" title="William H. Casselman" label="William H. Casselman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241883" start="12463" end="12478" title="Preston Elliott" label="Preston Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540691" start="12546" end="12568" title="George Holmes Challies" label="George Holmes Challies"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379951" start="12613" end="12629" title="Grenville-Dundas (provincial electoral district)" label="Grenville-Dundas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903510" start="12709" end="12746" title="Winchester District Memorial Hospital" label="Winchester District Memorial Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497499" start="12749" end="12772" title="Frederick Cass" label="Frederick McIntosh Cass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315416" start="12824" end="12844" title="Ministry of Transportation of Ontario" label="Minister of Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867380" start="12858" end="12887" title="Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing (Ontario)" label="Minister of Municipal Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818648" start="12901" end="12928" title="Attorney General of Ontario" label="Attorney-General of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409170" start="12946" end="12992" title="Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario" label="Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q71937055" start="13033" end="13044" title="Eric Duncan (politician)" label="Eric Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499856" start="13065" end="13096" title="Stormont—Dundas—South Glengarry (federal electoral district)" label="Stormont-Dundas-South Glengarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903510" start="13212" end="13249" title="Winchester District Memorial Hospital" label="Winchester District Memorial Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643835" start="13251" end="13279" title="List of townships in Ontario" label="List of townships in Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008452" start="13281" end="13323" title="List of francophone communities in Ontario" label="List of francophone communities in Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423225" wikidata="Q5562777" url="?curid=423225" title="Gimo">
<text>Gimo may refer to:

==Gimo, Sweden==
** Gimo Air Base
** Gimo manor house
** Gimo Runestone
** Skäfthammar Church

==People==
* Guillermo C. de Vega (1931–1975), nicknamed Gimo, Philippine politician
* Chiang Kai-shek (1887–1975), nicknamed Gimo, Chinese politician and former leader of the Kuomintang</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5562777" start="0" end="4" title="Gimo" label="Gimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470033" start="22" end="34" title="Gimo, Sweden" label="Gimo, Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274268" start="40" end="53" title="Gimo Air Base" label="Gimo Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q10504985" start="57" end="73" title="Gimo manor house" label="Gimo manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334414" start="77" end="91" title="Gimo Runestone" label="Gimo Runestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q10670879" start="95" end="113" title="Skäfthammar Church" label="Skäfthammar Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15440200" start="128" end="148" title="Guillermo C. de Vega" label="Guillermo C. de Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="202" end="217" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423229" wikidata="Q3492577" url="?curid=423229" title="North Grenville">
<text>North Grenville is a township in eastern Ontario, Canada, in the United Counties of Leeds and Grenville on the Rideau River. It is located just south of Ottawa in Canada&#x27;s National Capital Region.

It was established on January 1, 1998, through the amalgamation of Oxford-on-Rideau Township, South Gower Township, and the Town of Kemptville. In 2003, a motion of the municipal council adopted the designation of &#x27;municipality&#x27;.

The largest community in North Grenville is Kemptville, with a population of 3,911 in the 2016 census, up from 3,620 in the Canada 2011 Census. It is located on the Kemptville Creek (historically South Branch of the Rideau River) approximately south of Ottawa, sitting midway between suburban Ottawa and the Ogdensburg–Prescott International Bridge along Highway 416.

==Communities==
The municipality comprises the communities of Actons Corners, Bedell, Bishops Mills, Burritts Rapids (the oldest community on the Rideau River), East Oxford, Heckston, Hutchins Corners, Kemptville, McReynolds, Millars Corners, Mountain, Newmanville, Oxford Mills, Oxford Station, Pattersons Corners, Peltons Corners, Sabourins Crossing, Schipaville, Swan Crossing and Van Allens. The administrative offices of the municipality are located in Kemptville.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, North Grenville had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.
==See also==
*List of francophone communities in Ontario
*List of townships in Ontario
*North Grenville District High School

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3492577" start="0" end="15" title="North Grenville" label="North Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936646" start="21" end="29" title="township (Canada)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="41" end="48" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q923198" start="65" end="103" title="United Counties of Leeds and Grenville" label="United Counties of Leeds and Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q280507" start="111" end="123" title="Rideau River" label="Rideau River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="153" end="159" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q668850" start="177" end="200" title="National Capital Region (Canada)" label="National Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147002" start="335" end="345" title="Kemptville" label="Kemptville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387166" start="609" end="625" title="Kemptville Creek" label="Kemptville Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016132" start="752" end="792" title="Ogdensburg–Prescott International Bridge" label="Ogdensburg–Prescott International Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q453417" start="799" end="810" title="Ontario Highway 416" label="Highway 416"/>
<link wikidata="Q344450" start="875" end="889" title="Actons Corners, Ontario" label="Actons Corners"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="899" end="912" title="Bishops Mills, Ontario" label="Bishops Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000458" start="914" end="972" title="Burritts Rapids" label="Burritts Rapids (the oldest community on the Rideau River)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147002" start="1015" end="1025" title="Kemptville" label="Kemptville"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="1310" end="1335" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="1349" end="1366" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008452" start="1564" end="1606" title="List of francophone communities in Ontario" label="List of francophone communities in Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643835" start="1608" end="1636" title="List of townships in Ontario" label="List of townships in Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q112860935" start="1638" end="1674" title="North Grenville District High School" label="North Grenville District High School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423230" wikidata="Q3516340" url="?curid=423230" title="Harmonized sales tax">
<text>The harmonized sales tax (HST) is a consumption tax in Canada. It is used in provinces where both the federal goods and services tax (GST) and the regional provincial sales tax (PST) have been combined into a single value-added tax.

==Jurisdiction==

The HST is in effect in five of the ten Canadian provinces: New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, Ontario and Prince Edward Island. The HST is collected by the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA), which remits the appropriate amounts to the participating provinces. The HST may differ across these five provinces, as each province will set its own PST rates within the HST. In provinces and territories which have not enacted the HST, the CRA collects only the 5% goods and services tax. The current rates are as follows:

The introduction of the HST changed the PST for these provinces from a cascading tax system, which has been abandoned by most economies throughout the world, to a value-added tax like the GST.

==Individual HST credit==
To help maintain revenue neutrality of total taxes on individuals, the Canadian government (for the GST) and the participating provincial governments have accompanied the change from a cascading tax to a value-add tax with a reduction in income taxes, and instituted direct transfer payments (refundable tax credits) to lower-income groups. The federal government provides a refundable &quot;GST Credit&quot; of up to $248 per adult and $130 per child to low income people for 2009-10. Provinces offer similar adjustments, such as Newfoundland and Labrador providing a refundable tax credit of up to $40 per adult and $60 for each child.

==1997 implementation==
In 1996, three of the four Atlantic provinces—New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, and Nova Scotia—entered into an agreement with the Government of Canada to implement what was initially termed the &quot;blended sales tax&quot; (renamed to &quot;harmonized sales tax&quot;) which would combine the 7% federal GST with the provincial sales taxes of those provinces; as part of this project, the PST portion of the new HST in these provinces dropped from 10% to 8%. The result was a 15% combined tax when the federal GST was added. The new tax for these provinces went into effect on April 1, 1997.

The HST is collected by the Canada Revenue Agency, which then remits the appropriate amounts to the participating provinces. Subsequent studies have been equivocal as to the success of this implementation for these provinces&#x27; economies and their consumers.

;2006 and 2008 GST reductions
On July 1, 2006, the Government of Canada reduced the GST nationwide to 6%, resulting in a combined HST for Nova Scotia, New Brunswick and Newfoundland and Labrador of 14%. The GST was again lowered nationwide on January 1, 2008 to its current rate of 5%, resulting in a combined HST in Nova Scotia, New Brunswick and Newfoundland and Labrador of 13%.

;Later HST increase in Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Newfoundland
On April 6, 2010, the Government of Nova Scotia raised the provincial portion of the HST to 10%, restoring the overall rate in that province to 15% effective July 1, 2010 as part of deficit fighting measures. On April 2, 2012 the premier indicated that the provincial government was planning to decrease the HST back to 13% by 2015 but this has since been canceled by a new government. 
New Brunswick and Newfoundland raised their HST back to 15% in 2016. 

==2010 implementation==
The Government of Canada&#x27;s 2008 federal budget called sales tax harmonization &quot;the single most important step provinces with retail sales taxes could take to improve the competitiveness of Canadian businesses&quot; and federal finance officials began to pressure/entice non-HST provinces to abandon their PST systems.

Consequently, in 2008 and 2009, the provinces of Ontario and British Columbia entered into negotiations with the Government of Canada for adopting the HST.

On March 26, 2009, in its annual budget, the province of Ontario announced its intention to merge the PST and GST to take effect on July 1, 2010.

On July 1, 2010 the HST was implemented in the provinces of Ontario and British Columbia, despite public opinion polls showing that 82% of British Columbians and 74% of Ontarians opposed it before it was implemented. The implementation of HST in British Columbia and Ontario replaced the separate GST and PST charged on goods and services in those provinces. Evidence from numerous studies demonstrated that tax harmonization raises business investment and that PST-type taxes slowed provincial economic growth. British Columbia combined the 5% GST with a 7% PST and implemented the HST at a rate of 12% and committed to lowering the HST by two further points, to 10%, by 2014. Ontario&#x27;s HST rate is 13%, similar to New Brunswick and Newfoundland and Labrador.

Ontario committed to provide a refundable tax credit of up to $260 per adult or child in 2010–11 to low income people, and British Columbia committed to provide a refundable tax credit of up to $230 per adult or child in 2010–11. Federal and provincial tax credits are paid quarterly through the year. British Columbia also provided a one-time transition payment of $175 to low and modest income seniors as well as $175 for each child under 18 to every family with children. British Columbia’s low income credit was mailed out to 1.1 million British Columbians every three months and amounted to up to $230 annually per individual.

On May 4, 2011, an independent panel commissioned by the British Columbia government released a report on the impact of the HST in that province. The report concluded that &quot;Unless you are among the 15 per cent of families with an income under $10,000 a year, you&#x27;re paying more sales tax under the HST than you would under the PST/GST: On average about $350 per family.&quot; The report also predicted that by 2020, the HST is anticipated to result in a BC economy that will &quot;be $2.5 billion larger than it would be under the PST. That&#x27;s about $480 per person or $830 per family.&quot; British Columbia residents voted in a referendum in August 2011 to repeal the HST, resulting in the province reverting to the former PST/GST model, with rates of 7% and 5% respectively, on April 1, 2013.

==Reception in British Columbia and Ontario==
A study, conducted by the CD Howe Institute before announcements to exempt low value purchases, found B.C. and Ontario&#x27;s HST likely revenue neutral. A separate report from the Roger Martin task force on the economy found the HST would lower taxes overall as &quot;increased revenue from the harmonized sales tax is matched by reductions in corporate and personal taxes and by tax credits. The effect is revenue loss.&quot; The &quot;Globe and Mail&quot; reporting on the study found that the &quot;Ontario government will actually lose revenue.&quot; In a report by researcher David Murrell for the Canadian Centre for Policy Studies, the net impact of the tax was expected to be &quot;modestly progressive&quot; for the poorest households to upper-middle-income families while increasing taxes by $320 in British Columbia and $290 in Ontario.

In November 2009, an Ipsos Reid poll found that the vast majority of British Columbians (82%) and Ontarians (74%) opposed their provincial governments&#x27; plans to harmonize the sales tax. Only 39% of the public believed the HST would be beneficial for businesses whereas the Task Force on Competitiveness, Productivity and Economic Progress concluded that a harmonized sales tax would reduce administrative costs for small businesses and lead to reduction in taxes, as they would recover sales taxes they would have paid on goods and services they purchased. Additionally, only 10% of the public agreed that the move would create more jobs. A study by Jack Mintz of the University of Calgary School of Public Policy suggested the HST and a drop in the corporate tax rate would have created almost 600,000 new jobs over ten years.

=== Rejection in British Columbia ===
The introduction of HST in British Columbia was extremely unpopular, due to its perception as a &quot;tax hike&quot; and the fact that Premier Gordon Campbell had denied any plans to implement the HST before the 2009 election, only to introduce it anyway shortly after winning a majority government.

Former British Columbia Premier Bill Vander Zalm launched a petition against the HST in response to the public outrage. On August 11, 2010, Elections BC informed him that the campaign had succeeded in collecting the signatures of more than 10% of registered voters in each of the province&#x27;s 85 ridings by July 5, 2010. The success of the petition could require the provincial government to hold a referendum on the tax. Elections BC was expected to make a formal announcement but they declined to do so and chose not to move forward in the process until the courts decided on a case, brought by local business groups, challenging the petition. On Monday, July 5, 2010, Bill Vander Zalm, Chis Delaney and Bill Tieleman announced that they had launched their own lawsuit, a constitutional challenge against the HST because it was never passed into law by the British Columbia&#x27;s provincial legislature.
On August 20, 2010, Chief Justice Robert J. Bauman ruled a petition opposing British Columbia&#x27;s controversial harmonized sales tax was valid. This decision sent the issue back to the provincial legislature. Bauman said Elections BC was correct when it approved the petition on August 11.

The approval of the petition to recall the HST in British Columbia paved the way for a referendum that allowed British Columbians to decide the fate of the tax system. Elections BC conducted the referendum via mail-in ballot, allowing registered voters to send in their decision in regards to the HST. The 2011 British Columbia sales tax referendum was conducted throughout June and July 2011. In an attempt to appease public anger, the government pledged the referendum would be binding and that they would abide by the will of the people. The Question on the ballot was: &quot;Are you in favour of extinguishing the HST (Harmonized Sales Tax) and reinstating the PST (Provincial Sales Tax) in conjunction with the GST (Goods and Services Tax)? Yes or No&quot;

In November 2010, Gordon Campbell resigned as Premier, noting that his own unpopularity had effectively stopped the government from moving forward with its agenda and made real discussion about the HST impossible. He was replaced by Christy Clark.

The ruling BC Liberals had campaigned in favour of the HST since its introduction the previous year, noting it would be too costly to return to the original GST/PST system; they pointed to the money they would have to pay back to Ottawa, the lost tax revenue, and the amount it would cost taxpayers to have to switch back and forth between tax systems. In April 2011, British Columbia Premier Christy Clark announced a province-wide engagement initiative to listen to British Columbians&#x27; suggestions to &quot;fix&quot; the HST.

Faced with plummeting support and the ongoing anger against the HST, in May 2011 Minister of Finance Kevin Falcon announced that if British Columbians vote to keep the HST the rate will drop by 1% on July 1, 2012 and another point in 2014. This will bring the overall rate to 10%. The provincial government also committed to mailing onetime transition payments of $175 per child to families with children and $175 for low and middle income seniors. A month later, the federal government passed legislation to &quot;formalize and give legal force to the reductions in the rate of the provincial component of the HST in British Columbia&quot;.

On August 26, 2011, the results of the referendum were revealed by Elections BC, with 55% of 1.6 million voters in favour of abolishing the HST. Retaining the HST was most popular in affluent and highly educated ridings and those with a significant proportion of family businesses. The BC Liberals revealed a plan to reinstate the GST/PST system within 18 months, with a target date of March 31, 2013. As a direct result, British Columbia will have to pay back $1.6 billion to the federal government in order to opt out of the HST program.

On April 1, 2013, British Columbia abandoned the HST and reverted to the GST/PST system.

==2013 implementation==
In the provincial budget released April 18, 2012, the Government of Prince Edward Island announced plans to introduce a 14% HST to be implemented on April 1, 2013. This would reduce Prince Edward Island&#x27;s provincial sales tax component from 10% to 9%. The Government of Prince Edward Island was unique amongst Canadian provinces in that it &quot;taxed the GST&quot;. Since the implementation of the federal GST in 1990, PEI&#x27;s 10% PST has been charged on the subtotal of goods which included the federal GST; PST was not charged on services. This resulted in a combined tax of 17.7% for goods purchased before the 7% GST was reduced to 6% and then 5% in 2006 and 2008 respectively. As of 2012, consumers in PEI paid a combined 15.5% tax rate (5% GST and 10% PST applied to the subtotal). The provincial government committed to exempting some items while critics noted that electricity would see an increase from 5% GST to 14% HST; prior to the HST, electricity was not taxed by the PST.

The HST was introduced to Prince Edward Island on April 1, 2013 which dropped the tax on goods to 14% from 15.5% and raised the tax on services from 5% (GST) to 14%.

==Affected items==
* In Ontario, the HST increased tax on gasoline and diesel from 5% to 13%.
* In British Columbia, the HST applied on motor fuel and diesel but the 7% provincial portion was refunded at the point of sale, meaning the effective tax would remain at 5%, the rate of the GST.
* PST was only applicable to goods, whereas HST is generally applicable to both goods and services. Service items from haircuts to carpet cleaning that previously include only the five per cent GST saw an increase in costs. However, in Ontario the PST portion of the HST will be exempt on newspapers and fast food items not exceeding $4 per purchase.
* In Ontario, a rebate compensating for the HST leaves the first $400,000 of a new home purchase unaffected whereas the portion of a home above $400,000 will be charged the full HST. However, buyers of new homes can receive a rebate of up to $24,000 regardless of the price of the new home. The CRA has been actively reassessing many purchasers of newly constructed homes in Ontario and disallowing their claim for the HST New Housing Rebate. 
* There is also an HST Rebate in Ontario for rental properties called the HST New Residential Rental Rebate which provides up to a $24,000 HST rebate on the purchase of a new residential complex that is first used as a rental property. 
* For Ontarians HST is not charged on the resale of an existing home, however renovations are taxable.
* Ontarians are paying more for management and other fees associated with investment funds, such as: mutual funds, segregated funds and ETFs.

==Exemptions==
* Most provinces under HST exempt books from the tax, either through an outright exemption, or through a point-of-sale rebate.
* Nova Scotia exempts residential heating sources from HST, such as fuel oil, electricity used for residential heating, fire wood, and wood pellets.
* Ontario exempts HST from being charged to household goods such as &quot;children&#x27;s clothing and shoes, books, car seats, diapers and feminine hygiene products&quot;. British Columbia did the same thing before reverting to PST/GST.
* British Columbia exempted HST for public transit fares, BC Ferries tickets, bridge and road tolls.
* In Ontario, First Nations status card holders are exempt from the provincial part of the HST for eligible off-reserve purchases. This exemption is in addition to the relief provided to First Nations under the GST/HST framework, such as for purchases on a reserve or delivered to a reserve.
* Prince Edward Island exempts residential fuel oil used for heating, as well as some clothing, books and personal care items.

==See also==
* Goods and services tax (Canada)
* Sales taxes in British Columbia
* Sales taxes in Canada

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3516340" start="4" end="24" title="Harmonized sales tax" label="harmonized sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516340" start="26" end="29" title="Harmonized sales tax" label="HST"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351853" start="36" end="51" title="consumption tax" label="consumption tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="55" end="61" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516365" start="110" end="132" title="Goods and services tax (Canada)" label="goods and services tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516339" start="156" end="176" title="provincial sales tax" label="provincial sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="216" end="227" title="value added tax" label="value-added"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="301" end="310" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="312" end="325" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="327" end="352" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="354" end="365" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="367" end="374" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="379" end="399" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032002" start="429" end="450" title="Canada Revenue Agency" label="Canada Revenue Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516365" start="725" end="747" title="Goods and Services Tax (Canada)" label="goods and services tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048193" start="855" end="875" title="cascade tax" label="cascading tax system"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="947" end="962" title="value-added tax" label="value-added tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="1694" end="1702" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="1713" end="1726" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="1728" end="1753" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="1759" end="1770" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="1806" end="1826" title="Government of Canada" label="Government of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032002" start="2298" end="2319" title="Canada Revenue Agency" label="Canada Revenue Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589276" start="3006" end="3031" title="Government of Nova Scotia" label="Government of Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="4009" end="4016" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q536661" start="6382" end="6399" title="CD Howe Institute" label="CD Howe Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6960" end="6994" title="Canadian Centre for Policy Studies" label="Canadian Centre for Policy Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q509331" start="7047" end="7067" title="progressive tax" label="modestly progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6065482" start="7227" end="7237" title="Ipsos Reid" label="Ipsos Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149155" start="7879" end="7924" title="University of Calgary School of Public Policy" label="University of Calgary School of Public Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q627888" start="8221" end="8236" title="Gordon Campbell (Canadian politician)" label="Gordon Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q730975" start="8411" end="8427" title="Bill Vander Zalm" label="Bill Vander Zalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345832" start="9323" end="9339" title="Robert J. Bauman" label="Robert J. Bauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969824" start="9889" end="9931" title="2011 British Columbia sales tax referendum" label="2011 British Columbia sales tax referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q460064" start="10988" end="11001" title="Christy Clark" label="Christy Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396254" start="11230" end="11242" title="Kevin Falcon" label="Kevin Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="12331" end="12347" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589299" start="12481" end="12515" title="Government of Prince Edward Island" label="Government of Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="13450" end="13470" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q795723" start="15746" end="15756" title="BC Ferries" label="BC Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516365" start="16224" end="16255" title="Goods and services tax (Canada)" label="Goods and services tax (Canada)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404323" start="16258" end="16289" title="Sales taxes in British Columbia" label="Sales taxes in British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516339" start="16292" end="16313" title="Sales taxes in Canada" label="Sales taxes in Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423242" wikidata="Q1035793" url="?curid=423242" title="Cardo">
<text>A cardo (: &quot;cardines&quot;) was a north–south street in ancient Roman cities and military camps as an integral component of city planning. The cardo maximus, or most often the &quot;cardo&quot;, was the main or central north–south-oriented street.

==Etymology==
The &quot;cardo maximus&quot; was the &quot;hinge&quot; or axis of the city, derived from Greek καρδίᾱ, kardia (&quot;heart&quot;) and as such was generally lined with shops and vendors, and served as a hub of economic life.

Most Roman cities also had a &quot;decumanus maximus&quot;, an east–west street that served as a secondary main street. Due to varying geography, in some cities the &quot;decumanus&quot; is the main street and the &quot;cardo&quot; is secondary, but in general the &quot;cardo maximus&quot; served as the primary street. The forum was normally located at, or close to, the intersection of the &quot;decumanus&quot; and the &quot;cardo&quot;.

==Examples==

===Apamea, Syria===

The &quot;cardo maximus&quot; of Apamea, Syria, ran through the centre of the city directly from North to South, linked the principal gates of the city, and was originally surrounded by 1,200 columns with unique spiral fluting, each subsequent column spiralling in the opposite direction. The thoroughfare was about 1.85 kilometres long and 37 metres wide, as it was used for wheeled transport. The great colonnade was erected in the 2nd century and it was still standing until the 12th. The earthquakes of 1157 and 1170 demolished the colonnade. The &quot;cardo&quot; was lined on both sides with civic and religious buildings.

===Cologne, Germany===

Hohe Strasse and Schildergasse in Cologne, Germany, are examples of streets that have maintained their course and function of &quot;cardo&quot; and &quot;decumanus maximus&quot; to this day.

===Jerash, Jordan===
The excavations at Jerash, Jordan, have unearthed the remains of an ancient Roman city on the site, with the main feature of the city being a colonnaded &quot;cardo&quot;. The original road surface survived.
===Jerusalem, Israel===
During the visit of Hadrian to Judea in the 130s AD, Jerusalem&#x27;s ruins were surveyed, and Hadrian decided to build a Roman colony in its place, naming it Colonia Aelia Capitolina, after the Roman deities Jupiter, Juno and Minerva (the Capitoline Triad), worshiped at the Capitoline Hill temple in Rome. Like many Roman colonies, Aelia Capitolina was laid out with a Hippodamian grid plan of narrower streets and wider avenues. Notably, the decision was one of the main causes of the Bar Kokhba revolt, which shortly encompassed the region.

The main north–south thoroughfare, the &quot;cardo maximus&quot;, was originally a paved avenue approximately 22.5 meters wide (roughly the width of a six lane highway) which ran southward from the site of the Damascus Gate, terminating at an unknown point. The southern addition to the &quot;cardo&quot;, constructed under Justinian in the 6th century AD, extended the road further south to connect the Church of the Holy Sepulchre with the newly built Zion Gate. Along its length, the roadway was divided into three parts: two colonnaded covered walks flanking a 12 meter wide road. The shaded porticoes provided separation of pedestrian traffic from wheeled carts, shelter from the elements, space for small-scale commerce, as well as opportunities for residents and visitors to gather and interact. The central open pavement provided commercial access as well as ritual space. The &quot;cardo&quot;&#x27;s most striking visual feature was its colonnade, clearly depicted on the Madaba Map.

Simple bases supported monolithic shafts, spaced 5.77 meters apart. The shafts supported Byzantine-style Corinthian capitals – intricately carved, but more stylized versions of their Classical counterparts. Although this combination of elements was uniform the preserved examples display some variation in the profile and size of the bases, and in the pattern of the capitals. Despite aesthetic differences, the approximate height of the base, column, and capital units of the colonnade was five meters, a height which contributed to the spaciousness of the porticoes. The wall of the &quot;cardo&quot;&#x27;s eastern portico featured an arcade that housed various stalls and workshops leased by craftsmen and merchants.

The line of the &quot;cardo maximus&quot; is still visible on the Jewish Quarter Street, though the original pavement lies several meters below the modern street level. In the 7th century, when Jerusalem fell under Muslim rule, the &quot;cardo&quot; became an Arab-style marketplace. Remains of the Byzantine &quot;cardo&quot; were found in the Jewish Quarter excavations beginning in 1969.

In 1971, a plan for preserving the ancient street was submitted by architects Peter Bogod, Esther Krendel and Shlomo Aronson. Their proposal relied heavily on the sixth century Madaba Map, a mosaic map of Jerusalem found in 1897 in Madaba, Jordan. The map clearly showed the Roman &quot;cardo&quot; as the main artery through the Old City. The architects proposed a covered shopping arcade that would preserve the style of an ancient Roman street using contemporary materials. Their plan was based on the hope that archeologists would find remains of the southern end of the &quot;cardo&quot;, an extension of the north–south Roman thoroughfare built during the Byzantine era (324–638).

Time was of the essence and mounting pressure to repopulate the Jewish Quarter led to the construction of a superstructure which allowed the residential buildings to be built. At the same time, the archaeologists continued to work below. The project was 180 meters in total and was divided into eight sections to allow for construction teams to move quickly from one section to another. By 1980, 37 housing units and 35 shops were built, incorporating archaeological finds such as a Hasmonean wall from the second century BC and rows of Byzantine columns. The combination of old and new is also visible on the Street of the Jews, where the shops have been set into old vaults and the gallery is covered by an arched roof containing small apertures to allow for natural lighting.
===Beit She&#x27;an, Israel===
Beit She&#x27;an was one of a group of 10 Hellenistic cities known as Decapolis on the eastern frontier of the Roman Empire in Syria and Judea. It was a self-governed city established by the Romans to promote Roman culture. It was built with a central &quot;cardo&quot;, temples, theaters, baths and other public buildings, and minted its coins.

===Beirut, Lebanon===
The &quot;cardo maximus&quot; was the main north–south street of Roman Berytus. A section of the street – 100 meters long or so – was discovered during excavation works, flanked by two rows of limestone pedestals. These pedestals once carried 6-meter-high columns supporting roofed colonnades on either side of the street. A stairway in the eastern colonnade gave access to a large building complex.

The &quot;cardo maximus&quot; connected the forum to another complex that extended from the present Al-Azariyeh building to Riad Al Solh Square. Archaeological excavations uncovered two successive levels of the street, the oldest dating to the 2nd century CE. The later, wider street was laid out during the 4th century AD. The floors of the colonnades on both levels of the &quot;cardo maximus&quot; were embellished with mosaic pavements. These were covered, in the 6th century CE, with a thin coat of white lime plaster. Fragments of the floors remained in use until the 19th century. Roman columns were re-used in the foundations of later buildings constructed within the pavement of the &quot;cardo&quot;, reducing the main street of Roman Berytus into a small alley.

===Poreč, Croatia===
In the seaside resort of Poreč, Croatia, both &quot;cardo maximus&quot; and &quot;decumanus&quot; have retained their original names and still serve as the main streets of the historic town centre.

== See also ==

* Ancient Baths of Alauna

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Avigad, N. 1984. Discovering Jerusalem. London: Basil Blackwell.
*Bahat, D. 1990. The Illustrated Atlas of Jerusalem, translated by S. Ketko. New York and London: Simon and Schuster.
*Bosanquet, R. C. 1915. &quot;Greek and Roman Towns I: Streets&quot;. The Town Planning Review, Vol. 5, No. 4: 286–93.
*Chen, D. 1982. &quot;Dating the Cardo Maximus in Jerusalem&quot;. Palestine Exploration Quarterly, Vol. 114, January–June: 43–45.
*Geva, Hillel, ed. 2000. Jewish Quarter Excavations in the Old City of Jerusalem, Vol. 1. Jerusalem: Israel Exploration Society and Institute of Archaeology, Hebrew University.
*Golan, D. 1986. &quot;Hadrian’s decision to supplant &#x27;Jerusalem&#x27; by &#x27;Aelia Capitolina&quot;. Zeitschrift für Alte Geschichte, Vol. 35, No. 2: 226–39.
*Jones, A.H.M. 1955. &quot;The Economic Life of the Towns of the Roman Empire&quot;. Recueils de la Societe
*Jean Bodin, VII: la ville. Brussels: La Librairie Encyclopedique.
*Kennedy, Hugh. 1985. &quot;From Polis to Madina: Urban Change in Late Antique and Early Islamic Syria&quot;. Past and Present, Vol. 106: 3–27.
*Ward Perkins, J. B. 1955. &quot;Early Roman Towns in Italy&quot;. The Town Planning Review, Vol. 26, No. 3: 126–54.

== External links ==

*Exhaustive and progressing list of cardos with photographs
*Cardo Street on a Jerusalem photo portal
*Cardo Virtual Tour </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="61" end="74" title="Ancient Rome" label="ancient Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q88205" start="95" end="100" title="castra" label="camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="129" end="142" title="Urban planning" label="city planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q959042" start="529" end="546" title="Decumanus" label="decumanus maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062780" start="819" end="824" title="Forum (Roman)" label="forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q617550" start="1005" end="1018" title="Apamea, Syria" label="Apamea, Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425039" start="1626" end="1638" title="Hohe Straße" label="Hohe Strasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235506" start="1643" end="1656" title="Schildergasse" label="Schildergasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="1660" end="1667" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q31565" start="1858" end="1864" title="Jerash" label="Jerash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="2091" end="2098" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="2102" end="2107" title="Judaea (Roman province)" label="Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250874" start="2238" end="2254" title="Aelia Capitolina" label="Aelia Capitolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="2280" end="2287" title="Jupiter (god)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q125046" start="2289" end="2293" title="Juno (mythology)" label="Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q126916" start="2298" end="2305" title="Minerva" label="Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246962" start="2311" end="2327" title="Capitoline Triad" label="Capitoline Triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="2347" end="2362" title="Capitoline Hill" label="Capitoline Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q298071" start="2442" end="2453" title="Hippodamus of Miletus" label="Hippodamian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256511" start="2454" end="2463" title="grid plan" label="grid plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q334502" start="2559" end="2576" title="Bar Kokhba revolt" label="Bar Kokhba revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q947597" start="2827" end="2840" title="Damascus Gate" label="Damascus Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="2941" end="2950" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q187702" start="3021" end="3049" title="Church of the Holy Sepulchre" label="Church of the Holy Sepulchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q205416" start="3071" end="3080" title="Zion Gate" label="Zion Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q657100" start="3564" end="3573" title="colonnade" label="colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346870" start="3599" end="3609" title="Madaba Map" label="Madaba Map"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="3717" end="3736" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499567" start="4836" end="4850" title="Shlomo Aronson (landscape architect)" label="Shlomo Aronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683958" start="4958" end="4964" title="Madaba" label="Madaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q496922" start="5897" end="5906" title="Hasmonean dynasty" label="Hasmonean"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="5951" end="5960" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q152368" start="6224" end="6240" title="Beit She&amp;#x27;an" label="Beit She&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="6266" end="6277" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q823244" start="6294" end="6303" title="Decapolis" label="Decapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q829310" start="6664" end="6671" title="Berytus" label="Berytus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22948547" start="7118" end="7137" title="Riad Al Solh Square" label="Riad Al Solh Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323" start="7814" end="7819" title="Poreč" label="Poreč"/>
<link wikidata="Q959042" start="7871" end="7880" title="decumanus" label="decumanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830711" start="8006" end="8029" title="Ancient Baths of Alauna" label="Ancient Baths of Alauna"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423245" wikidata="Q2505131" url="?curid=423245" title="Mengke Bateer">
<text>Mengke Bateer (, pronounced ; born November 20, 1975) or Mönkhbaatar, is a Mongolian-Chinese former professional basketball player. As a center, he played parts of three seasons in the NBA, winning the NBA Finals with the San Antonio Spurs in 2003; Bateer is one of two players born in China to win an NBA championship, the other being shooting guard/small forward Sun Yue, who won the 2009 NBA Finals with the Los Angeles Lakers.

Bateer spent the majority of his career competing in the Chinese Basketball Association for the Beijing Ducks and Xinjiang Flying Tigers before ending his career with the Sichuan Blue Whales in the lesser National Basketball League.

==Background==
Bateer hails from China&#x27;s Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region. Like most Mongols, he does not have a surname and only goes by the name Mönkhbaatar (lit. eternal hero). Chinese fans also sometimes refer to him affectionately as &quot;Da Ba&quot; (大巴), with &quot;Da&quot; meaning &quot;big&quot; and &quot;Ba&quot; representing the first character of his name in Mandarin.

At 210 cm and 132 kg, Bateer was a strong center widely respected as an accomplished screen-setter and passer, despite being severely hindered over the years by a lack of speed. His prowess as a passer was put on full display during one of his earliest NBA games when he made six assists against the Chicago Bulls on March 30, 2002.

As of his official retirement in 2015, Bateer holds three notable distinctions: he was the only Chinese player to have played in the NBA without being selected in any NBA draft until Cui Yongxi signed with the Brooklyn Nets in 2024; he was the first player of Asian descent to win an NBA championship; and he was the first Chinese player to have been on a title-winning roster, taking part in the San Antonio Spurs&#x27; triumphant 2003 season. His compatriot Sun Yue also accomplished this achievement as a member of the Los Angeles Lakers when they won the NBA championship in 2009. Coincidentally, Bateer and Sun would win the 2014 CBA championship for the Beijing Ducks together, making them the first, and so far only, Chinese players to win both the NBA and CBA finals; a feat matched only by American player Eric Moreland in 2022.

Bateer was also the first-ever Chinese player to start an NBA game when he joined the Denver Nuggets in 2002. Yao Ming would become the second Chinese player to do so later in that year and Wang Zhizhi, despite being the first-ever Chinese player to join the league, did not start in a game until years later.

== Early basketball career ==
Brought up through the youth ranks by the Beijing Ducks, Mengke Bateer made his debut for China&#x27;s national basketball team prior to the 1994 Asian Games, at the age of 18. Three years later, although a regular member of the playing rotation, he was removed from the national squad due to &quot;disciplinary problems&quot; as reported in the media. Often presented to the public as a filial son, Bateer would attempt several times over the course of his career to leave his teams, and return to his family.

While training with China&#x27;s national team in 1999, Bateer was invited to play in a pre-draft tournament held in Phoenix, where he suffered from jet lag and did not impress the scouts in attendance. He also made a brief appearance at another pre-draft venue, in Treviso, Italy. But he would have to wait several more years to play in the NBA, staying with the Ducks from the 1997–98 CBA season through the 2001–02 season, and earning MVP honors at the 2002 CBA All-Star Game.

==NBA career==

=== Denver Nuggets (2002) ===
In October 2001, Bateer joined the Denver Nuggets for the team&#x27;s preseason training camp. He was dropped after two preseason games, but in March 2002, already deep into the 2001–02 NBA season, he rejoined the team, as the Nuggets were in desperate need of a player with big stature after trading Raef LaFrentz. This made him the second Chinese player to compete in the NBA after Wang Zhizhi, who had made his debut for the Dallas Mavericks a year earlier. He was also the first undrafted Chinese player in NBA history.

Bateer played in Denver&#x27;s final 25 games of the season, averaging 5.5 points while battling fouls from opponents. Due to the shortage of the players with big stature in the Nuggets roster, he also ended up in the starting 10 of those contests, becoming the first Chinese player to ever start an NBA game, as Wang never made it into the starting line-up during his time with the Mavericks.

=== San Antonio Spurs (2002–2003) ===
In summer 2002, Bateer was traded to the Detroit Pistons, along with Don Reid, for Rodney White and a future first-round pick. But after an impressive show against Team USA at the 2002 FIBA World Championship in Indianapolis, where he scored 19 points (also leading China in scoring in five of seven games during the tournament) for a squad that also included the just-drafted Yao Ming, Team USA assistant coach Gregg Popovich, who was also the head coach of the San Antonio Spurs, decided to take a chance on Bateer and acquired him in exchange for a second-round pick.

Despite playing only occasionally with the Spurs, Bateer was nonetheless a member of San Antonio&#x27;s 2002–03 championship team.

=== Toronto Raptors (2003–2004) ===
The following season, Bateer signed as a free agent with the Toronto Raptors, but was transferred later in the 2003–04 NBA season to the Orlando Magic, who waived him three days later. In October 2004, the New York Knicks signed Bateer as a training camp invitee, but waived him prior to the start of the 2004–05 NBA season. After being waived by the Knicks, Bateer played for the Huntsville Flight of the National Basketball Development League, now known as the NBA G League, for a while, before deciding to return to China.

===NBA career statistics===
==Return to China==
Mengke Bateer rejoined the Beijing Ducks in the Chinese Basketball Association in mid-February 2005, a couple of weeks before the end of the 2004–05 CBA season, and was named MVP of the 2005 CBA All-Star Game, which was held in Nanjing on March 7, after the regular season concluded. He scored a contest-best 28 points while leading the North to a 103–99 victory over the South.

During the 2005–06 CBA season, Bateer helped Beijing win a then-franchise-best CBA North Division title, while averaging 25 points, 11 rebounds, and 5 assists per game. He was originally chosen to be named the league&#x27;s Regular Season MVP, but he had the honor vacated due to a rule forbidding players who were slapped with suspensions from receiving any awards (earlier in the season, he incurred the heaviest fine in CBA history for arguing with a referee, and sat out two games as a result).

Bateer then missed the 2006–07 CBA season due to injuries, and subsequently moved from the Ducks to the Xinjiang Flying Tigers, where he spent the next six years of his career. During his time in Xinjiang, he became the first player to ever &quot;three-peat&quot; as CBA Most Valuable Player, winning the honor in 2009, 2010, and 2011. The Flying Tigers also advanced to the CBA Finals in each of those years, but failed to win the title, falling to the Guangdong Southern Tigers on all three occasions.

After a brief stint with the Sichuan Blue Whales in China&#x27;s lower-tier NBL in summer 2013, just as the team was preparing join the CBA, Bateer returned to the Beijing Ducks for the 2013–14 CBA season. More of a role player by that point in his career, he nonetheless provided an occasionally useful presence in the front court for Beijing, and helped the Ducks win their second CBA title.

==National team career==
Mengke Bateer competed for China in the Summer Olympic Games at Atlanta 1996, Sydney 2000, and Athens 2004. He represented the PRC at the 2002 FIBA World Championship in Indianapolis. In addition to being a member of his country&#x27;s national team for a number of FIBA Asia Championship, Asian Games, and East Asian Games competitions, he also competed for the PRC at the 2001 Summer Universiade in Beijing. The trio of 7&#x27; 6&quot; Yao Ming, 7&#x27; 1&quot; Wang Zhizhi, and 6&#x27; 11&quot; Bateer were known by some fans and commentators as the &quot;Walking Great Wall&quot;.

==Retirement==
Bateer played briefly with NBL team &quot;Shaanxi Weinan Xingda&quot; in the summer of 2014, but did not compete during the 2014–15 CBA season. Some reports in the Chinese media stated that he was struggling with complications from the onset of diabetes. On August 11, 2015, he was honored with an official retirement ceremony held at the Beijing Wukesong Culture &amp; Sports Center. The event was attended by former national team squadmates Wang Zhizhi, Du Feng, Wang Shipeng, and Zhu Fangyu, as well as NBA legend Hakeem Olajuwon. Yao Ming sent a videotaped farewell message and the evening climaxed with Bateer&#x27;s number 9 jersey being lifted to the arena&#x27;s rafters.

==Filmography==
==References==
==External links==
* NBA D-League Bio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2505131" start="0" end="13" title="Mengke Bateer" label="Mengke Bateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505131" start="57" end="68" title="Mengke Bateer" label="Mönkhbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187403" start="75" end="92" title="Mongolian-Chinese" label="Mongolian-Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q222052" start="137" end="143" title="Center (basketball)" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="185" end="188" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q842375" start="202" end="212" title="NBA Finals" label="NBA Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q159729" start="222" end="239" title="San Antonio Spurs" label="San Antonio Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006129" start="243" end="247" title="2003 NBA Finals" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="286" end="291" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q273199" start="336" end="350" title="shooting guard" label="shooting guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q308879" start="351" end="364" title="small forward" label="small forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q514117" start="365" end="372" title="Sun Yue (basketball)" label="Sun Yue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959941" start="386" end="401" title="2009 NBA Finals" label="2009 NBA Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q121783" start="411" end="429" title="Los Angeles Lakers" label="Los Angeles Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073722" start="489" end="519" title="Chinese Basketball Association" label="Chinese Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627897" start="528" end="541" title="Beijing Ducks" label="Beijing Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375161" start="546" end="568" title="Xinjiang Flying Tigers" label="Xinjiang Flying Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10924945" start="603" end="622" title="Sichuan Blue Whales" label="Sichuan Blue Whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314816" start="637" end="663" title="National Basketball League (China)" label="National Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="712" end="726" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510817" start="1336" end="1343" title="Assist (basketball)" label="assists"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="1356" end="1369" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="1527" end="1549" title="Undrafted free agent" label="without being selected"/>
<link wikidata="Q622521" start="1557" end="1566" title="NBA draft" label="NBA draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q122412819" start="1573" end="1583" title="Cui Yongxi" label="Cui Yongxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q572134" start="1600" end="1613" title="Brooklyn Nets" label="Brooklyn Nets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1617" end="1621" title="2024 NBA draft#Notable undrafted players" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058325" start="1650" end="1663" title="Asian people" label="Asian descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q842375" start="1674" end="1690" title="NBA championship" label="NBA championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q159729" start="1787" end="1804" title="San Antonio Spurs" label="San Antonio Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006129" start="1822" end="1826" title="2003 NBA Finals" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q514117" start="1850" end="1857" title="Sun Yue (basketball)" label="Sun Yue"/>
<link wikidata="Q121783" start="1912" end="1930" title="Los Angeles Lakers" label="Los Angeles Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959941" start="1969" end="1973" title="2009 NBA Finals" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2020" end="2041" title="2013–14 Chinese Basketball Association season#Finals" label="2014 CBA championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627897" start="2050" end="2063" title="Beijing Ducks" label="Beijing Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q842375" start="2146" end="2149" title="NBA Finals" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073722" start="2154" end="2157" title="Chinese Basketball Association Finals" label="CBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17306301" start="2205" end="2218" title="Eric Moreland" label="Eric Moreland"/>
<link wikidata="Q107571934" start="2222" end="2226" title="2021–22 Chinese Basketball Association season" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q162954" start="2315" end="2329" title="Denver Nuggets" label="Denver Nuggets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135932" start="2333" end="2337" title="2002–03 NBA season" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q58590" start="2339" end="2347" title="Yao Ming" label="Yao Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q647405" start="2419" end="2430" title="Wang Zhizhi" label="Wang Zhizhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627897" start="2612" end="2625" title="Beijing Ducks" label="Beijing Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q862262" start="2660" end="2697" title="China national basketball team" label="China&amp;#x27;s national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867687" start="2711" end="2727" title="Basketball at the 1994 Asian Games" label="1994 Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="3199" end="3206" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475" start="3348" end="3355" title="Treviso" label="Treviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3357" end="3362" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593095" start="3461" end="3479" title="1997–98 CBA season" label="1997–98 CBA season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599426" start="3492" end="3506" title="2001–02 CBA season" label="2001–02 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q162954" start="3644" end="3658" title="Denver Nuggets" label="Denver Nuggets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132622" start="3787" end="3805" title="2001–02 NBA season" label="2001–02 NBA season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371485" start="3910" end="3923" title="Raef LaFrentz" label="Raef LaFrentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q647405" start="3993" end="4004" title="Wang Zhizhi" label="Wang Zhizhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q132893" start="4037" end="4053" title="Dallas Mavericks" label="Dallas Mavericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="4608" end="4623" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Detroit Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132834" start="4636" end="4644" title="Don Reid (basketball)" label="Don Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714935" start="4650" end="4662" title="Rodney White" label="Rodney White"/>
<link wikidata="Q244847" start="4731" end="4739" title="USA national basketball team" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q587978" start="4747" end="4775" title="2002 FIBA World Championship" label="2002 FIBA World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="4779" end="4791" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470976" start="4931" end="4943" title="2002 NBA draft" label="just-drafted"/>
<link wikidata="Q58590" start="4944" end="4952" title="Yao Ming" label="Yao Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q456730" start="4979" end="4993" title="Gregg Popovich" label="Gregg Popovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q159729" start="5030" end="5047" title="San Antonio Spurs" label="San Antonio Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135932" start="5243" end="5268" title="2002–03 NBA season" label="2002–03 championship team"/>
<link wikidata="Q132880" start="5368" end="5383" title="Toronto Raptors" label="Toronto Raptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132659" start="5418" end="5436" title="2003–04 NBA season" label="2003–04 NBA season"/>
<link wikidata="Q161337" start="5444" end="5457" title="Orlando Magic" label="Orlando Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131364" start="5513" end="5528" title="New York Knicks" label="New York Knicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q941115" start="5612" end="5630" title="2004–05 NBA season" label="2004–05 NBA season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033853" start="5688" end="5705" title="Huntsville Flight" label="Huntsville Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q842793" start="5713" end="5751" title="National Basketball Development League" label="National Basketball Development League"/>
<link wikidata="Q842793" start="5770" end="5782" title="NBA Development League" label="NBA G League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627897" start="5909" end="5922" title="Beijing Ducks" label="Beijing Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073722" start="5930" end="5960" title="Chinese Basketball Association" label="Chinese Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603619" start="6023" end="6041" title="2004–05 CBA season" label="2004–05 CBA season"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="6110" end="6117" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605321" start="6273" end="6291" title="2005–06 CBA season" label="2005–06 CBA season"/>
<link wikidata="Q10873970" start="6468" end="6504" title="CBA MVP" label="the league&amp;#x27;s Regular Season MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607390" start="6785" end="6803" title="2006–07 CBA season" label="2006–07 CBA season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375161" start="6866" end="6888" title="Xinjiang Flying Tigers" label="Xinjiang Flying Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990858" start="7009" end="7019" title="three-peat" label="three-peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10873970" start="7029" end="7053" title="CBA Most Valuable Player" label="CBA Most Valuable Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629395" start="7216" end="7241" title="Guangdong Southern Tigers" label="Guangdong Southern Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10924945" start="7296" end="7315" title="Sichuan Blue Whales" label="Sichuan Blue Whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314816" start="7343" end="7346" title="National Basketball League (China)" label="NBL"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057371" start="7453" end="7471" title="2013–14 CBA season" label="2013–14 CBA season"/>
<link wikidata="Q208137" start="7727" end="7747" title="Basketball at the Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005505" start="7751" end="7763" title="Basketball at the 1996 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="Atlanta 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005491" start="7765" end="7776" title="Basketball at the 2000 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="Sydney 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q80385" start="7782" end="7793" title="Basketball at the 2004 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="Athens 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q587978" start="7825" end="7853" title="2002 FIBA World Championship" label="2002 FIBA World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="7857" end="7869" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q810308" start="7953" end="7975" title="FIBA Asia Championship" label="FIBA Asia Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048665" start="7977" end="7988" title="Basketball at the Asian Games" label="Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867737" start="7994" end="8010" title="Basketball at the East Asian Games" label="East Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867698" start="8061" end="8084" title="Basketball at the 2001 Summer Universiade" label="2001 Summer Universiade"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="8088" end="8095" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18701996" start="8412" end="8430" title="2014–15 CBA season" label="2014–15 CBA season"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="8533" end="8541" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321458" start="8627" end="8671" title="Beijing Wukesong Culture &amp;amp; Sports Center" label="Beijing Wukesong Culture &amp;amp; Sports Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q647405" start="8731" end="8742" title="Wang Zhizhi" label="Wang Zhizhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q711177" start="8744" end="8751" title="Du Feng" label="Du Feng"/>
<link wikidata="Q377001" start="8753" end="8765" title="Wang Shipeng" label="Wang Shipeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621765" start="8771" end="8781" title="Zhu Fangyu" label="Zhu Fangyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q273256" start="8805" end="8820" title="Hakeem Olajuwon" label="Hakeem Olajuwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58590" start="8822" end="8830" title="Yao Ming" label="Yao Ming"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423246" wikidata="Q6904088" url="?curid=423246" title="Montague, Ontario">
<text>Montague is a township in eastern Ontario, Canada, in Lanark County on the Rideau River. The township administrative offices are located on Roger Stevens Drive east of Smiths Falls.

==Communities==
The township comprises the communities of Andrewsville, Atironto, Kilmarnock, Nolans Corners, Numogate, Poolers Corners, Rosedale and Welsh.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Montague had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.
==Transportation==
The main roads in the township are the east–west County Road 43, the north–south Ontario Highway 15, and the northeast-southwest Roger Stevens Drive. The Rideau Trail passes through the township between Merrickville and Smiths Falls.

==See also==
*List of townships in Ontario

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6904088" start="0" end="8" title="Montague, Ontario" label="Montague"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936646" start="14" end="22" title="township (Canada)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="34" end="41" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801761" start="54" end="67" title="Lanark County" label="Lanark County"/>
<link wikidata="Q280507" start="75" end="87" title="Rideau River" label="Rideau River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938153" start="168" end="180" title="Smiths Falls" label="Smiths Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="367" end="392" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="406" end="423" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094717" start="668" end="682" title="Ontario Highway 43" label="County Road 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443598" start="700" end="718" title="Ontario Highway 15" label="Ontario Highway 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332581" start="773" end="785" title="Rideau Trail" label="Rideau Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139434" start="822" end="834" title="Merrickville-Wolford" label="Merrickville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938153" start="839" end="851" title="Smiths Falls" label="Smiths Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643835" start="868" end="896" title="List of townships in Ontario" label="List of townships in Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423251" wikidata="Q6684964" url="?curid=423251" title="Lottery jackpot records">
<text>This is a list of the largest jackpots, or prizes, awarded in various lotteries.

== United States ==

All lottery winnings are subject to Federal taxation (automatically reported to the Internal Revenue Service if the win is at least $600); many smaller jurisdictions also levy taxes. The IRS requires a minimum withholding of 24% of the prize (minus the wager) of any gambling win in excess of $5,000. However, the net for a major prize often is misleading; winners often owe the IRS upon filing a return because the Federal withholding was below the winner&#x27;s tax obligations. Nonresident U.S. lottery winners have 30% of winnings of at least $600 withheld.

While the largest lottery prizes in the early history of U.S. state lotteries were &quot;annuity-only,&quot; these lotteries gradually introduced a &quot;cash option&quot; for these games. All prizes listed below are reported as the pre-withholdings amount, as this is taxable income the player must report on their returns to be subject to taxation. Jackpots and jackpot shares listed below are annuity amounts (and the cash value). The annuities for both the Mega Millions and the Powerball are paid out in 30 annual installments, increasing 5 percent yearly.

Over time, the size of Mega Millions and Powerball jackpots has generally increased because of higher ticket prices, the larger number of states participating (especially after cross-selling was allowed), and the reduced odds of winning.

List of U.S. lottery drawings of $400 million or more (annuity value):

==Europe==
Unlike in the United States, where lottery wins are taxed, European jackpots are generally tax-free (the lotteries themselves are taxed in other ways) and jackpots are paid in a lump sum. For example, in the United Kingdom&#x27;s National Lottery, wagers are split between the game operator Camelot Group and the government, with Camelot distributing its share among prizes, operating costs, profit, Camelot&#x27;s &quot;good causes&quot; programme, with the remainder going to the government as tax.

;Examples of largest jackpots in specific European lotteries

*€240.0 million (US$258.3 million/£205.8 million) was the largest jackpot in the Euromillions history in the pan-European EuroMillions , won on 8 December 2023, the ticket was sold in Austria.
*£195.7 million was the largest prize won by a British winner in the pan-European EuroMillions in sterling currency, won on 19 July 2022.
*€120.0 million (US$126.8 million) was the largest jackpot in the Eurojackpot history, won on 6 December, 2024 by two tickets in Germany.
*€371.1 million (US$394.6 million) was the largest single-ticket jackpot in Italy&#x27;s SuperEnalotto lottery, won on 16 February 2023.
*€98.4 million (US$112.0 million) was the largest jackpot in Spain&#x27;s La Primitiva (not to be confused with El Gordo de la Primitiva), won by a single ticket holder on Thursday 15 October 2015. The ticket was purchased in Barcelona.
*€48.6 million (US$53.2 million) was the largest jackpot in Germany&#x27;s Lotto 6 aus 49, won on 3 January 2024 by one ticket.
*Kr. 388 million (US$38 million) is the largest single ticket jackpot of Svenska Spel Lotto Drömvinsten, won on 17 August 2024
*£66.1 million (US$96 million) was the largest jackpot in the United Kingdom&#x27;s Lotto, won on 9 January 2016 by two tickets.
*CHF 70.1 million was the largest jackpot in Switzerland&#x27;s Swiss Lotto, won by 3 winning tickets on 17 December 2016.
*CHF 64.6 million (US$72.8 million) was the largest winner in Switzerland&#x27;s Swiss Lotto, won on 2 March 2024.
*£35.1 million (US$49.6 million) was the largest winner on the UK Lotto game in April 2016.
*€38.4 million (US$49.7 million) was the largest jackpot in the Netherlands draw of the Staatsloterij (&quot;State Lottery&quot;) in May 2013.
*€30,009,676 (US$31 million) was the largest jackpot in France&#x27;s SuperLoto, won in May 2006 by two tickets.
*€30,000,000 (US$25.7 million) was the largest single-ticket jackpot in the French Lotto, won on 4 December 2021.
*€22.5 million (US$23.9 million) was the biggest lottery win in Hungary, which was on Eurojackpot (half of the €45 mil.) on 10 February 2017. This 7 billion forint grand prize beat a 5 billion record set up in 2003.
*Kr. 215 million (€22 million, US$30 million) was the largest single-ticket jackpot in Sweden&#x27;s Lotto of Svenska Spel, won on 27 March 2010.
*€19.1 million (US$21.8 million) was the largest jackpot and largest single-ticket jackpot in Ireland&#x27;s Lotto, won on 15 January 2022.
*€12.2 million (US$15.7 million) was the largest jackpot in Finland&#x27;s Lotto of Veikkaus, won in October 2012 by one ticket.
*€13 million (US$17.9 million) was the largest jackpot in Belgium&#x27;s Loterie Nationale/Nationale Loterij, won in December 2013 by one ticket.
*₽358 million (€4.32 million/US$4.77 million) was the largest jackpot in Russia&#x27;s Gosloto 6 to 45, won in February 2016 by one 1,800 rouble ticket. This is the largest jackpot in Russia.

===Spain===
The Spanish Christmas Lottery is considered to be the world&#x27;s largest lottery. The 2011 top prize of €720 million was paid out as €4 million (US$5.2 million) to each of the 180 tickets. In 2012, the first prize was €720 million (then US$941.8 million; $1.215 billion in 2022 dollars), out of a total prize pool of €2.52 billion (US$3.297 billion; $4.255 billion in 2022 dollars). In 2016, the total prize pool was €2.310 billion ($2.414 billion). In 2020, the total prize pool was €2.38 billion ($2.897 billion).

==Other==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189409" start="70" end="79" title="lottery" label="lotteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="187" end="211" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q32032" start="417" end="420" title="Net (economics)" label="net"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1565" end="1578" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1759" end="1773" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517536" start="1781" end="1797" title="National Lottery (United Kingdom)" label="National Lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028497" start="1842" end="1855" title="Camelot Group" label="Camelot Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280451" start="2196" end="2208" title="Euromillions" label="Euromillions"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="2406" end="2414" title="Pound sterling" label="sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375028" start="2512" end="2523" title="Eurojackpot" label="Eurojackpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2660" end="2665" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q384214" start="2673" end="2686" title="SuperEnalotto" label="SuperEnalotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2782" end="2787" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2795" end="2807" title=":es:La Primitiva" label="La Primitiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351325" start="2833" end="2857" title="El Gordo de la Primitiva" label="El Gordo de la Primitiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="2947" end="2956" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="3018" end="3025" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="3087" end="3090" title="Swedish krona" label="Kr."/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3275" end="3289" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517536" start="3297" end="3302" title="National Lottery (United Kingdom)" label="Lotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="3387" end="3398" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="3527" end="3538" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3871" end="3877" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="4106" end="4113" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375028" start="4128" end="4139" title="Eurojackpot" label="Eurojackpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="4259" end="4262" title="Swedish krona" label="Kr."/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="4345" end="4351" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924567" start="4368" end="4380" title="Svenska Spel" label="Svenska Spel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="4498" end="4505" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4513" end="4518" title="National Lottery (Ireland)#Record Lotto Jackpots" label="Lotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="4604" end="4611" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28495996" start="4628" end="4636" title="Veikkaus" label="Veikkaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="4731" end="4738" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q41044" start="4820" end="4821" title="Russian ruble" label="₽"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4892" end="4898" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572959" start="5028" end="5053" title="Spanish Christmas Lottery" label="Spanish Christmas Lottery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423255" wikidata="Q1648259" url="?curid=423255" title="Peleg">
<text>Peleg (, in pausa , &quot;division&quot;; ) is mentioned in the Hebrew Bible as one of the two sons of Eber, an ancestor of the Ishmaelites and the Israelites, according to the Generations of Noah in and .

== In Scriptures ==
Peleg&#x27;s son was Reu, born when Peleg was thirty, and he had other sons and daughters. According to the Hebrew Bible, Peleg lived to the age of 239 years, () (up to when Terah was 118). 
In the Septuagint and some Christian Bibles derived from it, Peleg is called and his father is called . His son is called , born when Phaleg was 130 years old, and he had other sons and daughters. According to the Septuagint, Phaleg lived to an age of 339 years. (Septuagint Genesis 11:16-19) Modern translations generally use the names and dating as in the Masoretic Hebrew text. (compare )

== &quot;The earth was divided&quot; ==

According to and , it was during the time of Peleg that the earth was divided – traditionally, this is often assumed to be just before, during, or after the failure of the Tower of Babel, whose construction was traditionally attributed to Nimrod. The meaning of the Earth being divided is usually taken to refer to a patriarchal division of the world, or possibly just the Eastern Hemisphere, into allotted portions among the three sons of Noah for future occupation, as specifically described in the &quot;Book of Jubilees&quot;, &quot;Biblical Antiquities of Philo&quot;, &quot;Kitab al-Magall&quot;, Flavius Josephus, and numerous other antiquarian and mediaeval sources, even as late as Archbishop Ussher, in his &quot;Annals of the World&quot;. One account, the &quot;Conflict of Adam and Eve with Satan&quot;, states that &quot;In the days of Phalek (Peleg), the earth was divided &quot;a second time&quot; among the three sons of Noah; Shem, Ham and Japheth&quot; – it had been divided once previously among the three sons by Noah himself. 

Some Creationists interpret this verse to refer to the continent of Pangaea being split into the modern continents.

== Popularity of the name ==
Peleg is a common first name and surname in Israel, also being the root lettering for sailing ( ) and a military half-bivouac tent ( ). The meaning of Peleg in English is &quot;brook&quot;, a little river.

== In popular culture ==
Peleg is the name of one of the principal owners of the fictional whaling ship Pequod in Herman Melville&#x27;s &quot;Moby-Dick&quot; (1851). The following actors have portrayed this character in film adaptations: 

* Mervyn Johns in &quot;Moby Dick&quot; (1956)
* Gordon Stanley in the off-Broadway &quot;Moby Dick&quot; (1986) 

Peleg Peterson (played by Fred Paul) is a character in the silent film &quot;Infelice&quot; (1915). This film is an adaptation of the 1875 novel of the same name by Augusta J. Evans.

Dan Peleg (played by Noah Emmerich) is a Mossad trainer in the miniseries &quot;The Spy&quot; (2019).

== References ==
==External links==
*&quot;Jewish Encyclopedia&quot;: Peleg is briefly mentioned in the article &quot;Eber&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1648259" start="0" end="5" title="Peleg" label="Peleg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115257" start="12" end="17" title="pausa" label="pausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="64" end="76" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q502282" start="103" end="107" title="Eber" label="Eber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597041" start="128" end="139" title="Ishmaelites" label="Ishmaelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="148" end="158" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033715" start="177" end="196" title="Generations of Noah" label="Generations of Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040793" start="248" end="251" title="Reu" label="Reu"/>
<link wikidata="Q586541" start="401" end="406" title="Terah" label="Terah"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="425" end="435" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q380669" start="776" end="785" title="Masoretic" label="Masoretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41213" start="1024" end="1038" title="Tower of Babel" label="Tower of Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q201861" start="1091" end="1097" title="Nimrod" label="Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q186198" start="1225" end="1243" title="Eastern Hemisphere" label="Eastern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033715" start="1284" end="1296" title="sons of Noah" label="sons of Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q843946" start="1359" end="1375" title="Book of Jubilees" label="Book of Jubilees"/>
<link wikidata="Q837700" start="1383" end="1424" title="Pseudo-Philo" label="&amp;quot;Biblical Antiquities of Philo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q692467" start="1426" end="1453" title="Clementine literature" label="&amp;quot;Kitab al-Magall&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="1455" end="1471" title="Flavius Josephus" label="Flavius Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q333481" start="1543" end="1560" title="James Ussher" label="Archbishop Ussher"/>
<link wikidata="Q352047" start="1625" end="1660" title="Conflict of Adam and Eve with Satan" label="Conflict of Adam and Eve with Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81422" start="1885" end="1889" title="Noah" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="1906" end="1918" title="Creationism" label="Creationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398" start="1969" end="1976" title="Pangaea" label="Pangaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="2091" end="2097" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166594" start="2358" end="2364" title="Pequod (Moby-Dick)" label="Pequod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="2368" end="2383" title="Herman Melville" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q174596" start="2397" end="2406" title="Moby-Dick" label="Moby-Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922184" start="2497" end="2509" title="Mervyn Johns" label="Mervyn Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423235" start="2519" end="2528" title="Moby Dick (1956 film)" label="Moby Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667981" start="2544" end="2558" title="Gordon Stanley (actor)" label="Gordon Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496050" start="2636" end="2645" title="Fred Paul" label="Fred Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="2669" end="2675" title="Silent film" label="silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q96382136" start="2687" end="2695" title="Infelice (film)" label="Infelice"/>
<link wikidata="Q274219" start="2775" end="2791" title="Augusta J. Evans" label="Augusta J. Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q720530" start="2815" end="2828" title="Noah Emmerich" label="Noah Emmerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q34216" start="2835" end="2841" title="Mossad" label="Mossad"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600557" start="2874" end="2881" title="The Spy (TV miniseries)" label="The Spy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423256" wikidata="Q142450" url="?curid=423256" title="Douglas Haig (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Douglas Haig, 1st Earl Haig]] (1861–1928) was a British soldier and senior commander during World War I.

Douglas Haig may also refer to:
* Douglas Haig (actor) (1920–2011), American actor
* Club Atlético Douglas Haig, an Argentine football club founded in 1918

==See also==
*Douglas Hague (1926–2015), British economist</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q142450" start="0" end="31" title="Douglas Haig (disambiguation)" label="[[Douglas Haig, 1st Earl Haig]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q142450" start="108" end="120" title="Douglas Haig (disambiguation)" label="Douglas Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301561" start="142" end="162" title="Douglas Haig (actor)" label="Douglas Haig (actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757455" start="193" end="219" title="Club Atlético Douglas Haig" label="Club Atlético Douglas Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q19591267" start="279" end="292" title="Douglas Hague" label="Douglas Hague"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423258" wikidata="Q5464150" url="?curid=423258" title="Foil">
<text>Foil may refer to:
==Materials==
* Foil (metal), a quite thin sheet of metal, usually manufactured with a rolling mill machine
* Metal leaf, a very thin sheet of decorative metal
* Aluminium foil, a type of wrapping for food
* Tin foil, metal foil made of tin, the direct predecessor to aluminium foil
* Transparency (projection), a thin sheet of transparent flexible material, placed on an overhead projector for display to an audience

==Fluid dynamics==
* Foil (fluid mechanics)
** Airfoil, a foil operating in air
** Hydrofoil, a foil operating in water
** Parafoil, a non-rigid airfoil, inflated during use
* Foil bearing, a type of fluid bearing

==Arts and culture==
* Foil (architecture), decorative device derived from cusps of circles
* Foil stamping, a printmaking technique
* Foil (fencing), one of the three weapons used in modern fencing
* Foil (fiction), a subsidiary character who emphasizes the traits of a main character
** Comedic or comic foil, the straight man in a comedy double act
* &quot;Foil&quot; (song), &quot;Weird Al&quot; Yankovic&#x27;s parody of Lorde&#x27;s song &quot;Royals&quot;

==Navigation==
* Hydrofoil, a type of high-powered motorboat that uses underwater foils to lift its hull above the water when moving at high speeds
* Bruce foil, a foil used on an outrigger to prevent a boat from heeling
* Centreboard, a movable keel that functions as a foil
* Foilboard, a surfboard using a hydrofoil

==Other uses==
* People in a police lineup
* First-order inductive learner – a rule-based learning algorithm
* The FOIL method, a mnemonic in algebra, to expand the product of two first-degree polynomials (&quot;linear factors&quot;)
* FOIL (programming language), either of two now-defunct computer programming languages
* Forum of Indian Leftists, a political group of Indian intellectuals
* Freedom of information legislation or Freedom of Information Law (FOIL)
* Ultrasonic foil (papermaking), a type of high-frequency vibrating foil involved in papermaking
* Split tally, in ancient financial accounting, the part of a split tally stick given to the recipient in a transaction</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5464150" start="0" end="4" title="Foil" label="Foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q251473" start="35" end="47" title="Foil (metal)" label="Foil (metal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11074667" start="129" end="139" title="Metal leaf" label="Metal leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q447349" start="181" end="195" title="Aluminium foil" label="Aluminium foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752332" start="227" end="235" title="Tin foil" label="Tin foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751645" start="304" end="329" title="Transparency (projection)" label="Transparency (projection)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097964" start="459" end="481" title="Foil (fluid mechanics)" label="Foil (fluid mechanics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698744" start="485" end="492" title="Airfoil" label="Airfoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q130268556" start="521" end="530" title="Hydrofoil" label="Hydrofoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q769299" start="561" end="569" title="Parafoil" label="Parafoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464159" start="614" end="626" title="Foil bearing" label="Foil bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755770" start="676" end="695" title="Foil (architecture)" label="Foil (architecture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502469" start="747" end="760" title="Foil stamping" label="Foil stamping"/>
<link wikidata="Q471447" start="788" end="802" title="Foil (fencing)" label="Foil (fencing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563727" start="854" end="868" title="Foil (fiction)" label="Foil (fiction)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141470" start="994" end="1004" title="double act" label="double act"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153188" start="1007" end="1030" title="Foil (song)" label="&amp;quot;Foil&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130268556" start="1134" end="1143" title="Hydrofoil" label="Hydrofoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978525" start="1267" end="1277" title="Bruce foil" label="Bruce foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571036" start="1340" end="1351" title="Centreboard" label="Centreboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464163" start="1395" end="1404" title="Foilboard" label="Foilboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418981" start="1466" end="1479" title="police lineup" label="police lineup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453470" start="1482" end="1511" title="First-order inductive learner" label="First-order inductive learner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426847" start="1552" end="1563" title="FOIL method" label="FOIL method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426845" start="1673" end="1700" title="FOIL (programming language)" label="FOIL (programming language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473131" start="1761" end="1785" title="Forum of Indian Leftists" label="Forum of Indian Leftists"/>
<link wikidata="Q329497" start="1831" end="1865" title="Freedom of information legislation" label="Freedom of information legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931541" start="1905" end="1934" title="Ultrasonic foil (papermaking)" label="Ultrasonic foil (papermaking)"/>
<link wikidata="Q933008" start="2002" end="2013" title="Split tally" label="Split tally"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423269" wikidata="Q911411" url="?curid=423269" title="HO scale">
<text>HO or H0 is a rail transport modelling scale using a 1:87 scale (3.5 mm to 1 foot). It is the most popular scale of model railway in the world. The rails are spaced apart for modelling standard gauge tracks and trains in HO.

The name HO comes from 1:87 scale being &quot;half&quot; that of O scale, which was originally the smallest of the series of older and larger 0, 1, 2 and 3 gauges introduced by Märklin around 1900. Rather than referring to the scale as &quot;half-zero&quot; or &quot;H-zero&quot;, English-speakers have consistently pronounced it and have generally written it with the letters HO. In other languages it also remains written with the letter H and number 0 (zero); in German it is thus pronounced as . In Japan, many models are produced using 1:80 scale proportions (16.5mm track is still used).

==History==
After the First World War there were several attempts to introduce a model railway about half the size of 0 scale that would be more suitable for smaller home layouts and cheaper to manufacture. H0 was created to meet these aims. For this new scale, a track width of was designed to represent prototypical standard-gauge track of width, and a model scale of 1:87 was chosen. By as early as 1922 the firm Bing in Nuremberg, Germany, had been marketing a &quot;tabletop railway&quot; for several years. This came on a raised, quasi-ballasted track with a gauge of 16.5 mm, which was described at that time either as 00 or H0. The trains initially had a clockwork drive, but from 1924 were driven electrically. Accessory manufacturers, such as Kibri, marketed buildings in the corresponding scale.

At the 1935 Leipzig Spring Fair, an electric tabletop railway, Trix Express, was displayed to a gauge described as &quot;half nought gauge&quot;, which was then abbreviated as gauge 00 (&quot;nought-nought&quot;). Märklin, another German firm, followed suit with its 00 gauge railway for the 1935 Leipzig Autumn Fair. The Märklin 00 gauge track that appeared more than ten years after Bing&#x27;s tabletop railway had a very similar appearance to the previous Bing track. On the Märklin version, however, the rails were fixed to the tin &#x27;ballast&#x27; as in the prototype, whilst the Bing tracks were simply stamped into the ballast, so that track and ballast were made of a single sheet of metal.

HO scale trains elsewhere were developed in response to the economic pressures of the Great Depression. The trains first appeared in the United Kingdom, originally as an alternative to 00 gauge, but could not make commercial headway against the established 00 gauge. However, it became very popular in the United States, where it took off in the late 1950s after interest in model railroads as toys began to decline and more emphasis began to be placed on realism in response to hobbyist demand. While HO scale is by nature more delicate than 0 scale, its smaller size allows modelers to fit more details and more scale track distance into a comparable area.

In the 1950s HO began to challenge the market dominance of O gauge and, in the 1960s, as it began to overtake O scale in popularity, even the stalwarts of other sizes, including Marx and Lionel Corporation began manufacturing HO trains.

Today, HO locomotives, rolling stock (cars or carriages), buildings, and scenery are available from a large number of manufacturers in a variety of price brackets.

== Standards ==

===Scale===

HO is the most popular model railroad scale in both continental Europe and North America, whereas OO scale (4 mm:foot or 1:76.2 with 16.5 mm track) is still dominant in the United Kingdom. There are some modellers in the United Kingdom who model in HO scale and the British 1:87 Scale Society was formed in 1994.

In continental Europe, H0 scale is defined in the &quot;&quot; (NEM) standard &quot;NEM 010&quot; published by MOROP as exactly 1:87. In North America, the National Model Railroad Association (NMRA) standard &quot;S-1.2 General Standard Scales&quot; defines HO scale as representing a ratio of , usually rounded to 1:87.1. The precise definition of HO scale thus varies slightly by country and manufacturer.
In other hobbies, the term HO is often used more loosely than in railroad modeling. In slot car racing, HO does not denote a precise scale of car, but a general size of track on which the cars can range from 1:87 to approximately 1:64 scale. Small plastic model soldiers are often popularly referred to as HO size if they are close to high, though the actual scale is usually 1:76 or 1:72.

Even in model railroading, the term HO can be stretched. Some British producers have marketed railway accessories such as detail items and figures, as &quot;HO/OO&quot; in an attempt to make them attractive to modelers in both scales. Sometimes the actual scale is OO, and sometimes the difference is split (about 1:82). These items may be marketed as HO, especially in the US. In addition, some manufacturers or importers tend to label any small-scale model, regardless of exact scale, as HO scale in order to increase sales to railroad modelers. The sizes of &quot;HO&quot; automobiles, for example, can vary greatly between different manufacturers.

===Power and control===
Model locomotives are fitted with small motors that are wired to pick up power from the rails. As with other scales, HO trains can be controlled in either analog or digital fashions. With analog control, two-rail track is powered by direct current (varying the voltage applied to the rails to control speed, and polarity to control direction). With digital control, such as Digital Command Control (DCC) or proprietary systems such as the one developed by Märklin, digital commands are encoded at the controller and received by any decoders receiving power from the track. Digital control allows independent control of each locomotive&#x27;s speed and direction as well as functions not easily achieved with analog control such as reactive sound and lighting effects, integration of auxiliary decoders and automation.

The basic power and control system consists of a power pack of a transformer and rectifier (DC), a rheostat. On large model layouts, the power system may consist of several signal boosters, control interfaces, switch panels and more. Trackage may be divided into electrically isolated sections called blocks and toggle or rotary switches (sometimes relays) are used to select which tracks are energized. Blocking trackage also allows the detection of locomotives within the block through the measurement of current draw.

===Track===
The &quot;gauge&quot; of a rail system is the distance between the inside edges of the railheads. It is distinct from the concept of &quot;scale&quot;, though the terms are often used interchangeably in rail modelling. &quot;Scale&quot; describes the size of a modeled object relative to its prototype. Prototype rail systems use a variety of track gauges, so several different gauges can be modeled at the same scale.

The gauges used in HO scale are a selection of standard and narrow gauges. The standards for these gauges are defined by the NMRA (in North America) and the NEM (in Continental Europe). While the standards are in practice interchangeable, there are minor differences.

====Construction====
The earliest &quot;pre-gauged&quot; track available in the 1940s had steel rails clipped to a fiber tie base. This was called flexible track as it could be &quot;flexed&quot; around any curve in a continuous fashion. The sections were sold in lengths of , and the rail ends were connected with a sheet metal track connector that was soldered to the base of the rail.

As brass became more readily available, the steel rail was phased out, along with its corrosion problems. Brass flex-track continued to be available long after sectional track was introduced, as the three-foot lengths of rail reduced the number of joints. The biggest disadvantage of flex-track was that it had to be fastened to a roadbed.

In the late 1940s, Tru-Scale made milled wood roadbed sections, simulating ballast, tie plates and milled ties with a gauged, grooved slot with simulated tie plates. Bulk HO code 100 rail was spiked in place with HO spikes. This was available in straight lengths and curves, from radius. 
It was up to the user to stain the wood for the tie colors prior to laying the brass track, and then adding scale ballast between the ties.

Tru-Scale made preformed wood roadbed sections, simulating ballast, that the flextrack would be fastened with tiny steel spikes. These spikes were shaped much like real railroad spikes, and were fitted through holes pre-drilled in the fiber flextrack ties base. An improvement was made when &quot;sectional track&quot; became available in a variety of standardized lengths, such as the ubiquitous straight and curved tracks with radii of . These are representative of curves as tight as , which in the real world would only be found on some industrial spurs and light rail systems.

Sectional track was an improvement in setting up track on a living room floor because the rail was attached to a rigid plastic tie base, and could withstand rough handling from children and pets without suffering much damage. With flex track, which can be bent to any desired shape (within reason), it became possible to create railroads with broader curves, and with them more accurate models. Individual rails are available for those that wish to spike their own rails to ties. Individual ties can be glued to a sound base, or pre-formed tie and ballast sections milled from wood can be used for a more durable, if somewhat artificially uniform, look is preferred.

There are a variety of preassembled track sections made by Märklin using their three-rail system (where the third rail are actually studs protruding from the center of the rail tie). This trackwork is a little bulkier looking than true to scale, but it is considered quite trouble-free, and is preferred by many that are interested in reducing much of the operational problems that come with HO scale railroading. As with other preformed track, it is also available in several radius configurations. Generally speaking, very-sharp-radius curves are only suitable for single-unit operation, such as trolley cars, or for short-coupled cars and locos such as found around industrial works. Longer wheelbase trucks (bogies) and longer car and loco overhangs require the use of broader radius curves. Today many six-axle diesels and full-length passenger cars will not run on curves less than in radius.

HO scale track was originally manufactured with steel rails on fiber ties, then brass rail on fiber ties, then brass rail on plastic tie. Over time, track made of nickel silver (an alloy of nickel and brass) became more common due to its superior resistance to corrosion. Today, almost all HO scale track is of nickel silver, although Bachmann, Life-Like and Model Power continue to manufacture steel track.

In America, Atlas gained an early lead in track manufacturing, and their sectional, flex, and turnout track dominates the US market. In the UK, Peco&#x27;s line of flex track and &quot;Electrofrog&quot; (powered frog) and &quot;Insulfrog&quot; (insulated frog) turnouts are more common. Atlas, Bachmann, and Life-Like all manufacture inexpensive, snap-together track with integral roadbed. Kato also manufactures a full line of &quot;HO Unitrack&quot;; however, it has not yet caught on as their N scale Unitrack has.

Rail height is measured in thousandths of an inch; &quot;code 83&quot; track has a rail which is high. As HO&#x27;s commonly available rail sizes, especially the popular &quot;code 100&quot;, are somewhat large (representative of extremely heavily trafficked lines), many modelers opt for hand-laid finescale track with individually laid wooden sleepers and crossties and rails secured by very small railroad spikes.

In Australia, many club-owned layouts employ code 100 track so that club members can also run OO-scale models and older rolling stock with coarse (deep) wheel flanges.

===Couplers===
A hook-and-loop coupler originally developed by Märklin became an NEM standard and is still widely used. More recently, manufacturers, including Fleischmann and Märklin, developed close couplers that on straight track have the buffers almost touching, more like the prototype. On curves a sliding mechanism allows the couplers to move away from the buffer frame providing the additional clearance necessary.

Most couplers provide pre-uncoupling, whereby a train may reverse over a raised uncoupler and some time later change direction leaving the train (or selected cars) behind.

Another NEM standard is the coupler pocket, which the individual coupler slots into. The majority of models provide this pocket, meaning that it is very simple to exchange one coupler type for another, or to replace damaged couplers.

In North America, all train sets/kits used to come with the &quot;X2F&quot; or &quot;Horn Hook&quot; coupler until Kadee came out with the No. 5 coupler. After Kadee&#x27;s patent ran out, other manufacturers made duplicates of the KD No. 5 until KD brought out the scale-accurate No. 58 coupler, and everyone else followed suit.

In Australia, older models produced by Lima and Powerline traditionally used NEM hook-and-loop couplers, however almost all models since the mid-1990s use Kadee or compatible couplers such as Bachmann E-Z Mate. Older Australian-market train sets manufactured by Tyco, Life-Like and Bachmann used the same horn hook couplers as their American counterparts.

==Models==
Because of the scale&#x27;s popularity, a huge array of models, kits and supplies are manufactured. The annual HO scale catalog by Wm. K. Walthers, North America&#x27;s largest model railroad supplier, lists more than 1,000 pages of products in that scale alone. Models are generally available in three varieties:
* &quot;Ready-to-run&quot; models are fully ready for use right out of the box. Generally, this means couplers, trucks (bogies), and other integral parts are installed at the factory, although some super detailing parts may still need to be attached.
* &quot;Shake-the-box&quot; kits are simple, easy-to-assemble kits; a freight car might include a one-piece body, a chassis, trucks, couplers, and a weight, while a structure kit might include walls, windows, doors, and glazing. The name derives from the joke that no skill was required – shake the box, and the kit falls together. A common synonym is &quot;screwdriver kit&quot; as many can be assembled with a screwdriver and tweezers.
* &quot;Craftsman kits&quot; require a much higher level of skill to assemble and can include several hundred parts.
In addition to these kits, numerous manufacturers sell individual supplies for super detailing, scratch building, and kitbashing.

Quality varies extremely. Toylike, ready-to-run trains using plastic molds which are well over 50 years old are still sold; at the other are highly detailed limited-edition locomotive models made of brass by companies based in Japan and South Korea. A popular locomotive such as the F7/F9 may be available in thirty different versions with prices ranging from twenty to several thousand dollars or euros.

==Comparison to other scales==
HO scale&#x27;s popularity lies somewhat in its middle-of-the-road status. It is large enough to accommodate a great deal of detail in finer models, more so than the smaller N and Z scales, and can also be easily handled by children. Models are usually less expensive than the smaller scales because of more exacting manufacturing process in N and Z, and also less expensive than S, O and G scales because of the smaller amount of material; the larger market and the resultant economy of scale also drives HO prices down. The size lends itself to elaborate track plans in a reasonable amount of room space, not as much as N but considerably more than S or 0. In short, HO scale provides the balance between the detail of larger scales and the lower space requirements of smaller scales.

==Manufacturers==

Currently active significant manufacturers and marketers of HO railroad equipment include:

*ABR Model Works
*Accurail
*Acme Model Engineering Co.
*Albrae Models
*Arlo
*Athabasca Scale Models
*Athearn
*Atlas
*Auhagen
*Auscision
*Austrains
*AWM
*Bachmann Industries
*BGR Group
*Blackstone Models (HOn3)
*Blair Line
*BLMA Models
*Bowser Manufacturing
*Brawa
*Brekina
*Broadway Limited Imports
*Busch
*Campbell Scale Models
*Century Foundry
*Egger-Bahn
*Electrotren (part of Hornby)
*ESU (Electronic Solutions Ulm)
*Eureka
*Exactrail
*Faller
*Fleischmann (part of Modelleisenbahn GmbH)
*Frateschi
*Fulgurex
*HAG
*Heki
*Heljan
*Herpa
*Hodgdon Scale Models
*Hornby Railways
*Hunterline Craftsman Kits
*Ibertren
*InterMountain Railway
*IHC
*Island Modelworks
*Jouef (part of Hornby)
*Kadee
*Kanamodel Products
*Kato Precision Railroad Models
*Katsumi Trains
*Kibri
*Kleinbahn
*Lemaco
*Life-Like
*Liliput (part of Bachmann)
*Lima — bankrupt in 2004, now part of Hornby
*Lionel, LLC
*Mantua
*Märklin
*Mehano
*Micro Metakit
*Minitrains
*Model Power
*MTH Electric Trains
*Musashino Model
*MRmatiX
*Noch
*NMJ
*Norev
*Northwest Short Line (NWSL)
*Peco
*PIKO
*Powerline Models
*Precision Craft Models
*Preiser
*Rapido Trains
*Rietze
*Rivarossi (part of Hornby)
*Roco (part of Modelleisenbahn GmbH)
*ScaleTrains
*SoundTraxx
*Spectrum (trains) (part of Bachmann)
*Stewart Hobbies
*Spark
*Summit USA
*Tenshodo
*Tillig
*Trix (part of the Märklin group)
*TMI Digital
*Tyco
*VK
*Viessmann
*Vollmer (company)
*Wiking
*Wm. K. Walthers
*Woodland Scenics
Significant historical manufacturers, importers, and marketers of HO equipment that are no longer active in HO include but are not limited to:
*Airfix
*American Railroad Models (American Beauty)
*Aristo-Craft
*Associated Hobby Manufacturers (AHM)
*Aurora Plastics Corporation
*Balboa
*L.M. Cox
*Globe
*Gützold (bankrupt in 2004)
*Herkimer
*Kembel
*Ken Kidder
*Key Imports
*Lindberg Models
*Lindsay Products
*Marx
*Olympic Express
*Overland Models
*Pacific Fast Mail (PFM)
*Penn Line Manufacturing
*PMP
*Powerline Models
*Revell
*Sachsenmodelle (bankrupt in 2001, acquired by Tillig group)
*Selley
*Train Miniature
*Trains Unlimited
*Trainorama
*Tru-Scale
*True Line Trains
*Trumpeter Models
*Tyco Toys
*Ulrich
*Varney Scale Models
*Vollon &amp; Brun
*Westside Model Company
==See also==
* FREMO
* List of rail transport modelling scale standards
* Miniatur Wunderland
* Rail transport modelling scales

==References==

==External links==

* Layout Tours A-L and Layout Tours M-Z
* Tony Cook&#x27;s HO-Scale Trains Resource Includes separate Web sites for many classic and contemporary HO-scale model train product lines of the past; online catalog resources; plus links to current manufacturers.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q911411" start="0" end="2" title="HO scale" label="HO"/>
<link wikidata="Q911411" start="6" end="8" title="HO scale" label="H0"/>
<link wikidata="Q623272" start="14" end="38" title="rail transport modelling" label="rail transport modelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498959" start="58" end="63" title="scale model" label="scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="185" end="199" title="standard gauge" label="standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760576" start="291" end="298" title="O scale" label="O scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q382105" start="371" end="372" title="1 gauge" label="1"/>
<link wikidata="Q502537" start="374" end="375" title="2 gauge" label="2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402466" start="380" end="387" title="3 gauge" label="3 gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q170127" start="403" end="410" title="Märklin" label="Märklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="1139" end="1153" title="Standard-gauge railway" label="standard-gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="1245" end="1254" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1256" end="1263" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q599697" start="1363" end="1372" title="track ballast" label="ballasted"/>
<link wikidata="Q170127" start="1843" end="1850" title="Märklin" label="Märklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2419" end="2435" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032117" start="3180" end="3198" title="Lionel Corporation" label="Lionel Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q93301" start="3241" end="3251" title="locomotive" label="locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414135" start="3254" end="3267" title="rolling stock" label="rolling stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242629" start="3379" end="3393" title="price point" label="price brackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807761" start="3524" end="3532" title="OO scale" label="OO scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q575721" start="3851" end="3856" title="MOROP" label="MOROP"/>
<link wikidata="Q653903" start="3896" end="3931" title="National Model Railroad Association" label="National Model Railroad Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q788537" start="4235" end="4243" title="slot car" label="slot car"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="5449" end="5463" title="direct current" label="direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="5477" end="5484" title="voltage" label="voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="5517" end="5522" title="velocity" label="speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="5528" end="5536" title="Electrical polarity" label="polarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q905329" start="5590" end="5613" title="Digital Command Control" label="Digital Command Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q170127" start="5672" end="5679" title="Märklin" label="Märklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q173285" start="5681" end="5688" title="Digital data" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="6100" end="6111" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q171486" start="6116" end="6125" title="rectifier" label="rectifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q187868" start="6134" end="6142" title="rheostat" label="rheostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q214519" start="6579" end="6584" title="Track gauge" label="gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751601" start="6901" end="6924" title="List of track gauges" label="variety of track gauges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="7036" end="7044" title="Standard gauge" label="standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="7049" end="7062" title="Narrow-gauge railway" label="narrow gauges"/>
<link wikidata="Q653903" start="7114" end="7118" title="NMRA" label="NMRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999914" start="7146" end="7149" title="Normen Europäischer Modellbahnen" label="NEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q10667400" start="8970" end="8975" title="Siding (rail)" label="spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="8980" end="8990" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="10680" end="10685" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="10694" end="10701" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q203874" start="10732" end="10745" title="nickel silver" label="nickel silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q757188" start="10990" end="10995" title="Atlas Model Railroad" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373916" start="11122" end="11126" title="Peco" label="Peco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11190" end="11194" title="Railroad turnout#Frog (common crossing)" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274379" start="11286" end="11295" title="Life-Like" label="Life-Like"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407078" start="11368" end="11372" title="Kato Precision Railroad Models" label="Kato"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11415" end="11423" title="Unitrack" label="Unitrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755600" start="11474" end="11481" title="N scale" label="N scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416928" start="11796" end="11805" title="finescale" label="finescale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999914" start="12165" end="12168" title="Normen Europäischer Modellbahnen" label="NEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6345338" start="13031" end="13036" title="Kadee" label="Kadee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256278" start="13746" end="13761" title="Wm. K. Walthers" label="Wm. K. Walthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501648" start="14031" end="14039" title="Railway coupling" label="couplers"/>
<link wikidata="Q217421" start="14049" end="14054" title="bogie" label="bogie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14814" end="14829" title="super detailing" label="super detailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q168392" start="14831" end="14847" title="scratch building" label="scratch building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417941" start="14853" end="14863" title="kitbashing" label="kitbashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q93301" start="15039" end="15049" title="locomotive" label="locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957893" start="15065" end="15070" title="Brass model" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q952246" start="15149" end="15151" title="EMD F7" label="F7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287249" start="15152" end="15154" title="EMD F9" label="F9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755600" start="15477" end="15478" title="N scale" label="N"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967226" start="15483" end="15484" title="Z scale" label="Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q454996" start="15683" end="15684" title="S gauge" label="S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760576" start="15686" end="15687" title="O scale" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275296" start="15692" end="15693" title="G scale" label="G"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="15780" end="15796" title="economy of scale" label="economy of scale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16203" end="16218" title="ABR Model Works" label="ABR Model Works"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16220" end="16228" title="Accurail" label="Accurail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16230" end="16256" title="Acme Model Engineering Co." label="Acme Model Engineering Co."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16258" end="16271" title="Albrae Models" label="Albrae Models"/>
<link wikidata="Q610478" start="16273" end="16277" title="Arlo" label="Arlo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16279" end="16301" title="Athabasca Scale Models" label="Athabasca Scale Models"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813297" start="16303" end="16310" title="Athearn" label="Athearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q757188" start="16312" end="16317" title="Atlas Model Railroad" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16328" end="16337" title="Auscision" label="Auscision"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16339" end="16348" title="Austrains" label="Austrains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988550" start="16355" end="16374" title="Bachmann Industries" label="Bachmann Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182705" start="16376" end="16385" title="BGR Group" label="BGR Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16387" end="16411" title="Blackstone Models (HOn3)" label="Blackstone Models (HOn3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924131" start="16413" end="16423" title="Blair Line" label="Blair Line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16425" end="16436" title="BLMA Models" label="BLMA Models"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951421" start="16438" end="16458" title="Bowser Manufacturing" label="Bowser Manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16460" end="16465" title="Brawa" label="Brawa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16467" end="16474" title="Brekina" label="Brekina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972469" start="16476" end="16500" title="Broadway Limited Imports" label="Broadway Limited Imports"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16509" end="16530" title="Campbell Scale Models" label="Campbell Scale Models"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16532" end="16547" title="Century Foundry" label="Century Foundry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16549" end="16559" title="Egger-Bahn" label="Egger-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16561" end="16572" title="Electrotren" label="Electrotren"/>
<link wikidata="Q243673" start="16642" end="16648" title="Faller" label="Faller"/>
<link wikidata="Q707382" start="16650" end="16661" title="Fleischmann (model railroads)" label="Fleischmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q953277" start="16694" end="16703" title="Frateschi" label="Frateschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507892" start="16705" end="16713" title="Fulgurex" label="Fulgurex"/>
<link wikidata="Q667256" start="16715" end="16718" title="HAG" label="HAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685819" start="16720" end="16724" title="Heki" label="Heki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5706316" start="16726" end="16732" title="Heljan" label="Heljan"/>
<link wikidata="Q644941" start="16734" end="16739" title="Herpa" label="Herpa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16741" end="16761" title="Hodgdon Scale Models" label="Hodgdon Scale Models"/>
<link wikidata="Q164484" start="16763" end="16778" title="Hornby Railways" label="Hornby Railways"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16780" end="16805" title="Hunterline Craftsman Kits" label="Hunterline Craftsman Kits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655852" start="16807" end="16815" title="Ibertren" label="Ibertren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16817" end="16838" title="InterMountain Railway" label="InterMountain Railway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16840" end="16843" title="International Hobby Corporation" label="IHC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16845" end="16862" title="Island Modelworks" label="Island Modelworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q762100" start="16864" end="16869" title="Jouef" label="Jouef"/>
<link wikidata="Q6345338" start="16888" end="16893" title="Kadee" label="Kadee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16895" end="16913" title="Kanamodel Products" label="Kanamodel Products"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407078" start="16915" end="16945" title="Kato Precision Railroad Models" label="Kato Precision Railroad Models"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16947" end="16961" title="Katsumi Trains" label="Katsumi Trains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16963" end="16968" title="Kibri" label="Kibri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16970" end="16979" title="Kleinbahn (model railroads)" label="Kleinbahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520991" start="16981" end="16987" title="Lemaco" label="Lemaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274379" start="16989" end="16998" title="Life-Like" label="Life-Like"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988550" start="17000" end="17007" title="Bachmann Industries" label="Liliput"/>
<link wikidata="Q574206" start="17028" end="17032" title="Lima (models)" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q9022829" start="17073" end="17084" title="Lionel, LLC" label="Lionel, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247" start="17086" end="17092" title="Mantua" label="Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q170127" start="17094" end="17101" title="Märklin" label="Märklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425400" start="17103" end="17109" title="Mehano" label="Mehano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17111" end="17124" title="Micro Metakit" label="Micro Metakit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17138" end="17149" title="Model Power" label="Model Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718450" start="17151" end="17170" title="MTH Electric Trains" label="MTH Electric Trains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17172" end="17187" title="Musashino Model" label="Musashino Model"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17189" end="17196" title="MRmatiX" label="MRmatiX"/>
<link wikidata="Q876329" start="17198" end="17202" title="Noch (model railroads)" label="Noch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17204" end="17207" title="Norsk Modelljernbane" label="NMJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658523" start="17209" end="17214" title="Norev" label="Norev"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17216" end="17243" title="Northwest Short Line (NWSL)" label="Northwest Short Line (NWSL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373916" start="17245" end="17249" title="Peco" label="Peco"/>
<link wikidata="Q697052" start="17251" end="17255" title="PIKO" label="PIKO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17257" end="17273" title="Powerline Models" label="Powerline Models"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17275" end="17297" title="Precision Craft Models" label="Precision Craft Models"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17299" end="17306" title="Preiser (company)" label="Preiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q655596" start="17308" end="17321" title="Arnold (models)" label="Rapido Trains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17323" end="17329" title="Rietze" label="Rietze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005933" start="17331" end="17340" title="Rivarossi" label="Rivarossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q872410" start="17359" end="17363" title="Roco (model railroads)" label="Roco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17409" end="17419" title="SoundTraxx" label="SoundTraxx"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17421" end="17438" title="Spectrum (trains)" label="Spectrum (trains)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988550" start="17448" end="17456" title="Bachmann Industries" label="Bachmann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17483" end="17493" title="Summit USA" label="Summit USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q476888" start="17505" end="17511" title="Tillig" label="Tillig"/>
<link wikidata="Q566514" start="17513" end="17517" title="Trix (company)" label="Trix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17547" end="17558" title="TMI Digital" label="TMI Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542657" start="17560" end="17564" title="Tyco Toys" label="Tyco"/>
<link wikidata="Q700651" start="17570" end="17579" title="Viessmann" label="Viessmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q700651" start="17581" end="17598" title="Vollmer (company)" label="Vollmer (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q883029" start="17600" end="17606" title="Wiking Modellbau" label="Wiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256278" start="17608" end="17623" title="Wm. K. Walthers" label="Wm. K. Walthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032891" start="17625" end="17641" title="Woodland Scenics" label="Woodland Scenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q408697" start="17786" end="17792" title="Airfix" label="Airfix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17794" end="17836" title="American Railroad Models (American Beauty)" label="American Railroad Models (American Beauty)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17838" end="17850" title="Aristo-Craft" label="Aristo-Craft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17852" end="17888" title="Associated Hobby Manufacturers (AHM)" label="Associated Hobby Manufacturers (AHM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871927" start="17890" end="17917" title="Aurora Plastics Corporation" label="Aurora Plastics Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179900" start="17927" end="17935" title="Cox Models" label="L.M. Cox"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17944" end="17951" title="Gützold" label="Gützold"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17990" end="18000" title="Ken Kidder" label="Ken Kidder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18015" end="18030" title="Lindberg Models" label="Lindberg Models"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18032" end="18048" title="Lindsay Products" label="Lindsay Products"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687784" start="18050" end="18054" title="Louis Marx and Company" label="Marx"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18056" end="18071" title="Olympic Express" label="Olympic Express"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18090" end="18113" title="Pacific Fast Mail (PFM)" label="Pacific Fast Mail (PFM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110046" start="18115" end="18138" title="Penn Line Manufacturing" label="Penn Line Manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18145" end="18161" title="Powerline Models" label="Powerline Models"/>
<link wikidata="Q702385" start="18163" end="18169" title="Revell" label="Revell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18171" end="18185" title="Sachsenmodelle" label="Sachsenmodelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448636" start="18232" end="18238" title="Selley" label="Selley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18240" end="18255" title="Train Miniature" label="Train Miniature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18257" end="18273" title="Trains Unlimited" label="Trains Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18275" end="18285" title="Trainorama" label="Trainorama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18287" end="18296" title="Tru-Scale" label="Tru-Scale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18298" end="18314" title="True Line Trains" label="True Line Trains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18316" end="18332" title="Trumpeter Models" label="Trumpeter Models"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542657" start="18334" end="18343" title="Tyco Toys" label="Tyco Toys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916044" start="18353" end="18372" title="Varney Scale Models" label="Varney Scale Models"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18374" end="18391" title="Vollon &amp;amp; Brun" label="Vollon &amp;amp; Brun"/>
<link wikidata="Q380248" start="18431" end="18436" title="FREMO" label="FREMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402466" start="18439" end="18487" title="List of rail transport modelling scale standards" label="List of rail transport modelling scale standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q685524" start="18490" end="18509" title="Miniatur Wunderland" label="Miniatur Wunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q436435" start="18512" end="18543" title="Rail transport modelling scales" label="Rail transport modelling scales"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423277" wikidata="Q13543940" url="?curid=423277" title="Pulo">
<text>Pulo may refer to:

==Places==
* Pulo, Cabuyao, a village in the Philippines
* Pulo do Lobo, a waterfall in Portugal
* Pulo Gadung, a subdistrict in Jakarta, Indonesia
* Pulo Jehat, an island in Malaysia
* Duri Pulo, Gambir, a village in Indonesia
* Isla Pulo, an island in Metro Manila, Philippines

==Dolines==
* Pulo di Altamura, Altamura, Apulia, Italy
* Pulo di Molfetta, Molfetta, Apulia, Italy
* Pulicchio di Gravina, Altamura, Apulia, Italy
* Pulicchio di Toritto, Toritto, Bari, Apulia, Italy

==Other uses==
* Patani United Liberation Organisation, Thailand

==See also==
* Polo (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13543940" start="0" end="4" title="Pulo" label="Pulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25096" start="33" end="46" title="Pulo, Cabuyao" label="Pulo, Cabuyao"/>
<link wikidata="Q17294140" start="79" end="91" title="Pulo do Lobo" label="Pulo do Lobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193314" start="119" end="130" title="Pulo Gadung" label="Pulo Gadung"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646349" start="170" end="180" title="Pulo Jehat" label="Pulo Jehat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316619" start="206" end="223" title="Duri Pulo, Gambir" label="Duri Pulo, Gambir"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052845" start="250" end="259" title="Isla Pulo" label="Isla Pulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925508" start="315" end="331" title="Pulo di Altamura" label="Pulo di Altamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109828" start="359" end="375" title="Pulo di Molfetta" label="Pulo di Molfetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16592947" start="403" end="423" title="Pulicchio di Gravina" label="Pulicchio di Gravina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="451" end="471" title="Pulicchio di Toritto" label="Pulicchio di Toritto"/>
<link wikidata="Q51853" start="473" end="480" title="Toritto" label="Toritto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058301" start="520" end="557" title="Patani United Liberation Organisation" label="Patani United Liberation Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q226619" start="584" end="605" title="Polo (disambiguation)" label="Polo (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423281" wikidata="Q4647612" url="?curid=423281" title="A. C. Gilbert Company">
<text>The A. C. Gilbert Company was an American toy company, once one of the largest in the world. Gilbert originated the Erector Set, which is a construction toy similar to Meccano in the rest of the world, and made chemistry sets, microscope kits, and a line of inexpensive reflector telescopes. In 1938, Gilbert purchased the American Flyer, a manufacturer of toy trains. The Gilbert Company struggled after the death of its founder in 1961 and went out of business in 1967. Its trademarks and toy lines were sold to other companies.

==History==
First known as the Mysto Manufacturing Company, the company was founded in 1909 in Westville, Connecticut, by Alfred Carlton Gilbert, a magician, and his friend John Petrie, to provide supplies for magic shows. Their &quot;Mysto Magic&quot; magician&#x27;s sets were marketed from the 1910s until the 1950s. The sets contained a variety of objects including interlocking rings, playing cards, and a magic wand.

In 1911, Gilbert invented the Erector construction toy concept, inspired by railroad girders used by the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad in its mainline electrification project. Gilbert and his wife Mary developed cardboard prototypes to get the right sizes, openings, and angles to create a robust buildable girder pattern. The Erector set was introduced in 1911, as the Mysto Erector Structural Steel Builder, at the New York City Toy Fair.

In 1916, the name of the company was changed from the Mysto Manufacturing Company to the A. C. Gilbert Company.

In 1920, the company began selling regenerative vacuum tube radio receivers designed by the C. D. Tuska Company, and the following year, in order to increase interest in radio, began operating station WCJ, which was the first broadcasting station licensed in the state of Connecticut. However, the receiver sales were ended after the Westinghouse Electric &amp; Manufacturing Company threatened legal action, on the grounds that Tuska&#x27;s patent rights did not extend to other companies, and WCJ was shut down in late 1922.
Beginning in 1922, A. C. Gilbert made chemistry sets in various sizes. The instruction manuals were co-edited by a Sterling Professor at Yale university and one of his graduate students.

Between 1946 and 1966, the company manufactured toy trains called the American Flyer.

In the 1950s, sets for other budding scientists included those to investigate radioactivity using the Gilbert U-238 Atomic Energy Laboratory, a kit featuring a Geiger counter and radioactive samples.

A line of inexpensive reflector telescopes followed the Sputnik-inspired science craze in the late 1950s. In 1958, the company promoted its science toys by commissioning a comic book, &quot;Adventures in Science&quot;, from Custom Comics. In the comic, a mysterious &quot;Mr. Science&quot; leaps through time and space with a bored teenage boy to interest him in science.

In 1965, A. C. Gilbert produced James Bond movie tie-in figures and a slot car road race set featuring Bond&#x27;s Aston Martin DB5.

==References==
== External links ==
* The Eli Whitney Museum&#x27;s extensive A. C. Gilbert Project includes collections, a bibliography, and pictures of Gilbert
* The Gilbert Electric Eye Set with Free Downloadable Manual
* Slideshow: Golden Age of Chemistry Sets
* Soaring and gliding aircraft This patent was assigned to A.C. Gilbert company. 
* A less successful venture of the company
* &quot;The 8 Most Wildly Irresponsible Vintage Toys&quot; -- page 1 and page 2 at Cracked.com: Includes humorous discussions of some of A.C. Gilbert&#x27;s more ill-advised products for pre-teens: A glass blowing kit (#8); a molten lead casting kit (#7); a chemistry set (#3) which included potassium permanganate, ammonium nitrate and instructions on how to make explosives; and an atomic energy lab (#1) which included uranium and radium samples and a coupon for ordering replacement uranium and radium through the mail.
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4647612" start="4" end="25" title="A. C. Gilbert Company" label="A. C. Gilbert Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422" start="42" end="45" title="toy" label="toy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2189033" start="116" end="127" title="Erector Set" label="Erector Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183277" start="168" end="175" title="Meccano" label="Meccano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743788" start="323" end="337" title="American Flyer" label="American Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q735273" start="418" end="429" title="A.C. Gilbert" label="its founder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989778" start="627" end="649" title="Westville, Connecticut" label="Westville, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q735273" start="654" end="676" title="Alfred Carlton Gilbert" label="Alfred Carlton Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q148442" start="742" end="747" title="magic (illusion)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472738" start="1061" end="1102" title="New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad" label="New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="1571" end="1582" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q16944276" start="1615" end="1634" title="Clarence D. Tuska" label="C. D. Tuska Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q25313416" start="1724" end="1727" title="WCJ" label="WCJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="1857" end="1906" title="Westinghouse Electric (1886)" label="Westinghouse Electric &amp;amp; Manufacturing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q905419" start="2088" end="2101" title="chemistry set" label="chemistry set"/>
<link wikidata="Q608197" start="2165" end="2183" title="Sterling Professor" label="Sterling Professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="2187" end="2202" title="Yale university" label="Yale university"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743788" start="2308" end="2322" title="American Flyer" label="American Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="2403" end="2416" title="radioactivity" label="radioactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561244" start="2427" end="2465" title="Gilbert U-238 Atomic Energy Laboratory" label="Gilbert U-238 Atomic Energy Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q48171" start="2485" end="2499" title="Geiger counter" label="Geiger counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="2582" end="2589" title="Sputnik" label="Sputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842881" start="2750" end="2763" title="American Comics Group" label="Custom Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="2931" end="2941" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187053" start="2948" end="2954" title="tie-in" label="tie-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q788537" start="2969" end="2977" title="slot car" label="slot car"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074" start="3014" end="3026" title="Aston Martin" label="Aston Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180348" start="3506" end="3517" title="Cracked.com" label="Cracked.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q12185286" start="3623" end="3636" title="glass blowing" label="glass blowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q190865" start="3715" end="3737" title="potassium permanganate" label="potassium permanganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182329" start="3739" end="3755" title="ammonium nitrate" label="ammonium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="3845" end="3852" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="3857" end="3863" title="radium" label="radium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423283" wikidata="Q5096327" url="?curid=423283" title="Chicken walks">
<text>Chicken walks is a dance move that is most frequently used in swing dances, such as East Coast Swing, West Coast Swing and jive. Sometimes they can be seen incorporated in samba (where they are known as &quot;plaits&quot;).

The chicken walks steps are similar from both feet. The basic way of performing chicken walks may be described as follows.

Initial position: knees slightly bent, weight on one, say, left foot.
*On count 1, slide the moving (right) foot straight forward without weight, while turning hips and shoulders to the right (kind of contra body movement). The right toe is in contact with the floor all the time.
*On count 2, transfer the weight onto the right foot (keeping knees bent), at the same time do the same what was described on count 1, but with opposite feet.
*Repeat

The basic chicken walks may be styled into a great variety of moves:
*the dancer may lean backwards;
*the walks may be done with kind of charleston bobbing;
*the support foot may swivel at the moment of weight transfer *in* the direction of the forthcoming body turn;
*as a result of the swivels just described, the steps may be done in outward-diagonal directions, etc.

Chicken walks are almost never done by both partners simultaneously. Almost always, the follower does the chicken while the leader leads. 

Dance connection may vary.
* The leader may walk backwards pretending that they are pulling the follower, while the follower is doing chicken walks.
* Assuming the shadow position (with any handhold), the leader leads the follower into chicken walks.
* The leader does chicken walks while the follower pretends to push the leader from behind while doing swivel walks.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5096327" start="0" end="13" title="Chicken walks" label="Chicken walks"/>
<link wikidata="Q384748" start="19" end="29" title="dance move" label="dance move"/>
<link wikidata="Q123704" start="62" end="67" title="swing (dance)" label="swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009578" start="84" end="100" title="East Coast Swing" label="East Coast Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738733" start="102" end="118" title="West Coast Swing" label="West Coast Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17237" start="123" end="127" title="Jive (dance)" label="jive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375949" start="172" end="177" title="Samba (Brazilian dance)" label="samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165612" start="550" end="570" title="contra body movement" label="contra body movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066703" start="935" end="945" title="Charleston (dance)" label="charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161682" start="1310" end="1326" title="connection (dance)" label="Dance connection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1474" end="1489" title="Ballroom glossary#Shadow position" label="shadow position"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1500" end="1508" title="Ballroom glossary#Handhold" label="handhold"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1664" end="1676" title="swivel walks" label="swivel walks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423289" wikidata="Q7231908" url="?curid=423289" title="Portland Community College">
<text>Portland Community College (PCC) is a public community college in Portland, Oregon. It is the largest post-secondary institution in the state and serves residents in the five-county area of Multnomah, Washington, Yamhill, Clackamas, and Columbia counties. As of the 2021–2022 academic year, PCC enrolls more than 50,000 full-time (40%) and part-time (60%) students.

==History==
The college was founded in 1961 as an adult education program for the local public school system, operating out of the former Elementary School since 1959 and renamed Portland Community College in 1961. Voters approved the establishment of an independent district for the college in 1968. Amo DeBernardis (1913-2010), former assistant superintendent of Portland Public Schools, was the founding president of the school, serving from 1961 to 1979.

The Cascade Campus opened in North Portland in 1971, and the Rock Creek Campus opened in Washington County in 1976. The district passed a $374 million bond measure in 2008. PCC&#x27;s $25 million Willow Creek Center opened in 2009 and earned a platinum LEED certification the next year. The Newberg Center opened in October 2011, replacing a temporary arrangement in use for the 2010–11 school year, in which PCC courses were offered at the Chehalem Cultural Center. The center&#x27;s building is a LEED platinum-designed building, the first net zero higher education building in Oregon.

==Facilities==
There are four main campuses, which are larger facilities offering two-year degrees and a range of typical student services:
*Sylvania, opened in the Far Southwest neighborhood of Portland in 1968 and serves over 26,000 students annually.
*Rock Creek, a suburban campus, opened in 1976, near Hillsboro; it is also home to the Washington County Museum. It is about 12 miles west of downtown Portland.
*Cascade, an urban campus, opened in 1971, and is located in North Portland.
*Southeast, newly expanded and upgraded to a full-fledged campus in fall of 2014, originally in the former home of the local U.S. Corps of Engineers headquarters.

There are several centers throughout the Portland metropolitan area, which are smaller facilities offering more limited or specialized programs:
*Continuous Learning for Individuals, Management and Business (CLIMB) Center for Advancement (formerly the Central Portland Workforce Training Center), located near OMSI.
*Portland Metropolitan Workforce Training Center.
*Willow Creek Center, opened in 2009 in Hillsboro. It is located immediately adjacent to TriMet&#x27;s Willow Creek Transit Center.
*Hillsboro Center, which serves about 500 students and moved to the Hillsboro Intermodal Transit Facility in 2010.
*Newberg Center, opened in fall 2011 and serving about 650 students.
In addition to classes held at campuses and centers, PCC partners with local business, schools, community centers, churches, and parks to offer classes in neighborhoods throughout the PCC district.

==Athletics==
Portland Community College competes in the Northwest Athletic Conference (NWAC) as the Panthers, with its men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s basketball teams competing against those from the community colleges of Chemeketa, Clackamas, Mount Hood, Lane, Linn-Benton, Southwestern Oregon, and Umpqua.
==Community education==
Portland Community College offers hundreds of non-credit and continuing education unit (CEU) classes each term through its lifelong learning community education program, which enrolls more than 25,000 students each year online and in-person across Multnomah, Washington, Clackamas, Columbia, and Yamhill counties.

==Notable people==
===Alumni===
*Margaret Carter, the first African-American woman elected to Oregon state&#x27;s legislature
*Richard Curtis, politician from Washington state
*Karen Gaffney, the first person with Down syndrome to complete a relay swim of the English Channel
*Samantha Hess, owner and founder of the Certified Cuddlers Certification Program
*Jon Hill, former White House Executive Chef
*Matt Keeslar, actor
*Christopher Loeak, President of the Marshall Islands
*Nichole Mead, 2012 Miss Oregon
*Rebecca Skloot, author
*Marie Watt, contemporary artist
*Jackie Winters, Oregon politician
*Cameron Whitten, Occupy Portland organizer and community activist

===Faculty===
*Michael Dembrow
*Lew Frederick
*Ralph Friedman
*Larry Galizio
*Diana Schutz
*Ralf Youtz

==National Alternative Fuels Training Consortium==
The college hosts a NAFTC Training Center.

==See also==

* List of Oregon community colleges

==References==
==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7231908" start="0" end="26" title="Portland Community College" label="Portland Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231908" start="28" end="31" title="Portland Community College" label="PCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="38" end="44" title="Public college" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="45" end="62" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="66" end="82" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q450374" start="190" end="199" title="Multnomah County, Oregon" label="Multnomah"/>
<link wikidata="Q484538" start="201" end="211" title="Washington County, Oregon" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q484346" start="213" end="220" title="Yamhill County, Oregon" label="Yamhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q484404" start="222" end="231" title="Clackamas County, Oregon" label="Clackamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q484385" start="237" end="245" title="Columbia County, Oregon" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319035" start="417" end="432" title="adult education" label="adult education"/>
<link wikidata="Q608234" start="732" end="755" title="Portland Public Schools (Oregon)" label="Portland Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521623" start="1080" end="1084" title="Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design" label="LEED"/>
<link wikidata="Q932637" start="1118" end="1125" title="Newberg, Oregon" label="Newberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="1369" end="1377" title="Carbon neutrality" label="net zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434614" start="1581" end="1594" title="Far Southwest, Portland, Oregon" label="Far Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q81824" start="1723" end="1732" title="Hillsboro, Oregon" label="Hillsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971782" start="1757" end="1781" title="Washington County Museum" label="Washington County Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="2033" end="2056" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="U.S. Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382066" start="2113" end="2139" title="Portland metropolitan area" label="Portland metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q174617" start="2382" end="2386" title="Oregon Museum of Science and Industry" label="OMSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766623" start="2527" end="2533" title="TriMet" label="TriMet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022288" start="2541" end="2568" title="Willow Creek Transit Center" label="Willow Creek Transit Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763578" start="2638" end="2675" title="Hillsboro Intermodal Transit Facility" label="Hillsboro Intermodal Transit Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866847" start="3010" end="3039" title="Northwest Athletic Conference" label="Northwest Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090359" start="3173" end="3182" title="Chemeketa Community College" label="Chemeketa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124879" start="3184" end="3193" title="Clackamas Community College" label="Clackamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930281" start="3195" end="3205" title="Mount Hood Community College" label="Mount Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485363" start="3207" end="3211" title="Lane Community College" label="Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554657" start="3213" end="3224" title="Linn-Benton Community College" label="Linn-Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571442" start="3226" end="3245" title="Southwestern Oregon Community College" label="Southwestern Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881771" start="3251" end="3257" title="Umpqua Community College" label="Umpqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165400" start="3344" end="3369" title="continuing education unit" label="continuing education unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154949" start="3424" end="3443" title="community education" label="community education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759251" start="3631" end="3646" title="Margaret Carter" label="Margaret Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325010" start="3725" end="3739" title="Richard Curtis (politician)" label="Richard Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369653" start="3775" end="3788" title="Karen Gaffney" label="Karen Gaffney"/>
<link wikidata="Q16853382" start="3875" end="3888" title="Samantha Hess" label="Samantha Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q20631215" start="3957" end="3965" title="Jon Hill (chef)" label="Jon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319532" start="4002" end="4014" title="Matt Keeslar" label="Matt Keeslar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12911" start="4023" end="4040" title="Christopher Loeak" label="Christopher Loeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q718550" start="4042" end="4075" title="President of the Marshall Islands" label="President of the Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858104" start="4077" end="4089" title="Nichole Mead" label="Nichole Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301924" start="4109" end="4123" title="Rebecca Skloot" label="Rebecca Skloot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763068" start="4133" end="4143" title="Marie Watt" label="Marie Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116737" start="4166" end="4180" title="Jackie Winters" label="Jackie Winters"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062511" start="4201" end="4216" title="Cameron Whitten" label="Cameron Whitten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075871" start="4218" end="4233" title="Occupy Portland" label="Occupy Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829794" start="4283" end="4298" title="Michael Dembrow" label="Michael Dembrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535980" start="4300" end="4313" title="Lew Frederick" label="Lew Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287509" start="4315" end="4329" title="Ralph Friedman" label="Ralph Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490354" start="4331" end="4344" title="Larry Galizio" label="Larry Galizio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271302" start="4346" end="4358" title="Diana Schutz" label="Diana Schutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287014" start="4360" end="4370" title="Ralf Youtz" label="Ralf Youtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q787669" start="4483" end="4516" title="List of Oregon community colleges" label="List of Oregon community colleges"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423290" wikidata="Q2202921" url="?curid=423290" title="National Front (Czechoslovakia)">
<text>The National Front (; ), also known as the National Front of Czechs and Slovaks was a political coalition created in 1943 serving as united front of political parties for liberation of Czechoslovakia, after 1948 organized solely by the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia. It was the vehicle for control of all political and social activity by the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia (KSČ).

== 1943–1948 ==
As World War II began, Czechoslovakia disappeared from the map of Europe. The Czech lands became the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia under direct Nazi rule, while Slovakia ostensibly became independent. At the end of World War II, Czechoslovakia was included in the sphere of influence of the Soviet Union. Postwar Czechoslovakia was organized according to a program worked out by the KSČ (whose leaders were in exile in Moscow), and Edvard Beneš, representing the government-in-exile in London—these being the two most important groups seeking the reconstitution of the country. Part of the program was the formation of a popular anti-Nazi coalition of parties. Negotiations began in December 1943 in Moscow. The KSČ and the non-Communist parties had very different ideas about this.

This coalition was established as the &quot;National Front&quot; in April 1945, when a Czechoslovak government came into being in the city of Košice, recently liberated by Soviet troops. The model of government was adopted from similar French tripartisme.
The Slovak People&#x27;s Party was banned due to its collaboration with the Nazis. The government decided not to allow the re-creation of other pre-war democratic parties, such as the Republican Party of Farmers and Peasants, due to its lead of the Party of National Unity.

The National Front was dominated by the socialist parties: KSČ (which held key ministerial offices), KSS and ČSSD.

The Communists viewed the National Front as a permanent entity, while the remaining parties considered it a temporary coalition until normal conditions would arise in Czechoslovakia. Many quarrels arose between the KSČ and the remaining parties of the National Front in the transitory period 1945–1948.

===Political parties (1943–1948)===


== 1948–1990 ==
The KSČ definitively seized power in Czechoslovakia on 25 February 1948. The other parties were quickly purged of their more courageous elements, and also dropped their original ideologies. The Front took on a character similar to similar alliances in the Communist bloc. All member parties accepted the &quot;leading role&quot; of the KSČ as a condition of their continued existence.

After the 1948 coup, the member parties were:

* Communist Party of Czechoslovakia (KSČ), incorporated also the ČSSD in June 1948
* Communist Party of Slovakia (CPS), merged with the KSČ in September 1948
* Czechoslovak People&#x27;s Party (ČSL)
* Czechoslovak Socialist Party (ČSS), which had dropped &quot;National&quot; from its name
* (Slovak) Freedom Party (SSL)
* Party of Slovak Revival (SSO) (a pro-Communist reincarnation of the Democratic Party)

The nonsocialist members of the Front were allowed to maintain their existence. Some sources say that it was just an act by KSČ to keep up an appearance of plurality. However, no one could take part in the political process without KSČ approval.

The other parties were structured just like the Communists, with a secretariat, central committee, and Presidium. Despite their actual impotence and subservience, they retained significant memberships through the entire Communist era. In 1984, the CPP had about 66,000 members, and the CNSP had about 17,000 members. Voters were presented with a single list of National Front-approved candidates, which was usually approved by margins of well over 99 percent against fewer than one percent who either rejected the list or cast blank or spoiled ballots. Non-KSČ candidates were represented, but seats were allocated in accordance with a set quota that guaranteed a large Communist majority.

In 1969, the country was re-organized as a federation of the Czech Socialist Republic and Slovak Socialist Republic. Separate National Front organizations for each federal component were set up, which nominated candidates for the Czech National Council and Slovak National Council.

In other Communist states, there were similar coalitions with identical names (in East Germany) or similar names, (Poland, Bulgaria, and Vietnam).

===Political parties (1948–1990)===


==Other civil organizations==
After the 1948 coup, the National Front was converted into a broad-based patriotic organization that controlled nearly all organized activity in the country, excluding only religion. Thus the Front was extended to include mass organizations that were not political parties. Among the other member organizations which were made full members were:

* Revolutionary Trade Union Movement (to which all unions belonged)
* Socialist Union of Youth (1.5 million members)
* Union for Czechoslovak-Soviet Friendship
* Czechoslovak Union of Women (1 million members)
* Czechoslovak Red Cross
* Union of Agricultural Cooperatives
* Union of Anti-Fascist Fighters
* Svazarm (Union for Cooperation with the Army)
* National Peace Committee
* Physical Culture Association
* Union of Philatelists

All these groups were given the standard Communist organization, and Party members held all controlling positions in these, even as they did not send elected deputies to parliament. This ensured that no secular organization could exist wholly independent of KSČ leadership. These groups permeated workplaces, schools, and neighborhoods. As with the Front, many of these organizations added Czech and Slovak regional components in 1969 and after.

==End of the National Front==
After the Velvet Revolution of 1989 ended Communist rule, the National Front was dissolved.

== Electoral history ==

=== National Assembly elections ===
=== House of the People and House of Nations elections ===
== See also ==

* Polish Committee of National Liberation/Front of National Unity
* Politics of Communist Czechoslovakia
* Vietnamese Fatherland Front
* National Front
* Fatherland Front
* People&#x27;s Democratic Front/Front of Socialist Unity and Democracy
* United Front
* Democratic Front for the Reunification of the Fatherland
* Lao Front for National Construction
* National United Front of Kampuchea

==Further reading==
*Kaplan, Karel. &quot;Pět kapitol o Únoru&quot;. Brno: Doplněk, 1997, .

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2202921" start="4" end="18" title="National Front (Czechoslovakia)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202921" start="43" end="79" title="National Front (Czechoslovakia)" label="National Front of Czechs and Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="236" end="269" title="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia" label="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="407" end="419" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q152750" start="505" end="540" title="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia" label="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="554" end="558" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="571" end="579" title="Slovak Republic (1939–1945)" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090550" start="674" end="693" title="Soviet sphere of influence" label="sphere of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="701" end="713" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q152274" start="842" end="854" title="Edvard Beneš" label="Edvard Beneš"/>
<link wikidata="Q430161" start="873" end="892" title="Czechoslovak government-in-exile" label="government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="1336" end="1342" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487675" start="1437" end="1448" title="tripartisme" label="tripartisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q693985" start="1454" end="1480" title="Slovak People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Slovak People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568847" start="1634" end="1674" title="Republican Party of Farmers and Peasants" label="Republican Party of Farmers and Peasants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267256" start="1699" end="1722" title="Party of National Unity (Czechoslovakia)" label="Party of National Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137957" start="2207" end="2232" title="Czechoslovak coup d&amp;#x27;état of 1948" label="definitively seized power"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="2634" end="2667" title="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia" label="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751122" start="2717" end="2744" title="Communist Party of Slovakia (1939)" label="Communist Party of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142687" start="2792" end="2824" title="Christian and Democratic Union – Czechoslovak People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Czechoslovak People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q341111" start="2833" end="2861" title="Czechoslovak National Socialist Party" label="Czechoslovak Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858670" start="2924" end="2946" title="Freedom Party (Slovakia)" label="(Slovak) Freedom Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581594" start="2955" end="2978" title="Party of Slovak Revival" label="Party of Slovak Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529439" start="4210" end="4232" title="Czech National Council" label="Czech National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q394078" start="4237" end="4260" title="Slovak National Council" label="Slovak National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q704655" start="4345" end="4357" title="National Front of the German Democratic Republic" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164782" start="4378" end="4384" title="Patriotic Movement for National Rebirth" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453048" start="4386" end="4394" title="Bulgarian Fatherland Front" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628865" start="4400" end="4407" title="Vietnamese Fatherland Front" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318937" start="4828" end="4862" title="Revoluční odborové hnutí" label="Revolutionary Trade Union Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q106413886" start="4896" end="4920" title="Socialist Union of Youth" label="Socialist Union of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4945" end="4985" title="Union for Czechoslovak-Soviet Friendship" label="Union for Czechoslovak-Soviet Friendship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4988" end="5015" title="Czechoslovak Union of Women" label="Czechoslovak Union of Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="5038" end="5060" title="Red Cross" label="Czechoslovak Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5063" end="5097" title="Union of Agricultural Cooperatives" label="Union of Agricultural Cooperatives"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5100" end="5130" title="Union of Anti-Fascist Fighters" label="Union of Anti-Fascist Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4177743" start="5133" end="5140" title="Svazarm" label="Svazarm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5208" end="5236" title="Physical Culture Association" label="Physical Culture Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q131026" start="5248" end="5260" title="Philately" label="Philatelists"/>
<link wikidata="Q182817" start="5749" end="5766" title="Velvet Revolution" label="Velvet Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q40147" start="5970" end="6009" title="Polish Committee of National Liberation" label="Polish Committee of National Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021587" start="6010" end="6033" title="Front of National Unity" label="Front of National Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225224" start="6036" end="6072" title="Politics of Communist Czechoslovakia" label="Politics of Communist Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628865" start="6075" end="6102" title="Vietnamese Fatherland Front" label="Vietnamese Fatherland Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q704655" start="6105" end="6119" title="National Front (East Germany)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453048" start="6122" end="6138" title="Fatherland Front (Bulgaria)" label="Fatherland Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848882" start="6141" end="6171" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Front (Romania)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q12728623" start="6172" end="6210" title="Front of Socialist Unity and Democracy" label="Front of Socialist Unity and Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q835396" start="6213" end="6225" title="United Front (China)" label="United Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q49632" start="6228" end="6284" title="Democratic Front for the Reunification of the Fatherland" label="Democratic Front for the Reunification of the Fatherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164164" start="6287" end="6322" title="Lao Front for National Construction" label="Lao Front for National Construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598946" start="6325" end="6359" title="National United Front of Kampuchea" label="National United Front of Kampuchea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423294" wikidata="Q223872" url="?curid=423294" title="Samba (disambiguation)">
<text>Samba may also refer to:
==Dance==

*Samba (Brazilian dance), a genre of Afro-Brazilian dance
*Samba (ballroom dance), a ballroom dance
*Samba de Gafieira, a Brazilian ballroom dance

==Music==

* Samba, genre originating from Rio de Janeiro
* Caipira samba, a subgenre of Caipira music

*Samba rock, a subgenre of samba
*&quot;Samba!&quot;, a 1962 album by Edmundo Ros
*&quot;Samba&quot; (album), a 2005 album by Twins
* &quot;Samba&quot; (song), a 2011 song by Ricky Martin from the album &quot;Música + Alma + Sexo&quot;

==Places==
*Samba, Jammu and Kashmir, a town in Jammu and Kashmir, India
*Samba district, a district in Jammu and Kashmir, India
*Samba, Iran, a village in South Khorasan Province, Iran
*Samba, Luanda, a municipality in Luanda Province, Angola
*Samba Department including the town Samba, Burkina Faso

==People==
*Abderrahman Samba (born 1995), Qatari track athlete
*Bindi Hindowa Samba, Sierra Leonean paramount chief
*Martin-Paul Samba (1875–1914), Cameroonian collaborator with and later rebel against German rule
*Christopher Samba (born 1984), French football player
*Cherno Samba (born 1985), Gambian-British football player
*Brice Samba (born 1994), Congolese football player
*Simon Samba (1929-?), Central African politician
*Léopold Ismael Samba (1946-2022), Central African civil servant and diplomat

==Games and sport==
*Samba (shoe), a brand of indoor soccer shoe made by Adidas
*Samba (card game), a variant of canasta
*Salinas Valley Samba, a soccer team in the National Premier Soccer League

==Films==
*&quot;Samba&quot; (1965 film), a Brazilian-Spanish musical film
*&quot;Samba&quot; (1996 film), a Hungarian comedy film
*&quot;Samba&quot; (2004 film), a Telugu-language Indian film
*&quot;Samba&quot; (2014 film), a French comedy drama film

==Brands, companies, technology and engineering==
*Samba (software), cross-platform network file and printer sharing suite
*MacWWW, also known as Samba, an early Macintosh Web browser
*Samba, a Cluster II satellite
*Samba (bus), a name for one variation of the Volkswagen Type 2
*Talbot Samba, a car produced by PSA Group 1981-1986
*Cosmos Samba, ultralight trike aircraft
*Samba TV, a smart TV company
*Samba Financial Group, a banking firm in Saudi Arabia, formerly the Saudi American Bank

==Other==
*Samba (Krishna&#x27;s son), a son of the Hindu god Krishna
*Samba (rice), a variety of rice grown in India and Sri Lanka

==See also==
* 
* Sambar (disambiguation)
* Shamba (disambiguation)
* Shambu (disambiguation)
*Sambha (&quot;Sholay&quot;), a fictional sidekick of the dacoit Gabbar Singh, played by Mac Mohan in the 1975 classic Indian film &quot;Sholay&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q223872" start="0" end="5" title="Samba (disambiguation)" label="Samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375949" start="37" end="60" title="Samba (Brazilian dance)" label="Samba (Brazilian dance)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340043" start="95" end="117" title="Samba (ballroom dance)" label="Samba (ballroom dance)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470688" start="137" end="154" title="Samba de Gafieira" label="Samba de Gafieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q11403" start="197" end="202" title="Samba" label="Samba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="244" end="257" title="Caipira samba" label="Caipira samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q834959" start="289" end="299" title="Samba rock" label="Samba rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q723974" start="358" end="369" title="Edmundo Ros" label="Edmundo Ros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408945" start="371" end="396" title="Samba (album)" label="&amp;quot;Samba&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9333098" start="422" end="446" title="Samba (song)" label="&amp;quot;Samba&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731787" start="537" end="561" title="Samba, Jammu and Kashmir" label="Samba, Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117086" start="599" end="613" title="Samba district" label="Samba district"/>
<link wikidata="Q5723305" start="655" end="666" title="Samba, Iran" label="Samba, Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006431" start="712" end="725" title="Samba, Luanda" label="Samba, Luanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216901" start="770" end="786" title="Samba Department" label="Samba Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q29831361" start="839" end="856" title="Abderrahman Samba" label="Abderrahman Samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913997" start="892" end="911" title="Bindi Hindowa Samba" label="Bindi Hindowa Samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774828" start="945" end="962" title="Martin-Paul Samba" label="Martin-Paul Samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q334554" start="1043" end="1060" title="Christopher Samba" label="Christopher Samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070294" start="1098" end="1110" title="Cherno Samba" label="Cherno Samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627817" start="1157" end="1168" title="Brice Samba" label="Brice Samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q128405279" start="1209" end="1220" title="Simon Samba" label="Simon Samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q128798891" start="1259" end="1279" title="Léopold Ismael Samba" label="Léopold Ismael Samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682715" start="1358" end="1370" title="Samba (shoe)" label="Samba (shoe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q278854" start="1418" end="1435" title="Samba (card game)" label="Samba (card game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404667" start="1459" end="1479" title="Salinas Valley Samba" label="Salinas Valley Samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q21646960" start="1545" end="1574" title="Samba (1965 film)" label="&amp;quot;Samba&amp;quot; (1965 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20439246" start="1610" end="1639" title="Samba (1996 film)" label="&amp;quot;Samba&amp;quot; (1996 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408948" start="1666" end="1695" title="Samba (2004 film)" label="&amp;quot;Samba&amp;quot; (2004 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16675434" start="1728" end="1757" title="Samba (2014 film)" label="&amp;quot;Samba&amp;quot; (2014 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1830735" start="1838" end="1854" title="Samba (software)" label="Samba (software)"/>
<link wikidata="Q838371" start="1911" end="1917" title="MacWWW" label="MacWWW"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1981" end="2001" title="Cluster II (spacecraft)#Mission overview" label="Cluster II satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506917" start="2003" end="2014" title="Samba (bus)" label="Samba (bus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q629268" start="2067" end="2079" title="Talbot Samba" label="Talbot Samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q275623" start="2099" end="2108" title="PSA Group" label="PSA Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174618" start="2120" end="2132" title="Cosmos Samba" label="Cosmos Samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459453" start="2161" end="2169" title="Samba TV" label="Samba TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408955" start="2191" end="2212" title="Samba Financial Group" label="Samba Financial Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841495" start="2291" end="2317" title="Samba (Krishna&amp;#x27;s son)" label="Samba (Krishna&amp;#x27;s son)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408949" start="2351" end="2363" title="Samba (rice)" label="Samba (rice)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210138" start="2431" end="2454" title="Sambar (disambiguation)" label="Sambar (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487438" start="2457" end="2480" title="Shamba (disambiguation)" label="Shamba (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q117305061" start="2483" end="2506" title="Shambu (disambiguation)" label="Shambu (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q949228" start="2508" end="2535" title="Sambha (Sholay)" label="Sambha (&amp;quot;Sholay&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515286" start="2572" end="2584" title="Gabbar Singh (character)" label="Gabbar Singh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423298" wikidata="Q471447" url="?curid=423298" title="Foil (fencing)">
<text>A foil is one of the three weapons used in the sport of fencing. It is a flexible sword of total length or under, rectangular in cross section, weighing under , with a blunt tip. As with the épée, points are only scored by making contact with the tip. The foil is the most commonly used weapon in fencing.

== Non-electric and electric foils ==
===Background===
There are two types of foil used in modern fencing. Both types are made with the same basic parts: the pommel, grip, guard, and blade. The difference between them is one is electric, and the other is known as &quot;steam&quot; or &quot;dry&quot;. The blades of both varieties are capped with a plastic or rubber piece, with a button at the tip in electric blades, that provides information when the blade tip touches the opponent. (There are also a range of plastic swords made by varying manufacturers for use by juniors.) Lacking the button and associated electrical mechanism, a judge is required to determine the scoring and the victor in a tournament with non-electric foils.

Non-electric ones are primarily used for practice. The Fédération Internationale d&#x27;Escrime and most national organizations require electric scoring apparatus since the 1956 Olympics, although some organizations still fence competitively with non-electric swords.

=== Blade ===
Foils have standardized, tapered, rectangular blades in length and cross-section that are made of tempered and annealed low-carbon steel—or maraging steel as required for international competitions. To prevent the blade from breaking or causing harm to an opponent, the blade is made to bend upon impact with its target. The maximum length of the blade must be . The length of the assembled weapon at maximum is , and the maximum weight must be less than ; however, most competition foils are lighter, closer to .

The blade of a foil has two sections: the (strong) which is the one third of the blade near the guard, and the (weak) which is the two thirds of the blade near the tip. There is a part of the blade contained within the grip called a tang. It extends past the grip enough to be fastened to the pommel and to hold the rest of the foil together. When an Italian grip is used, see below, a ricasso extends from under the guard, inside of the grip&#x27;s quillons, into the tang.

=== Guard assembly ===
The guard is fastened to the blade, plug, and grip. Then the pommel, a type of fastener, is attached to the grip and holds the rest together. The type of pommel used depends on the type of grip. Two grips are used in foil: straight traditional grips with external pommels (Italian, French, Spanish, and orthopedic varieties); and the newer design of pistol grips, which fix the hand in a specific, ergonomic position, and which have pommels that fit into a countersink in the grip.

===Electric foils===

Beginning with the 1956 Olympics, scoring in foil has been accomplished by means of registering the touch with an electric circuit. A switch at the tip of the foil registers the touch, and a metallic foil vest, or &quot;lamé&quot;, verifies that the touch is on valid target.

==== Cord ====

The cord of any type of electric fencing weapon goes through the fencing gear, coming out behind the fencer. The cord of a foil has one end connecting to the back of the fencing strip, and the other end attaches to the foil. The two ends are not interchangeable with one another.

==== Socket ====
The electric foil contains a socket underneath the guard that connects to the scoring apparatus via the body cord and a wire that runs down a channel cut into the top of the blade. Electric foil sockets are fixed so that the body cord plugs into the weapon at the fencer&#x27;s wrist. There are two main sockets in use today: the &quot;bayonette&quot; which has a single prong and twists-locks into the foil, and the two prong, which has different diameters for each prong, held in place by a clip.

==== Tip ====
The tip of the electric foil terminates in a button assembly that generally consists of a barrel, plunger, spring, and retaining screws. The circuit is a &quot;normally closed&quot; one, meaning that at rest there is always a complete power circuit; depressing the tip breaks this circuit, and the scoring apparatus illuminates an appropriate light. Color-coding is used: white or yellow indicates hits not on the valid target area, and either red or green indicate hits on the valid target area (red for one fencer, green for the other). When fencing, the FIA (international fencing federation) states that the tip requires a minimum of 500 grams to complete the circuit.

== History ==

The modern foil is the training weapon for the small-sword, the common sidearm of 18th century gentleman.
Rapier and even longsword foils are also known to have been used, but their weight and use were very different.
Although the foil as a blunted weapon for sword practice goes back to the 16th century (for example, in &quot;Hamlet&quot;, Shakespeare writes &quot;let
the foils be brought&quot;), the use as a weapon for sport is more recent. The foil was used in France as a training weapon in the middle of the 18th century in order to practice fast and elegant thrust fencing. Fencers blunted the point by wrapping a foil around the blade or fastening a knob on the point (&quot;blossom&quot;, French &quot;fleuret&quot;). In addition to practicing, some fencers took away the protection and used the sharp foil for duels. German students took up that practice in academic fencing and developed the &quot;Pariser&quot; (&quot;Parisian&quot;) thrusting small sword for the &quot;Stoßmensur&quot; (&quot;thrusting mensur&quot;).

The target area for modern foil is said to come from a time when fencing was practiced with limited safety equipment. Another factor in the target area is that foil rules are derived from a period when dueling to the death was the norm. Hence, the favored target area is the torso, where the vital organs are.

In 1896, foil (and sabre) were included as events in the first Olympic Games in Athens.

=== Women&#x27;s foil ===
Women&#x27;s foil was first competed at the Olympics in 1924 in Paris,
and was the only Olympic fencing event in which women competed until women&#x27;s épée was introduced at the 1996 Olympics.

In 1940 the Amateur Fencers League of America issued a new rule book stating that women were allowed to compete in foil (in bouts to four points or eight minutes), but touches below the waist (delineated by a dark-colored sash) were off-target. In 1957 they issued a new rule book including alternate rules for 8-point bouts (women&#x27;s foil) and 10-point bouts (men at all weapons), with a requirement of a two-point advantage (15-minute time limit). In 1965 they issued a new rule book in which the target area for women&#x27;s foil was made the same as that for men&#x27;s foil.

=== Ratings ===
Ratings/Rankings are generally run by national fencing federations and use varying scales based on that particular federations system. These ratings are used as the basis for initial seeding into the pool rounds of tournaments and vary country to country.

=== Groups ===
Age groups are necessary to separate skill and body maturity levels in order to create a level playing field. The current age groups for foil (and also épée and sabre) are Y10 (age 10 and under), Y12 (age 12 and under), Y14 (age 14 and under), cadet (age 16 and under), junior (age 19 and under), and senior (anything over 19). While an older competitor cannot compete in a younger category, the contrary is allowed and encouraged, in order to expedite learning.

The veteran age group consists of 40 and over, 60 and over, and 70 and over sub-groups.

== Rules ==

The rules for the sport of fencing are regulated by national sporting associations—in the United States, the United States Fencing Association (USFA) and internationally by the International Fencing Federation (FIE).

The detailed rules for foil are listed in the USFA Rulebook.

Rules for the sport of fencing date back to the 19th century. The current international rules for foil were adopted by the FIE Committee for Foil on 12 June 1914. They are based on previous sets of rules adopted by national associations. The rules governing the use of electrical judging apparatus were adopted in 1957 and have been amended several times.

=== Scoring ===
The foil is used as a thrusting (or point) weapon only. Contact with the side of the blade (a slap or slash) does not result in a score. The tip of the foil must be depressed for at least 15 (± .5) milliseconds while in contact with the opponent&#x27;s lamé (wire-mesh jacket which covers valid target area) to score a touch. The foil lamé only covers the torso while in sabre it covers the whole upper body. The tip must be able to support a minimum force of 4.90 newtons (500 grams-force) without the circuit breaking. This is tested with a 500g (± 3g) weight.

=== Target area ===

In foil the valid target area includes the torso (including the lower part of the bib of the mask) and the groin. The head (except the lower part of the bib of the mask), arms, and legs are considered off target. Touches made off-target do not count for points, but do stop play. Touches to the guard are the only touches that do not stop play. The target area has been changed multiple times, with the latest change consisting of adding the bottom half of the bib to the target zone.

=== Priority (right of way) ===
Foil competition and scoring is governed by the rules of priority, also known as right of way. Originally meant to indicate which competitor would have scored the touch (or lethally injured the other), it is now a main contributor to the appeal of the sport of fencing. In essence, it decides who receives the point (there can only be one competitor that receives a point per engagement) when both competitors hit.

The basic rules are whoever the referee judges to be the attacking fencer has &quot;priority&quot;. This &quot;priority&quot; can be changed in several ways. The first is the defending fencer deflects the attack from the fencer with &quot;priority&quot; with the (strong) of their blade (a &quot;parry&quot;). This switches the &quot;priority&quot; to the fencer who just parried. The second way priority can be switched is if the attacking fencer&#x27;s attack misses (this is generally judged off the attacking fencer&#x27;s arm extension. The final major way &quot;priority&quot; can be shifted is if the defending fencer &quot;beats&quot; their opponent&#x27;s blade (this can also be used by the attacking fencer to make it clear to the referee that they are continuing their attack) this involves striking the (weak) of their opponents blade with their own. If both fencers are judged by the referee to be seeking to beat each other&#x27;s blades then the fencer who is on the attack is favored.

== See also ==

* Sabre (fencing)
* Épée
* Colichemarde
* Rapier
== References ==
== External links ==

* – International Fencing Federation
* Components of a Foil
* U.S. Fencing organization home page
* Fédération Internationale d&#x27;Escrime organisation home page&amp;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q471447" start="2" end="6" title="Foil (fencing)" label="foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100" start="56" end="63" title="fencing" label="fencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791" start="82" end="87" title="sword" label="sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q840419" start="191" end="195" title="épée" label="épée"/>
<link wikidata="Q178695" start="1099" end="1139" title="Fédération Internationale d&amp;#x27;Escrime" label="Fédération Internationale d&amp;#x27;Escrime"/>
<link wikidata="Q685487" start="1425" end="1433" title="tempering (metallurgy)" label="tempered"/>
<link wikidata="Q187360" start="1438" end="1446" title="Annealing (metallurgy)" label="annealed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855903" start="1467" end="1481" title="maraging steel" label="maraging steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q927227" start="2228" end="2235" title="ricasso" label="ricasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355832" start="2292" end="2300" title="quillons" label="quillons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355195" start="2311" end="2315" title="Tang (tools)" label="tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q904243" start="2530" end="2534" title="Grip (sport fencing)" label="grip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750812" start="2739" end="2748" title="ergonomics" label="ergonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8411" start="2865" end="2878" title="1956 Summer Olympics" label="1956 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23954892" start="4687" end="4698" title="small-sword" label="small-sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q848342" start="4762" end="4771" title="longsword" label="longsword"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="4968" end="4974" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="4982" end="4993" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q512229" start="5510" end="5526" title="academic fencing" label="academic fencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740519" start="6308" end="6341" title="Amateur Fencers League of America" label="Amateur Fencers League of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889884" start="7844" end="7877" title="United States Fencing Association" label="United States Fencing Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q553495" start="8641" end="8645" title="lamé (fencing)" label="lamé"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438" start="8853" end="8860" title="Newton (unit)" label="newtons"/>
<link wikidata="Q216880" start="8866" end="8877" title="kilogram-force" label="grams-force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156606" start="10928" end="10943" title="Sabre (fencing)" label="Sabre (fencing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q840419" start="10946" end="10950" title="Épée" label="Épée"/>
<link wikidata="Q127057" start="10953" end="10965" title="Colichemarde" label="Colichemarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q816745" start="10968" end="10974" title="Rapier" label="Rapier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423300" wikidata="Q377764" url="?curid=423300" title="STS-8">
<text>STS-8 was the eighth NASA Space Shuttle mission and the third flight of the Space Shuttle &quot;Challenger&quot;. It launched on August 30, 1983, and landed on September 5, 1983, conducting the first night launch and night landing of the Space Shuttle program. It also carried the first African-American astronaut, Guion Bluford. The mission successfully achieved all of its planned research objectives, but was marred by the subsequent discovery that a solid-fuel rocket booster had almost malfunctioned catastrophically during the launch.

The mission&#x27;s primary payload was INSAT-1B, an Indian communications and weather observation satellite, which was released by the orbiter and boosted into a geostationary orbit. The secondary payload, replacing a delayed NASA communications satellite, was a four-metric-ton dummy payload, intended to test the use of the shuttle&#x27;s Canadarm (remote manipulator system). Scientific experiments carried on board &quot;Challenger&quot; included the environmental testing of new hardware and materials designed for future spacecraft, the study of biological materials in electric fields under microgravity, and research into space adaptation syndrome (also known as &quot;space sickness&quot;). The flight furthermore served as shakedown testing for the previously launched TDRS-1 satellite, which would be required to support the subsequent STS-9 mission.

== Crew ==
This mission had a crew of five, with three mission specialists. It was the second mission (after STS-7) to fly with a crew of five, the largest carried by a single spacecraft up to that date. The crew was historically notable for the participation of Guion Bluford, who became the first African-American to fly in space.

The commander, Truly, was the only veteran astronaut of the crew, having flown as the pilot on STS-2 in 1981 and for two of the Approach and Landing Tests (ALT) aboard &quot;Enterprise&quot; in 1977. Prior to this, he had worked as a capsule communicator (CAPCOM) for all three Skylab missions and the ASTP mission. Brandenstein, Gardner and Bluford had all been recruited in 1978, and been training for a mission since 1979. The mission had originally been planned for a crew of four, with Thornton added to the crew as a third mission specialist in December 1982, eight months after the crew was originally named. As with Truly, he was an Apollo-era recruit, having joined NASA in 1967. His participation on the mission included a series of tests aimed at gathering information on the physiological changes linked with Space Adaptation Syndrome, more commonly known as &quot;space sickness&quot;; this had become a focus of attention in NASA, as astronauts succumbed to it during Shuttle missions.

The orbiter carried two Extravehicular Mobility Unit (EMUs) for use in case of an emergency spacewalk; if needed, they would be used by Truly and Gardner.

=== Crew seat assignments ===
== Mission plan and payloads ==
An early plan for STS-8, released in April 1982, had scheduled it for July 1983. It was expected to be a three-day mission with four crew members, and would launch INSAT-1B, an Indian satellite, and TDRS-B, a NASA communications relay satellite. However, following problems with the Inertial Upper Stage (IUS) used to deploy TDRS-A on the STS-6 mission, it was announced in May 1983 that the TDRS was not going to be flown. It was replaced in the manifest by the Payload Flight Test Article. After re-development of the IUS, TDRS-B was eventually re-manifested for the STS-51-L mission, and was lost along with the Space Shuttle &quot;Challenger&quot; and its crew when the launch failed in January 1986.

The primary element of the STS-8 mission payload was INSAT-1B. It was the second in a series of multi-purpose weather and communications satellites to be operated by the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO); the first, INSAT-1A, had been launched by a Delta launch vehicle in April 1982, but had to be shut down shortly afterwards due to a failure of the onboard
reaction control system (RCS). The satellite was carried in the rear of the shuttle&#x27;s payload bay, and was boosted into a Geostationary transfer orbit (GTO) by a Payload Assist Module (PAM-D), a small solid rocket upper stage, after its release from the orbiter. The satellite, with its upper stage, massed a total of , with the cradle massing another , and had cost around US$50 million.

The Payload Flight Test Article (PFTA) had been scheduled for launch in June 1984 on STS-16 in the April 1982 manifest, but by May 1983 it had been brought forward to STS-11. That month, when the TDRS missions were delayed, it was brought forward to STS-8 to fill the hole in the manifest. It was an aluminum structure resembling two wheels with a long central axle, ballasted with lead to give it a total mass of , which could be lifted by the &quot;Canadarm&quot; Remote Manipulator System – the Shuttle&#x27;s &quot;robot arm&quot; – and moved around to help astronauts gain experience in using the system. It was stored in the midsection of the payload bay.

The orbiter carried the Development Flight Instrumentation (DFI) pallet in its forward payload bay; this had previously flown on &quot;Columbia&quot; to carry test equipment. The pallet was not outfitted with any flight instrumentation, but was used to mount two experiments. The first studied the interaction of ambient atomic oxygen with the structural materials of the orbiter and payload, while the second tested the performance of a heat pipe designed for use in the heat rejection systems of future spacecraft.

Four Getaway Special (GAS) payloads were carried. One studied the effects of cosmic rays on electronic equipment. The second studied the effect of the gas environment around the orbiter using ultraviolet absorption measurements, as a precursor to ultraviolet equipment being designed for Spacelab 2. A third, sponsored by the Japanese &quot;Asahi Shimbun&quot; newspaper, tried to use water vapor in two tanks to create snow crystals. This was a second attempt at an experiment first flown on STS-6, which had had to be redesigned after the water in the tanks froze solid. The last was similar to an experiment flown on STS-3, and studied the ambient levels of atomic oxygen by measuring the rates at which small carbon and osmium wafers oxidized.

The mission, in cooperation with the United States Postal Service (USPS), also carried 260,000 postal covers franked with US$9.35 express postage stamps, which were to be sold to collectors, with the profits divided between the USPS and NASA. Two storage boxes were attached to the DFI pallet, with more stored in six of the Getaway Special canisters.

A number of other experiments were to be performed inside the orbiter crew compartment. Among these was the Continuous Flow Electrophoresis System, being flown for the fourth time. This separated solutions of biological materials by passing electric fields through them; the experiment aimed at supporting research into diabetes treatments. A small animal cage was flown containing six rats; no animal experiment was carried out on the flight, but a student involvement project was planned for a later mission which would use the cage, and NASA wanted to ensure it was flight-tested. The student involvement project carried out on STS-8 involved William E. Thornton using biofeedback techniques, to try to determine if they worked in microgravity. A photography experiment would attempt to study the spectrum of a luminous atmospheric glow which had been reported around the orbiter, and determine how this interacted with firings of the reaction control system (RCS).

The mission was also scheduled to carry out a series of tests with the TDRS-1 satellite which had been deployed by STS-6, to ensure the system was fully operational before it was used to support the Spacelab program on the upcoming STS-9 flight. The orbiter furthermore carried equipment to allow for encrypted transmissions, to be tested for use in future classified missions.

=== Support crew ===
* John E. Blaha
* Mary L. Cleave
* William F. Fisher
* Jeffrey A. Hoffman
* Bryan D. O&#x27;Connor (ascent CAPCOM)

== Mission summary ==
=== Launch preparations ===
Preparation for the mission began on June 3, 1983, with the assembly of the shuttle&#x27;s solid rocket boosters (SRB) on the Mobile Launcher Platform. The boosters were stacked on June 20, 1983, and the external tank (ET) mated to the assembly on June 23, 1983. &quot;Challenger&quot; arrived at Kennedy Space Center on June 29, 1983, and was transferred to the Orbiter Processing Facility on June 30, 1983. After post-flight maintenance and preparation for the new mission, including the installation of most flight payloads, the shuttle was transferred to the Vehicle Assembly Building on July 27, 1983, and mated to the booster/tank stack. The stack was checked out on July 29 and 30, 1983, and moved to Launch Complex 39A on August 2, 1983. INSAT-1B was loaded into the orbiter when on the pad; the overall processing time from &quot;Challenger&quot; arriving at KSC to being ready for launch was only sixty-two days, a record for the program at the time.

The launch had originally been scheduled for on August 4, 1983, and was later rescheduled for on August 20, 1983. The requirement to conduct testing with the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) required a delay of ten days for the system to be ready, during which the stack remained on the launch pad. During the on-pad delay, Hurricane Barry (1983) hit the Florida coastline, making landfall just south of the Kennedy Space Center on the morning of August 25, 1983. The storm had only been identified two days earlier, and there was no time to roll &quot;Challenger&quot; back from the pad; the decision was made to secure the launch stack and ride out the storm.

=== Launch ===
&quot;Challenger&quot; finally launched at 06:32:00 UTC (02:32:00 EDT) on August 30, 1983, after a final 17-minute delay due to thunderstorms near the launch site. The launch window extended from 06:15 to 06:49. The countdown to launch was called by Mark Hess, public information officer.

The launch, which occurred in pre-dawn darkness, was the first American night launch since Apollo 17, and was watched by several thousand spectators. The unusual launching time was due to tracking requirements for the primary payload, INSAT-1B; the program would not have another night launch until STS-61-B in 1985. The crew had attempted to prepare for it by training in darkened simulators so as to keep their night vision, but in practice it was discovered that the light of the solid-fuel rocket boosters made the immediate area around the launchpad virtually as bright as a day launch.

The launch was the first to use a newly developed high-performance motor for the solid rocket boosters, which gave approximately 7% greater thrust. Post-flight analysis later showed there was nearly a burn-through of the rocket casing, a significant problem that later doomed the 51-L mission (see &quot;Post-flight safety analysis&quot; section below for more). This launch was also the second-to-last to use the original standard-mass steel casings for the boosters. These had been replaced by a thinner case, saving some , on STS-6 and STS-7, but because of safety concerns the next two flights used the conventional cases.

=== Orbital operations ===
After a successful insertion into a circular orbit at , the first experiments began; the first two samples were run through the Continuous Flow Electrophoresis System, and measurements were taken for the atmospheric luminosities study. A hydraulic circulation pump failed, but this was worked around and it proved to have no impact on operations.

The major event of the second day (August 31, 1983) was the successful deployment of the INSAT-1B satellite, which took place at 07:48 UTC, with &quot;Challenger&quot; then maneuvering to avoid the firing of the booster motor forty minutes later. Other experimentation continued, though telemetry through TDRS was lost for around three hours, requiring manual intervention. A fire alarm sounded in the morning, indicating signs of a fire in the avionics compartment, but a second alarm remained silent and it was eventually determined to be a false alarm.

On the third and fourth days (September 1 and 2, 1983), work began with the Canadarm Remote Manipulator System and the payload test article, and communications testing through TDRS continued. The former was successful, but the latter lost contact on a number of occasions, due to problems at the White Sands ground station. As a result, the crew had to be awakened early on September 1, 1983, in order to deal with the problem. A minor cabin pressure leak on September 2, 1983, was traced to the waste management system, and quickly controlled. The orbiter performed an Orbital Maneuvering System (OMS) firing on September 2, 1983, to place itself in a lower orbit, where the air density was higher and the oxygen interaction experiments would work more effectively.

On the fifth day (September 3, 1983), testing of the Canadarm continued, including a number of optional &quot;shopping list&quot; tests, and the TDRS tests were carried out with more success. A live press conference was held late in the day, the first in-flight press conference since Apollo 17. On the sixth day (September 4, 1983), experiment runs were completed and the crew prepared to deorbit. Two systems failures were recorded on this last day, the most serious of which involved a synchronization failure in one of the onboard computers.

While on orbit, &quot;Challenger&quot; made a number of altitude and attitude adjustments, in order to test the behavior of a Shuttle orbiter and to perform some experiments in different thermal conditions. By exposing or shading areas from the sun in an unusual way, it was possible to induce particularly warm or cold conditions and observe any resulting problems.

=== Landing ===
The mission plan called for a landing at Edwards Air Force Base, California, at 121:28 mission elapsed time (MET). On the original plan, this would have been at 07:44 UTC on September 4, 1983, before accounting for the last-minute launch delay; in the event, this was put back by one day to allow for further communications testing, and &quot;Challenger&quot; touched down at 07:40:33 UTC (00:40:33 PDT), September 5, 1983, on Runway 22 at Edwards Air Force Base, on the morning of the seventh day of the mission. As with the launch, this was the first night landing of the program. The Shuttle orbiters had no on-board lights, due to the difficulty of designing landing lights to survive re-entry, and so the runway was lit by high-intensity xenon arc lamps to guide the orbiter in. There was no pressing operational requirement for a night landing, but there was a desire to prove it was possible. Footage of the landing was shown in the 1986 film &quot;SpaceCamp&quot;.

== Post-flight safety analysis ==
The launch was carried out with no obvious anomalies, but on September 27, 1983, during post-flight inspection of the solid rocket boosters, severe corrosion was discovered in the left-hand booster. The three--thick resin lining protecting the rocket nozzle, which was designed to erode about half its thickness during firing, was found to have burned down to as little as in places. By some estimations, this left around 14 seconds of firing time before the nozzle would have ruptured, a situation which would have resulted in loss of control and the probable break-up of the spacecraft. It was later determined that this fault was due to the particular batch of resin used on this set of boosters. The burn-through problem was treated as a small mishap by the media, and did not receive significant interest until after the &quot;Challenger&quot; disaster in 1986; the only major contemporary public criticism came from NASA&#x27;s Soviet counterparts. As a result of this incident, the flight of STS-9 was delayed for a month while the nozzles of its boosters were changed.

Post-flight inspection of the thermal protection system tiles found seven major debris impacts and forty-nine minor impacts, of which three and twenty-six respectively were on the orbiter&#x27;s underside. This was the lowest incidence of major tile damage until at least STS-74, and compares very favorably with the program average of twenty-three major impacts to the underside. It was the first Shuttle flight with no significant problems reported for the thermal protection system. Three windows were removed from the orbiter due to pitting and hazing.

A total of thirty-three in-flight anomalies were eventually reported. As well as the issues above, STS-8&#x27;s more minor problems ranged from faulty thermostats to an unusually high amount of dust in the cabin.

== Scientific results ==
Overall, the crew successfully completed all fifty-four of the planned mission test objectives. While the INSAT deployment was a success, the satellite had problems unfolding its solar array once in geostationary orbit, and was not fully operational until the middle of September 1983. Once functional, however, it provided satisfactory service for seven years, returning 36,000 images of Earth and broadcasting television to thousands of remote Indian villages. The Payload Flight Test Article evaluation found that the Canadarm remote manipulator system was capable of moving bulky masses with some accuracy, to a precision of and 1° of alignment.

The TDRS-1 program was overall less successful, with the satellite suffering several computer failures and an overall loss of telemetry for several hours. In all, the orbiter was able to use the satellite for 65 of the planned 89 orbits, and could make successful use of the connection on about forty. The Continuous Flow Electrophoresis System equipment functioned as planned, processing several hundred times more material than would have been possible on Earth, and the &quot;Asahi Shimbun&quot; crystal experiment, flown for the second time, was able to produce snow crystals after the canister was redesigned.

Thornton&#x27;s research into space adaptation sickness noted that the STS-8 astronauts had escaped severe cases, with none suffering loss of motor control; Gardner suffered a &quot;mild case&quot;, but was still able to manage effectively, while Brandenstein – who had suffered from induced motion sickness during training operations – was entirely unaffected. The symptoms were found to abate within three days of launch.

== Wake-up calls ==
NASA began a tradition of playing music to astronauts during Project Gemini, and first used music to wake up a flight crew during Apollo 15. Each track is specially chosen, often by the astronauts&#x27; families, and usually has a special meaning to an individual member of the crew, or is applicable to their daily activities.

== See also ==

* List of human spaceflights
* List of Space Shuttle missions

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* STS-8 info NASA Kennedy Space Center
* STS-8 video highlights NSS</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q377764" start="0" end="5" title="STS-8" label="STS-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="21" end="25" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="26" end="39" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q54382" start="76" end="112" title="Space Shuttle Challenger" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775296" start="238" end="259" title="Space Shuttle program" label="Space Shuttle program"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="287" end="303" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q528943" start="315" end="328" title="Guion Bluford" label="Guion Bluford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135571" start="454" end="479" title="Solid rocket booster" label="solid-fuel rocket booster"/>
<link wikidata="Q13115909" start="581" end="589" title="INSAT-1B" label="INSAT-1B"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="594" end="599" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="601" end="615" title="communication satellite" label="communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q209363" start="620" end="639" title="weather satellite" label="weather observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192316" start="704" end="723" title="geostationary orbit" label="geostationary orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q44468" start="883" end="891" title="Canadarm" label="Canadarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299309" start="1140" end="1152" title="Micro-g environment" label="microgravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365937" start="1172" end="1197" title="space adaptation syndrome" label="space adaptation syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669864" start="1321" end="1327" title="TDRS-1" label="TDRS-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q312052" start="1389" end="1394" title="STS-9" label="STS-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474963" start="1460" end="1479" title="mission specialists" label="mission specialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q734688" start="1514" end="1519" title="STS-7" label="STS-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q528943" start="1668" end="1681" title="Guion Bluford" label="Guion Bluford"/>
<link wikidata="Q217538" start="1834" end="1839" title="STS-2" label="STS-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q621711" start="1867" end="1893" title="Approach and Landing Tests" label="Approach and Landing Tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q202347" start="1907" end="1929" title="Space Shuttle Enterprise" label="&amp;quot;Enterprise&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563791" start="1973" end="1993" title="Flight controller" label="capsule communicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q190776" start="2017" end="2023" title="Skylab" label="Skylab"/>
<link wikidata="Q208759" start="2041" end="2045" title="Apollo–Soyuz" label="ASTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="2380" end="2386" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365937" start="2560" end="2585" title="Space Adaptation Syndrome" label="Space Adaptation Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062633" start="2764" end="2792" title="Extravehicular Mobility Unit" label="Extravehicular Mobility Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="2822" end="2841" title="Extravehicular activity" label="emergency spacewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q13115909" start="3122" end="3130" title="INSAT-1B" label="INSAT-1B"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669874" start="3157" end="3163" title="TDRS-B" label="TDRS-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662192" start="3241" end="3261" title="Inertial Upper Stage" label="Inertial Upper Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q731368" start="3297" end="3302" title="STS-6" label="STS-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q19050" start="3527" end="3535" title="STS-51-L" label="STS-51-L"/>
<link wikidata="Q229058" start="3834" end="3868" title="Indian Space Research Organisation" label="Indian Space Research Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13115907" start="3888" end="3896" title="INSAT-1A" label="INSAT-1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q49506" start="3921" end="3941" title="Delta (rocket family)" label="Delta launch vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321971" start="4032" end="4055" title="reaction control system" label="reaction control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138649" start="4159" end="4187" title="Geostationary transfer orbit" label="Geostationary transfer orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424161" start="4199" end="4220" title="Payload Assist Module" label="Payload Assist Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q280602" start="4238" end="4250" title="solid rocket" label="solid rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161829" start="4251" end="4262" title="upper stage" label="upper stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="4727" end="4735" title="Aluminium" label="aluminum"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="4809" end="4813" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q44468" start="4872" end="4918" title="Canadarm" label="&amp;quot;Canadarm&amp;quot; Remote Manipulator System"/>
<link wikidata="Q54383" start="5225" end="5233" title="Space Shuttle Columbia" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q428653" start="5403" end="5424" title="Allotropes of oxygen" label="ambient atomic oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054254" start="5613" end="5628" title="Getaway Special" label="Getaway Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="5685" end="5695" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="5800" end="5811" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q827094" start="5896" end="5906" title="STS-51-F" label="Spacelab 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="5934" end="5939" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q720503" start="5949" end="5962" title="Asahi Shimbun" label="Asahi Shimbun"/>
<link wikidata="Q190120" start="5993" end="6004" title="water vapor" label="water vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="6028" end="6040" title="snow crystal" label="snow crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q731368" start="6101" end="6106" title="STS-6" label="STS-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q518867" start="6228" end="6233" title="STS-3" label="STS-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q428653" start="6269" end="6282" title="Allotropes of oxygen" label="atomic oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="6321" end="6327" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q751" start="6332" end="6338" title="osmium" label="osmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="6346" end="6354" title="redox" label="oxidized"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="6394" end="6422" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q827026" start="6452" end="6465" title="cover (philately)" label="postal covers"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="6495" end="6508" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q185098" start="6834" end="6849" title="Electrophoresis" label="Electrophoresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="7030" end="7038" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="7096" end="7099" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q719926" start="7356" end="7375" title="William E. Thornton" label="William E. Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q864329" start="7382" end="7393" title="biofeedback" label="biofeedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299309" start="7444" end="7456" title="Micro-g environment" label="microgravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q731368" start="7795" end="7800" title="STS-6" label="STS-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q312052" start="7879" end="7895" title="STS-9" label="Spacelab program"/>
<link wikidata="Q312052" start="7912" end="7917" title="STS-9" label="STS-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q609639" start="8082" end="8095" title="John E. Blaha" label="John E. Blaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q21842" start="8098" end="8112" title="Mary L. Cleave" label="Mary L. Cleave"/>
<link wikidata="Q185560" start="8115" end="8132" title="William Frederick Fisher" label="William F. Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q719911" start="8135" end="8153" title="Jeffrey A. Hoffman" label="Jeffrey A. Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q995007" start="8156" end="8178" title="Bryan D. O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Bryan D. O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135571" start="8337" end="8358" title="solid rocket boosters" label="solid rocket boosters"/>
<link wikidata="Q516775" start="8372" end="8396" title="Mobile Launcher Platform" label="Mobile Launcher Platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061044" start="8450" end="8463" title="external tank" label="external tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="8543" end="8563" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679729" start="8609" end="8636" title="Orbiter Processing Facility" label="Orbiter Processing Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q901058" start="8809" end="8834" title="Vehicle Assembly Building" label="Vehicle Assembly Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q24256513" start="8954" end="8972" title="Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39A" label="Launch Complex 39A"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522774" start="9366" end="9406" title="Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System" label="Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5947189" start="9548" end="9570" title="Hurricane Barry (1983)" label="Hurricane Barry (1983)"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="9579" end="9586" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="9954" end="9957" title="Coordinated Universal Time" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="9968" end="9971" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="EDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="10030" end="10042" title="thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="10283" end="10292" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q473478" start="10491" end="10499" title="STS-61-B" label="STS-61-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353651" start="10605" end="10617" title="night vision" label="night vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q858145" start="11054" end="11077" title="Space Shuttle Challenger disaster" label="doomed the 51-L mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q731368" start="11314" end="11319" title="STS-6" label="STS-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q734688" start="11324" end="11329" title="STS-7" label="STS-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q221329" start="12233" end="12241" title="avionics" label="avionics"/>
<link wikidata="Q44468" start="12421" end="12429" title="Canadarm" label="Canadarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q618540" start="12641" end="12652" title="White Sands Test Facility" label="White Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349167" start="12653" end="12667" title="ground station" label="ground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263822" start="12915" end="12941" title="Orbital Maneuvering System" label="Orbital Maneuvering System"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="13398" end="13407" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="13729" end="13737" title="Spacecraft attitude control" label="attitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q217563" start="14085" end="14107" title="Edwards Air Force Base" label="Edwards Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="14109" end="14119" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939034" start="14131" end="14151" title="mission elapsed time" label="mission elapsed time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="14211" end="14214" title="Coordinated Universal Time" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q847142" start="14443" end="14446" title="Pacific Time Zone" label="PDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q493009" start="14707" end="14721" title="landing lights" label="landing lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q839845" start="14787" end="14802" title="xenon arc lamps" label="xenon arc lamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631607" start="15000" end="15009" title="SpaceCamp" label="SpaceCamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q858145" start="15878" end="15909" title="Space Shuttle Challenger disaster" label="&amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot; disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="15986" end="15992" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="16160" end="16185" title="thermal protection system" label="thermal protection system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143980" start="16402" end="16408" title="STS-74" label="STS-74"/>
<link wikidata="Q187665" start="16839" end="16850" title="thermostats" label="thermostats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="18144" end="18148" title="snow" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365937" start="18224" end="18249" title="space adaptation sickness" label="space adaptation sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996165" start="18336" end="18349" title="motor control" label="motor control"/>
<link wikidata="Q214996" start="18700" end="18714" title="Project Gemini" label="Project Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q194068" start="18769" end="18778" title="Apollo 15" label="Apollo 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129350" start="18986" end="19012" title="List of human spaceflights" label="List of human spaceflights"/>
<link wikidata="Q559523" start="19015" end="19045" title="List of Space Shuttle missions" label="List of Space Shuttle missions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423305" wikidata="Q17237" url="?curid=423305" title="Jive (dance)">
<text>The jive is a dance style that originated in the United States from African Americans in the early 1930s. The name of the dance comes from the name of a form of African-American vernacular slang, popularized in the 1930s by the publication of a dictionary by Cab Calloway, the famous jazz bandleader and singer. In competition ballroom dancing, the jive is often grouped with the Latin-inspired ballroom dances, though its roots are based on swing dancing and not Latin dancing.

==History==
To the players of swing music in the 1930s and 1940s, jive was an expression denoting glib or foolish talk.

American soldiers brought Lindy Hop/jitterbug to Europe around 1940, where this dance swiftly found a following among the young. In the United States, &quot;swing&quot; became the most common word for the dance, and the term &quot;jive&quot; was adopted in the UK. Variations in technique led to styles such as boogie-woogie and swing boogie, with &quot;jive&quot; gradually emerging as the generic term in the UK.
==See also==
*Modern Jive

==References==
==External links==
* The Jive Treasure Box - A comprehensive database of Modern Jive moves illustrated.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17237" start="4" end="8" title="Jive (dance)" label="jive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="14" end="19" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="68" end="84" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571823" start="151" end="194" title="Glossary of jive talk" label="a form of African-American vernacular slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q273079" start="259" end="271" title="Cab Calloway" label="Cab Calloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085001" start="327" end="343" title="Ballroom dance" label="ballroom dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q123704" start="442" end="455" title="Swing (dance)" label="swing dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q203775" start="510" end="521" title="swing music" label="swing music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134329" start="627" end="636" title="Lindy Hop" label="Lindy Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q950354" start="637" end="646" title="jitterbug" label="jitterbug"/>
<link wikidata="Q892964" start="912" end="925" title="Boogie-woogie (dance)" label="boogie-woogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942004" start="1030" end="1041" title="Modern Jive" label="Modern Jive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423310" wikidata="Q4081306" url="?curid=423310" title="Beckwith, Ontario">
<text>Beckwith is a township in eastern Ontario, Canada. It is located in Lanark County on the Mississippi River. It is located within Canada&#x27;s National Capital Region.

==Communities==
The township comprises the communities of Black&#x27;s Corners, Franktown, Gillies Corners, Prospect, and the western half of Ashton (with the eastern half being within the City of Ottawa), as well as the lakeside communities of Gardiner Shore, Lake Park, Petrie Shore, Rathwell&#x27;s Shore, Scotch Corners and Tennyson.

Black&#x27;s Corners, a hamlet south of Carleton Place, is the location for the town hall of Beckwith. This site was chosen in 1857 as a compromise between Franktown and Carleton Place where the township council had met on an alternating basis previously. Currently, there are two marinas, an auto shop, and previously a gas station.

==Culture==
Franktown promotes itself as the &quot;Lilac Capital of Ontario&quot;. It is home to Lilac Lane, which features a beautiful park containing many lilac bushes that have grown there naturally over time, and where a lilac festival is held the last Saturday of May. Within the park facility there is also a baseball diamond.

Also located within Franktown are the Calvary Christian Academy, a private school, and the &quot;Franktown General Store&quot;, which features a gas bar, general merchandise, take-out foods, as well as dry-cleaning services.

On the ninth Line Road, east of Blacks Corners, Beckwith Park is being developed. It includes an indoor hockey rink and soccer pitch and outdoor artificial turf for football, soccer and rugby. The park include bush with walking trails and a pond. The extensive grass area includes twelve soccer pitches, a baseball and a softball field, a coverall building and open space to hold civic events like Beckwith Heritage Days. The University of Ottawa Gee-Gees football team played one season there while their new stadium was under construction.

==Geography==
Beckwith was originally covered in deciduous forest, much of which has been cleared for agriculture. Common trees include sugar maple, beech, oak and ash. Trees like hickory and butternut are less common. Wetter areas have elm, silver maple and white cedar. Hemlock was much more common in the past, but logging for tanbark, used in tanning, has much depleted this species. The enormous Goodwood Swamp is one of the most important natural areas in the township. There are several different access points to see this vast wetland by car and on foot. The Jock River, a popular canoe route, originates here, near Franktown.

The wetlands on the north-western shore of Mississippi Lake are also provincially significant. Within the town of Carleton Place, along the rapids of Mississippi River, there is a large and regionally significant hackberry forest.

The area has two main physiographic types: clay deposits over limestone, and exposed areas of limestone plain. These clay deposits were left behind by the Champlain Sea which flooded the Beckwith area about ten thousand years ago at the end of the last ice age. In the extreme northwestern corner there is an outcrop of Canadian Shield. Along the edge of this shield outcrop one can trace the old shoreline of the Champlain Sea.

An Environment and Climate Change Canada weather radar station for Ottawa and eastern Ontario, part of the Canadian weather radar network, is located at Franktown.

==Demographics==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Beckwith had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.
==See also==
*List of francophone communities in Ontario
*List of townships in Ontario

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4081306" start="0" end="8" title="Beckwith, Ontario" label="Beckwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936646" start="14" end="22" title="township (Canada)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="34" end="41" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801761" start="68" end="81" title="Lanark County" label="Lanark County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503538" start="89" end="106" title="Mississippi River (Ontario)" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q668850" start="143" end="166" title="National Capital Region (Canada)" label="National Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041701" start="548" end="562" title="Carleton Place" label="Carleton Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565319" start="1068" end="1073" title="Syringa vulgaris" label="lilac"/>
<link wikidata="Q205495" start="1322" end="1329" title="Filling station" label="gas bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344518" start="1613" end="1617" title="The bush" label="bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q627969" start="1829" end="1849" title="University of Ottawa" label="University of Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358670" start="1850" end="1867" title="Gee-Gees football" label="Gee-Gees football"/>
<link wikidata="Q214733" start="2082" end="2093" title="Acer saccharum" label="sugar maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q25403" start="2095" end="2100" title="beech" label="beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="2102" end="2105" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="2110" end="2113" title="Fraxinus" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q142788" start="2126" end="2133" title="hickory" label="hickory"/>
<link wikidata="Q630288" start="2138" end="2147" title="Juglans cinerea" label="butternut"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="2183" end="2186" title="elm" label="elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q158301" start="2188" end="2200" title="Acer saccharinum" label="silver maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q146037" start="2205" end="2216" title="Cupressaceae" label="white cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q739430" start="2218" end="2225" title="Tsuga" label="Hemlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510340" start="2276" end="2283" title="tanbark" label="tanbark"/>
<link wikidata="Q211578" start="2293" end="2300" title="Tanning (leather)" label="tanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875217" start="2513" end="2523" title="Jock River" label="Jock River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215064" start="2625" end="2641" title="Mississippi Lake" label="Mississippi Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q248582" start="2795" end="2804" title="Celtis" label="hackberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="2876" end="2885" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061490" start="2969" end="2982" title="Champlain Sea" label="Champlain Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="3062" end="3074" title="Last Glacial Period" label="last ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q76034" start="3134" end="3149" title="Canadian Shield" label="Canadian Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q348789" start="3247" end="3284" title="Environment and Climate Change Canada" label="Environment and Climate Change Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q863343" start="3285" end="3298" title="weather radar" label="weather radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058779" start="3322" end="3337" title="eastern Ontario" label="eastern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456612" start="3351" end="3381" title="Canadian weather radar network" label="Canadian weather radar network"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="3433" end="3458" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="3472" end="3489" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008452" start="3680" end="3722" title="List of francophone communities in Ontario" label="List of francophone communities in Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643835" start="3724" end="3752" title="List of townships in Ontario" label="List of townships in Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423311" wikidata="Q4641860" url="?curid=423311" title="62 Group">
<text>The 62 Group, originally the 62 Committee, was a militant broad-based coalition of anti-fascists in London, headed by Harry Bidney. Based on the earlier 43 Group, it was formed in 1962 largely in response to the resurgence of fascism in Britain at the time, and particularly Colin Jordan&#x27;s National Socialist Movement (NSM). It used violence against the remnants of Oswald Mosley&#x27;s Union Movement, the original British National Party, and the emerging National Front, as well as the NSM. The group was financed in part by the Jewish Aid Committee of Britain (JACOB).

==Membership==
The Group was modelled after the earlier 43 Group, to which Bidney and other leadership had also belonged. Another predecessor to the Group from which it drew its early membership was the Yellow Star Movement. Though the YSM was decentralised, its supporters had experienced a split concerning whether the organisation should engage in violence. The more militant faction of the YSM were among the founders of the 62 Group.

Formal membership was only open to those who were Jewish, but the Group worked with people from other anti-fascist organisations and immigrant communities, including Irish and Black-power activists.

The Group was led by Harry Bidney, owner of Soho night club, The Limbo. It was managed day-to-day by hardman Paul Nathan who was &quot;the toughest Jew around in those days, unlike the soft ones walking around today&quot;. Another significant member was Gerry Gable, an intelligence officer for the 62 Group, who later founded the magazine &quot;Searchlight&quot;.

==Activities==
The Group&#x27;s tactics consisted of direct action against those groups it believed were organising violence against minority groups, which sometimes resulted in violent confrontations. On one occasion in July 1962 this led to a riot in London&#x27;s Trafalgar Square, when Colin Jordan tried to address a crowd while standing in front of a large banner which read: &quot;Free Britain from Jewish Control&quot;. It also used intelligence, including informers within the fascist groups.

The Group frequently disrupted the meetings of Oswald Mosley&#x27;s Union Movement, and this was a contributing factor to the Union Movement&#x27;s demise. Commenting on the activities of the 62 Group, the Board of Deputies of British Jews disapprovingly said that, &quot;some of these anti-fascists are Jews who act as if throwing tomatoes at a British racialist speaker is somehow getting their own back on Hitler.&quot; 

The organisation attempted to expose connections between far-right groups in Britain and former members of the original Nazi Party. Two veterans of the 62 Group stated that they had encountered former members of the Schutzstaffel (SS) at a meeting held by the neo-Nazi Northern League in Brighton.

In 1975, the 62 Group dissolved. Some former members of the Group formed the Community Security Trust.

==&quot;Ridley Road&quot;==
Author Jo Bloom researched the events and wrote a novel, &quot;Ridley Road&quot;, published in 2014, with the 62 Group and events in the summer of 1962 as a backdrop, named after a street in the East End of London known as a fascist meeting place, around which battles took place. A television drama of the same name based on the book, written and adapted for television by Sarah Solemani, was announced in 2019 and broadcast by BBC One in October 2021.

==See also==
*Anti-fascism

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4641860" start="4" end="12" title="62 Group" label="62 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641860" start="29" end="41" title="62 Group" label="62 Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="83" end="96" title="anti-fascism" label="anti-fascists"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="100" end="106" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637897" start="153" end="161" title="43 Group" label="43 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="226" end="233" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474463" start="275" end="287" title="Colin Jordan" label="Colin Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012087" start="295" end="322" title="National Socialist Movement (UK, 1962)" label="National Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q332400" start="371" end="384" title="Oswald Mosley" label="Oswald Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4534560" start="392" end="406" title="Union Movement" label="Union Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970528" start="412" end="443" title="British National Party (1960)" label="original British National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q158093" start="462" end="476" title="National Front (UK)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637897" start="634" end="642" title="43 Group" label="43 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1068" end="1074" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q124010" start="1262" end="1266" title="Soho" label="Soho"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511206" start="1472" end="1483" title="Gerry Gable" label="Gerry Gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121444" start="1488" end="1508" title="intelligence officer" label="intelligence officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q787345" start="1564" end="1575" title="Searchlight (magazine)" label="Searchlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q506259" start="1637" end="1650" title="direct action" label="direct action"/>
<link wikidata="Q129143" start="1851" end="1867" title="Trafalgar Square" label="Trafalgar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474463" start="1874" end="1886" title="Colin Jordan" label="Colin Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q887527" start="2293" end="2326" title="Board of Deputies of British Jews" label="Board of Deputies of British Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="2728" end="2741" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012726" start="2781" end="2796" title="Northern League (British neo-Nazi organisation)" label="Northern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="2800" end="2808" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154869" start="2888" end="2912" title="Community Security Trust" label="Community Security Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q108807266" start="3006" end="3017" title="Ridley Road (novel)" label="Ridley Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="3138" end="3146" title="East End" label="East End"/>
<link wikidata="Q108807070" start="3224" end="3259" title="Ridley Road (TV series)" label="A television drama of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422788" start="3317" end="3331" title="Sarah Solemani" label="Sarah Solemani"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="3372" end="3379" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="3412" end="3424" title="Anti-fascism" label="Anti-fascism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423312" wikidata="Q371478" url="?curid=423312" title="Cisalpino">
<text>Cisalpino AG () was a railway company, referred to as CIS in timetables, operating international trains between Switzerland and Italy connecting Basel, Schaffhausen, Zurich, Geneva, Milan, Venice, Trieste, Livorno, and Florence. The company has its legal headquarters in Muri bei Bern (BE), Switzerland, and is jointly owned by the Swiss Federal Railways and Trenitalia.

It was founded in 1993 to operate fast trains across the Alps using tilting trains. In 2005, however, it also took over all daytime long-distance passenger trains between Switzerland and Italy run with conventional, non-tilting trains.

In the fall of 2009, the project was abandoned because of mounting bad press over the quality of service and the fiasco surrounding orders placed for new trains. The remaining trains were split nearly evenly between the two owners.

Until December 2012 the company owned the ETR 610 trainsets and leased them to Trenitalia and the Swiss Federal Railways (SBB CFF FFS). The company still exists, but its name is no longer used for public purposes.

== Cisalpino tilting trains ==

The original service was branded under the name &quot;Cisalpino,&quot; using the abbreviation &quot;CIS&quot; in timetables, but it has now been replaced by the name EuroCity, using the abbreviation &quot;EC&quot;. It operated with nine Italian ETR 470 tilting trains (colloquially known as &quot;Pendolino&quot;).

During the 2009 timetable, these trains were used on two main routes to connect Milan with northern Switzerland. Four trains per day and per direction ran via the Lötschberg line to Bern and Basel. Zurich was connected via the Gotthardbahn with seven daily trains, of which three were direct, and four others required a change in Lugano onto a leased Swiss ICN train. One of the Zurich-bound trains originally ran as far north as Stuttgart, but was cut back to Schaffhausen in 2006.

Train maintenance was carried out in the Milan Greco workshop by the Italian railway operator Trenitalia. Trains were staffed with personnel from Trenitalia as well as the Swiss Federal Railways, while the catering was provided by the Italian company Cremonini.

The trains had two classes. In first-class, power sockets were available. The Cisalpino train included a dining car.

=== Problems ===
The Cisalpino ETR 470 trains then in service suffered from a bad reputation due to continuing problems with punctuality (breakdowns in mid-journey) and cleanliness (overflowing toilets) and a ride that caused customers to complain of nausea due to these being first-generation Pendolinos. The service between Zurich and Stuttgart was discontinued in mid-December 2006 for these reasons. In 2008, 83 Cisalpino trains failed to reach their destination and 11.2% suffered a delay of 15 minutes or more (average delay 28 minutes).

=== New trains ===
A batch of fourteen new tilting trains ETR 610 was ordered in 2004 from Alstom (former Fiat Ferroviaria) in the hope of providing much-needed relief, but have themselves had some problems. Entry into service, originally to come with the December 2007 timetable change together with the opening of the Lötschberg Base Tunnel, was deferred and rescheduled for the spring of 2009. Again the trains were not ready for passenger-carrying service and their introduction was deferred to August 2009 when two did enter revenue-earning service. By December 2009 six trains were available, but the last train would be put into service only by December 2010, three years later than planned.

These new trains were ordered from the same consortium that built the original problematic trains.

==== Weight issues ====
During testing in 2009 it was found that the new ETR 610 trains were too heavy for the main Gotthard route from Zurich to Milan for which they had been ordered. The weight of the train influences the permitted cornering speed due to forces on the track – the heavier the train the slower the cornering speed allowed. It was found the new trains would have to run so slowly that traditional trains without tilting technologies would be just as fast, thus calling the whole project into question.

== EuroCity ==
Cisalpino also operated conventional EuroCity trains on two routes: from Basel or Zurich to Milan via Gotthard and from Geneva to Milan via Simplon. Three of these trains per day went all the way to Venice while one train continued from Milan to Genoa and Livorno.

These trains were run with traditional Swiss or Italian EuroCity non-tilting rolling stock. All trains had first- and second-class coaches. A dining car was available only on some of the trains.

For the Venice-bound trains, maintenance was carried out in Venice. The other trains were maintained in Switzerland. Like the Cisalpino trains, crews are provided by Trenitalia in Italy and the Swiss Federal Railways in Switzerland.

During the 2009 timetable Cisalpino also operated three couples of Milan-Bellinzona EuroCity with Italian stock.

Confusingly in 2010, whilst the name Cisalpino has disappeared from the timetables the older problematic ETR 470 trains live on. On the Zurich-Milan route, they are now also called EuroCity. The only way to tell which EuroCity is an old tilting train is to check whether folding bicycles are allowed (they are not allowed on tilting trains, although most folding bicycles actually fit into their luggage racks).

== See also ==
*Intercity Neigezug (ICN)
*Cisalpin (train)

==References==
== External links ==

*Campaign to remove Cisalpino from service Provides up-to-date statistics for non-arrival and delays.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q371478" start="0" end="12" title="Cisalpino" label="Cisalpino AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q249556" start="22" end="37" title="railway company" label="railway company"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="145" end="150" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9009" start="152" end="164" title="Schaffhausen" label="Schaffhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="166" end="172" title="Zurich" label="Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="174" end="180" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="182" end="187" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="189" end="195" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="197" end="204" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761" start="206" end="213" title="Livorno" label="Livorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="219" end="227" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q69765" start="271" end="284" title="Muri bei Bern" label="Muri bei Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q83835" start="332" end="354" title="Swiss Federal Railways" label="Swiss Federal Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q286650" start="359" end="369" title="Trenitalia" label="Trenitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q671188" start="440" end="453" title="tilting train" label="tilting train"/>
<link wikidata="Q753050" start="1255" end="1263" title="EuroCity" label="EuroCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q668075" start="1334" end="1341" title="ETR 470" label="ETR 470"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757636" start="1386" end="1395" title="Pendolino" label="Pendolino"/>
<link wikidata="Q666404" start="1568" end="1583" title="Lötschberg railway line" label="Lötschberg line"/>
<link wikidata="Q223656" start="1632" end="1644" title="Gotthardbahn" label="Gotthardbahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024" start="1735" end="1741" title="Lugano" label="Lugano"/>
<link wikidata="Q869587" start="1756" end="1771" title="SBB-CFF-FFS RABDe 500" label="Swiss ICN train"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="1835" end="1844" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q9009" start="1866" end="1878" title="Schaffhausen" label="Schaffhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q286650" start="1983" end="1993" title="Trenitalia" label="Trenitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83835" start="2061" end="2083" title="Swiss Federal Railways" label="Swiss Federal Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q29523365" start="2873" end="2880" title="ETR 610" label="ETR 610"/>
<link wikidata="Q309084" start="2906" end="2912" title="Alstom" label="Alstom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738829" start="2921" end="2937" title="Fiat Ferroviaria" label="Fiat Ferroviaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q660310" start="3135" end="3157" title="Lötschberg Base Tunnel" label="Lötschberg Base Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q29523365" start="3688" end="3695" title="ETR 610" label="ETR 610"/>
<link wikidata="Q753050" start="4187" end="4195" title="EuroCity" label="EuroCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q223656" start="4252" end="4260" title="Gotthardbahn" label="Gotthard"/>
<link wikidata="Q599515" start="4290" end="4297" title="Simplon Tunnel" label="Simplon"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="4349" end="4355" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="4396" end="4401" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761" start="4406" end="4413" title="Livorno" label="Livorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q64044" start="4919" end="4929" title="Bellinzona" label="Bellinzona"/>
<link wikidata="Q869587" start="5389" end="5407" title="SBB-CFF-FFS RABDe 500" label="Intercity Neigezug"/>
<link wikidata="Q82515" start="5415" end="5431" title="Cisalpin (train)" label="Cisalpin (train)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423313" wikidata="Q248277" url="?curid=423313" title="Sokol (train)">
<text>Sokol (Сокол, Russian for &quot;falcon&quot;) was a planned high-speed train in Russia. It was to be a successor of the ER200 for use on the Moscow–St. Petersburg mainline, and was designed to operate at a cruising speed of 250 km/h. A prototype was built in 2000 and tested by Russian High Speed Railway Shareholding Co.

The Sokol project was cancelled in 2002. Instead of a Sokol-based design, high speed trainsets (named &quot;Sapsan&quot;) based on the Siemens Velaro were procured from Siemens in Germany. The Sapsan trains have been operating on the Moscow–St. Petersburg line since December 2009.

==References==
==External links==
* High Speed Trains - Sokol &quot;4rail.net&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q248277" start="0" end="5" title="Sokol (train)" label="Sokol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="14" end="21" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43489" start="32" end="38" title="falcon" label="falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="60" end="76" title="high-speed rail" label="high-speed train"/>
<link wikidata="Q987406" start="120" end="125" title="ER200" label="ER200"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178843" start="141" end="171" title="Moscow – Saint Petersburg Railway" label="Moscow–St. Petersburg mainline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294789" start="431" end="437" title="Sapsan" label="Sapsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q392909" start="458" end="472" title="Siemens Velaro" label="Siemens Velaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="492" end="499" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423316" wikidata="Q4637897" url="?curid=423316" title="43 Group">
<text>The 43 Group was a British anti-fascist group set up by Jewish ex-servicemen after the Second World War. They did this when, upon returning to London, they encountered British fascist organisations such as Jeffrey Hamm&#x27;s British League of Ex-Servicemen and later Oswald Mosley&#x27;s new fascist party, the Union Movement. The activities of these fascist groups included antisemitic speeches in public places, and from the rank-and-file fascists, violent attacks on London Jews and Jewish property. Group members broke up far-right meetings, infiltrated fascist groups, and attacked the fascists in street fighting. 

Their newspaper, &quot;On Guard&quot;, was published from 1947 to 1949.

==Early history and activities==
The name &quot;43 Group&quot; came from the number of people in the room of Maccabi House (a Jewish sports centre in Hampstead, London) during the group&#x27;s founding meeting in April 1946. Those who convened the initial meeting included:
* Morris Beckman, served in the Merchant Navy during World War II. He lived through two torpedo attacks during the War.
* Gerald Flamberg, a middleweight boxing champion and member of 156 Battalion. Flamberg won the Military Medal at Arnhem during Operation Market Garden;
* Leonard Sherman, a martial arts expert and member of the Welsh Guards;
* Alec Carson, who flew Hawker Hurricanes in the Battle of Britain.
The organisation had two aims: to prevent fascist activities by physical force if necessary, and to pressure Parliament into making racial incitement a criminal offence.

The 17-year-old Vidal Sassoon joined the group and later joined the Israeli Defence Forces to fight in the 1948 Arab-Israeli War. Sassoon later founded a multinational hair styling business.

The initial membership was around 300 people. The group grew to include many hundreds of men and women, not all Jewish. Many among them had been decorated for bravery, including the VC (Petty Officer Tommy Gould), DSO, DFC, DSM, and MM. The organisation was sometimes portrayed by its enemies as a front for either Jewish terrorists or communists, but in fact it was mostly composed of British ex-servicemen.

The group published &quot;On Guard&quot;, from July 1947 to December 1949, an anti-fascist paper which often published intelligence gathered by Group spies. As well as covering the activities of Oswald Mosley and the British fascists, &quot;On Guard&quot; reported on the activities of fascists all around the world and racist injustices in countries including the USA and South Africa.

==Relationship with other organisations==
The 43 Group was viewed by established Jewish organisations, such as the Board of Deputies of British Jews, as counterproductive. The Board of Deputies of British Jews worried that the 43 Group&#x27;s activities could damage the Jewish community&#x27;s reputation, especially in light of the terrorist acts and guerrilla warfare carried out by militant Zionist groups such as the Irgun in British Mandate Palestine. However it also had promiment supporters, both political and social. Left-wing Labour MPs such as D. N. Pritt, John Platt-Mills, and Woodrow Wyatt were keen supporters, while entertainment giants Jack Solomon and Bud Flanagan regularly donated significant sums to the organisation.

However, the 43 Group never sought to replace the more traditional groups who preferred debate and discussion, but who had failed to stop the BUF, partly due to the non-cooperation of the then Home Secretary, James Chuter Ede. Rather, 43 Group sought to prevent the Union Movement mobilising and gathering support, remembering that the Nazi Party had gained prominence in a similar fashion as the Brownshirts on the streets of post-World War I Germany.

==Dissolution and impact==
The 43 Group was voluntarily disbanded on 4 June 1950, as various Jewish organizations and influential individuals members considered that the immediate threat had passed. Although Mosley&#x27;s Union Movement remained active throughout the 1950s, it was not until 1962, when Colin Jordan and his National Socialist Movement unfurled an enormous banner in Trafalgar Square bearing the words &quot;Free Britain from Jewish Control&quot; that former 43 group members formed the 62 Group in the former group&#x27;s image and British fascists again encountered any significant privately organised street-level resistance.

The overall effect of 43 Group is unclear. Morris Beckman argued that it was crucial in stopping a resurgence of fascism in post-war Britain. The 43 group was undoubtedly an inspiration to other militant anti-fascist groups such as the 62 Group and Anti-Fascist Action.

==Legacy==
In 2004, the group was the subject of BBC Radio 4 programme &quot;A Rage in Dalston&quot;, part of The Archive Hour series. 

In September 2015, it was announced that BBC2 and NBC were co-developing a six-part drama series alongside surviving members of The 43 Group and produced by The Tenafly Film Company and Tiger Aspect Drama, but the series was not made.

==Historical Marker==
Placed by the Jewish American Society for Historic Preservation, U.K. Branch, organised by Martin Sugarman, financed by Jerry Klinger (JASHP), and the Association of Jewish Ex-Servicemen and Women, at the site of the 43 Group Headquarters. The marker is located about 1/4 mile from Trafalgar Square in London.

&quot;At 4 Panton Street was the Headquarters of the mostly Jewish ex-servicemen and Women&#x27;s organization. The 43 Group They confronted the British Neo-fascist movement in 1946-50 and early 1960s to rid Britain of Antisemitism and all hatred. Be strong and of good courage (Joshua 1:9) Hebrew (The Jewish American Society for Historic Preservation U.K. Branch and AJEX UK)&quot;

December, 2023, the Jewish American Society for Historic Preservation, U.K. Branch, together with the Association of Jewish Ex-Servicemen and Women, organised by Martin Sugarman, placed the Ridley Rd. Marker. The Ridley Rd. area was the key area where the hatred, bigotry and racism of the British Neo-Nazi/Fascist movement was confronted by the 43 Group. 

The Text reads: 

&quot;This Ridley Road plaque marks a key site where the mainly Jewish Ex-Servicemen and Women anti-Fascist organization &#x27;The 43 Group&#x27; Confronted the British Neo-Fascist movement in 1946-50 and early 1960s to rid Britain of antisemitism and all hatred.&quot;

&quot;Be Strong and of Good Courage (Joshua 1:9)
(The Jewish American Society for Historic Preservation UK Branch and AJEX UK)

==See also==
* Anti-fascism
* 62 Group

==References==
==Further reading==
* Morris Beckman: &quot;The 43 Group.&quot; Centerprise Publication, June 2000 
* Daniel Sonabend: &quot;&quot;We Fight Fascists&quot;. The 43 Group and Their Forgotten Battle for Post-War Britain.&quot; Verso Books, October 2019 
* (in German) Daniel Sonabend: &quot;Die 43 Group wurde ein Opfer ihres eigenen Erfolgs.&quot; jungle world, Berlin, #36, 2020, september 3, p. 17

==External links==
*&quot;Voices on Antisemitism&quot;, Interview with Vidal Sassoon from the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum
* London&#x27;s Jewish community after the war
* Morris Beckman: My favourite books
* Review of Beckman&#x27;s book
* Interview with Morris Beckman
* The 43 Group - UK Jewish Anti-Fascist Organization - J-Grit.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4637897" start="4" end="12" title="43 Group" label="43 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="27" end="39" title="Anti-fascism" label="anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q702718" start="56" end="62" title="British Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="87" end="103" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="143" end="149" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969961" start="168" end="183" title="British Fascism" label="British fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176030" start="206" end="218" title="Jeffrey Hamm" label="Jeffrey Hamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970245" start="226" end="257" title="British League of Ex-Servicemen" label="British League of Ex-Servicemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q332400" start="268" end="281" title="Oswald Mosley" label="Oswald Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="293" end="300" title="fascist" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4534560" start="312" end="326" title="Union Movement" label="Union Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="376" end="387" title="antisemitic" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889725" start="471" end="482" title="London Jews" label="London Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="527" end="536" title="far-right" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923444" start="604" end="619" title="street fighting" label="street fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882557" start="805" end="812" title="Maccabi World Union" label="Maccabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25610" start="846" end="863" title="Hampstead, London" label="Hampstead, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913607" start="972" end="986" title="Morris Beckman (writer)" label="Morris Beckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="1002" end="1015" title="Merchant Navy" label="Merchant Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550636" start="1154" end="1167" title="156th Parachute Battalion (United Kingdom)" label="156 Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584344" start="1186" end="1200" title="Military Medal" label="Military Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q189930" start="1218" end="1241" title="Operation Market Garden" label="Operation Market Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806308" start="1302" end="1314" title="Welsh Guards" label="Welsh Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="1340" end="1356" title="Hawker Hurricane" label="Hawker Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="1365" end="1382" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q313550" start="1571" end="1584" title="Vidal Sassoon" label="Vidal Sassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="1623" end="1645" title="Israeli Defence Forces" label="Israeli Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="1662" end="1683" title="1948 Arab-Israeli War" label="1948 Arab-Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="1929" end="1931" title="Victoria Cross" label="VC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795145" start="1947" end="1958" title="Thomas William Gould" label="Tommy Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="2069" end="2078" title="terrorist" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="2083" end="2092" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q887527" start="2660" end="2693" title="Board of Deputies of British Jews" label="Board of Deputies of British Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="2898" end="2915" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="2940" end="2947" title="Zionist" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q207913" start="2967" end="2972" title="Irgun" label="Irgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="2976" end="3001" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="British Mandate Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q334368" start="3101" end="3112" title="Denis Pritt" label="D. N. Pritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253031" start="3114" end="3130" title="John Platts-Mills" label="John Platt-Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033220" start="3136" end="3149" title="Woodrow Wyatt" label="Woodrow Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115258" start="3199" end="3211" title="Jack Solomons" label="Jack Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q543118" start="3216" end="3228" title="Bud Flanagan" label="Bud Flanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="3479" end="3493" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q334318" start="3495" end="3511" title="James Chuter Ede" label="James Chuter Ede"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="3622" end="3632" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="3683" end="3694" title="Sturmabteilung" label="Brownshirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474463" start="4043" end="4055" title="Colin Jordan" label="Colin Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012087" start="4064" end="4091" title="National Socialist Movement (UK, 1962)" label="National Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q129143" start="4123" end="4139" title="Trafalgar Square" label="Trafalgar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641860" start="4243" end="4251" title="62 Group" label="62 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="4590" end="4602" title="anti-fascist" label="anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641860" start="4622" end="4630" title="62 Group" label="62 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q15727743" start="4635" end="4654" title="Anti-Fascist Action" label="Anti-Fascist Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="4706" end="4717" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q15642800" start="4767" end="4783" title="The Archive Hour" label="The Archive Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="4835" end="4839" title="BBC2" label="BBC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="4844" end="4847" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="6538" end="6550" title="Anti-fascism" label="Anti-fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641860" start="6553" end="6561" title="62 Group" label="62 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q315829" start="6924" end="6936" title="Jungle World" label="jungle world"/>
<link wikidata="Q238990" start="7071" end="7110" title="United States Holocaust Memorial Museum" label="United States Holocaust Memorial Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423320" wikidata="Q3511206" url="?curid=423320" title="Gerry Gable">
<text>Gerry Gable (born 27 January 1937) is a British political activist. He was a long-serving editor of the anti-fascist &quot;Searchlight&quot; magazine.

==Background==
The son of a Jewish woman and an Anglican father, Gable grew up in post-war east London identifying as Jewish. As a youth, Gable was a member of the Young Communist League and the Communist Party of Great Britain, and worked as a runner on the Communist Party&#x27;s &quot;Daily Worker&quot; newspaper, leaving after a year to become a Communist Party trade union organiser. He stood unsuccessfully for the Communist Party in 1962 at Northfield Ward, Stamford Hill, North London. He left the Communist Party because of their anti-Israel policy and because &quot;first and foremost [he has] always been a Jewish trade unionist&quot;.

Joined by other Jews and anti-fascists, many ex-servicemen and members of the (Spanish) International Brigades, the militant anti-fascist organisation 62 Group was formed to confront fascists organising on the streets.

Gable organised intelligence for the 62 Group on fascists, including using infiltrators to help build a defence policy for the community against fascist attacks. This led to the formation of the anti-fascist magazine &quot;Searchlight&quot; in the mid-1960s, along with Reg Freeson, Joan Lestor, Maurice Ludmer and others. Gable and Ludmer remained active in Searchlight Associates and re-launched the magazine in 1975.

==1963 burglary of David Irving&#x27;s flat==
By November 1963, David Irving was in England when he called the London Metropolitan Police with suspicions he had been the victim of a burglary by three men who had gained access to his Hornsey flat in London claiming to be General Post Office (GPO) telephone engineers. Gable was convicted in January 1964, along with Manny Carpel. They were fined £20 each, with Gable being fined an additional £5 for the theft of a GPO pass.

==BBC libel litigation==
In 1984, Gerry Gable was commissioned by the BBC to produce research for a BBC Panorama programme &quot;Maggie&#x27;s Militant Tendency&quot;. The episode was to focus on a claim of right-wing extremism in the Conservative Party. Gable claimed that his research drew upon the information previously published in &quot;Searchlight&quot;. The claims by Gable that two Conservative Party figures, Neil Hamilton and Gerald Howarth, were secret extremist Nazi supporters was met with libel action against the BBC. The programme had alleged (not admitted as evidence in court) that Hamilton gave a Nazi salute in Berlin while &#x27;messing around&#x27; on a Parliamentary visit in August 1983. &quot;The Guardian&quot; reported that &quot;Writing for the &quot;Sunday Times&quot; after the collapse of the case, he admitted he did give a little salute with two fingers to his nose to give the impression of a toothbrush moustache. &quot;Somebody on the trip clearly did not share our sense of humour,&quot; he wrote.&quot;

The BBC later capitulated and paid the pair&#x27;s legal costs. Hamilton and Howarth were awarded £20,000 each and in a subsequent edition of &quot;Panorama&quot;, the BBC made an unreserved apology to both.

In 1989, &quot;Private Eye&quot; magazine falsely claimed that Reginald Gulliver-Buckingham, a member of the military police, had plotted to abduct and murder Gable. The High Court ordered that substantial damages be paid due to the libellous claims.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3511206" start="0" end="11" title="Gerry Gable" label="Gerry Gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q787345" start="123" end="134" title="Searchlight (magazine)" label="Searchlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="180" end="186" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="200" end="208" title="Church of England" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q23672290" start="316" end="338" title="Young Communist League" label="Young Communist League"/>
<link wikidata="Q592068" start="347" end="379" title="Communist Party of Great Britain" label="Communist Party of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948306" start="440" end="452" title="Morning Star (British newspaper)" label="Daily Worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="519" end="530" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716505" start="618" end="631" title="Stamford Hill" label="Stamford Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q734547" start="633" end="645" title="North London" label="North London"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="917" end="938" title="militant anti-fascist" label="militant anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641860" start="952" end="960" title="62 Group" label="62 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q787345" start="1238" end="1261" title="Searchlight (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Searchlight&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137226" start="1291" end="1302" title="Reg Freeson" label="Reg Freeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205220" start="1304" end="1315" title="Joan Lestor" label="Joan Lestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793310" start="1317" end="1331" title="Maurice Ludmer" label="Maurice Ludmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q158629" start="1506" end="1518" title="David Irving" label="David Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="1553" end="1579" title="London Metropolitan Police" label="London Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="1713" end="1732" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247810" start="2018" end="2030" title="BBC Panorama" label="BBC Panorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835026" start="2047" end="2078" title="Maggie&amp;#x27;s Militant Tendency" label="Maggie&amp;#x27;s Militant Tendency"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="2153" end="2171" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337819" start="2337" end="2350" title="Neil Hamilton (politician)" label="Neil Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q689589" start="2355" end="2369" title="Gerald Howarth" label="Gerald Howarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="2637" end="2649" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195701" start="3185" end="3196" title="Private Eye" label="Private Eye"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423322" wikidata="Q2981802" url="?curid=423322" title="Mississippi Mills, Ontario">
<text>Mississippi Mills is a town in eastern Ontario, Canada, in Lanark County on the Mississippi River. It is made up of the former Townships of Ramsay and Pakenham, as well as the Town of Almonte. 

==History== 
The Town of Mississippi Mills was incorporated on January 1, 1998, by amalgamating the town of Almonte with the townships of Ramsay and Pakenham.

==Communities==
The town comprises the communities of Almonte, Appleton, Bennies Corners, Blakeney, Cedar Hill, Clayton, Galbraith, McCrearys, Montgomery Park, Pakenham, Ramsay, Snedden, The Tannery, Uneeda, and Union Hall. The town administrative offices are located in Ramsay and Almonte.

Many of the communities in Mississippi Mills were settled along the shores of the Mississippi River where the natural falls provided an opportunity to harness the water power to operate the mills.

===Almonte===
Settled in 1816, Almonte was one of the principal wool manufacturing towns of the Ottawa Valley. Formerly a separate municipality, the town located along the Mississippi River, has had many name changes: Shepherd&#x27;s Falls, Shipman&#x27;s Mills, Ramsayville, Waterford and then Almonte after a Mexican general.

===Appleton===
A former mill town, Appleton was settled in the 1820s along the Mississippi River in the former Ramsay Township. The town once included a sawmill, gristmill and a woolen mill.

===Bennies Corners===
Bennie’s Corners was a small village located at the junction of the eighth line of Ramsay and Bennies Corners Road, on land where James Bennie settled in 1821. Most of the hamlet was destroyed by fire in the summer of 1851, and when rebuilt it had little more than a post office and general store, a few residences, a school and some trades with a population of about fifty people. In 1874, the area post office was moved from Bennies Corners to Blakeney in 1874.

===Blakeney===
Located on the Blakeney Road, the community was first settled in 1821 at rapids along the Mississippi River. It was originally known as Norway Pine Falls, Snedden’s Mills and Rosebank, before being formally named Blakeney in 1865.

===Cedar Hill===
The village of Cedar Hill was first called Upper Pakenham and was built around the first school and once had a small population with two sawmills, two churches and a school. The village is located at the intersection of Cedar Hill Side Road and the 7th Concession in the former Pakenham Township.

===Clayton===
Founded by Edward Bellamy in 1824, it was first named Bellamy’s Mills, Clifton and then finally named Clayton in 1858 for postal reasons. The hamlet is located at the intersection of Tatlock Road and Bellamy Mills Road, on the shore of Clayton Lake, a local recreational area.

===Galbraith===
The area of Galbraith is located at Rae Road and Concession 5 in the former Ramsay Township. It was named after Daniel Galbraith, a Member of the Provincial Parliament, and later Member of Parliament, who owned the surrounding land which he had purchased in 1855. The one room Galbraith School, S.S. No. 5 Ramsay, was on a half acre of land at the top of the hill, which Mr. Galbraith had sold to the school trustees in 1870 for $1.00. He also gave land for a second school in 1875 on the opposite side of the road. The school operated until 1969 when the Government of Ontario mandated the consolidation of county schools and bussed students to either Almonte or Carleton Place.

===McCrearys===
Among the first settlers of the area was the McCreary family in 1823. McCrearys was located on Concession 3, Lot 3 in the former Ramsay Township.
Joseph McCreary gave the land for the first school, on which &quot;McCreary School&quot; was erected. This one was torn down and a new one was erected in 1871. The community was known for the McCreary Cheese Factory, located on the road south of Highway 7.

===Montgomery Park===
Located along the Montgomery Park Road next to the Mississippi River.

===Pakenham===
Pakenham, formally established in 1823, is known for the nearby Mount Pakenham, a popular skiing location, and the five-arch stone bridge crossing the Mississippi River. Built in 1901, it is the only five-arch stone bridge in North America. The community itself is named for a brother-in-law to the Duke of Wellington, Major-General Sir Edward Pakenham, who was killed near the Mississippi River in the southern United States commanding British forces at the Battle of New Orleans in 1815.

===Ramsay===

===Snedden===

===The Tannery===

===Uneeda===

===Union Hall===

==Demographics==

In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Mississippi Mills had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.
==Culture==

Mississippi Mills is home to several festivals and events, including the North Lanark Highland Games, Naismith 3-on-3 Basketball Festival, the Almonte Fair and CeltFest.

Many of the town&#x27;s citizens commute to the nearby city of Ottawa. Almonte has three elementary schools: R. Tait McKenzie Public School, Naismith Memorial Public School and Holy Name of Mary Catholic School. Almonte and District High School serves the town of Almonte and much of the surrounding area.

==See also==
*List of townships in Ontario
*Joseph Yuill

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2981802" start="0" end="17" title="Mississippi Mills, Ontario" label="Mississippi Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="23" end="27" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="39" end="46" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801761" start="59" end="72" title="Lanark County" label="Lanark County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503538" start="80" end="97" title="Mississippi River (Ontario)" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391099" start="303" end="310" title="Almonte, Ontario" label="Almonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391099" start="409" end="416" title="Almonte, Ontario" label="Almonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391099" start="876" end="883" title="Almonte, Ontario" label="Almonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217231" start="2835" end="2851" title="Daniel Galbraith (Ontario politician)" label="Daniel Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q96392575" start="2855" end="2890" title="Member of Provincial Parliament (Canada)" label="Member of the Provincial Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="2902" end="2922" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589283" start="3279" end="3300" title="Government of Ontario" label="Government of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391099" start="3376" end="3383" title="Almonte, Ontario" label="Almonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041701" start="3387" end="3401" title="Carleton Place" label="Carleton Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922640" start="3996" end="4010" title="Mount Pakenham" label="Mount Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="4022" end="4028" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125451" start="4047" end="4069" title="Pakenham Bridge" label="five-arch stone bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503538" start="4083" end="4100" title="Mississippi River (Ontario)" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="4231" end="4249" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293005" start="4269" end="4284" title="Edward Pakenham" label="Edward Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="4310" end="4327" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q41894" start="4391" end="4412" title="Battle of New Orleans" label="Battle of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="4528" end="4553" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="4567" end="4584" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643835" start="5275" end="5303" title="List of townships in Ontario" label="List of townships in Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288133" start="5305" end="5317" title="Joseph Yuill" label="Joseph Yuill"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423330" wikidata="Q6808031" url="?curid=423330" title="Mega-City One">
<text>Mega-City One is a fictional city that features in the &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; comic book series and related media. A post-nuclear megalopolis covering much of what is now the Eastern United States and some of Canada, the city&#x27;s exact geography depends on the writer and artist working the story. From its first appearance it has been associated with New York City&#x27;s urban sprawl; originally presented as a future New York, it was retconned as the centre of a &quot;Mega-City One&quot; in the third issue.

The &quot;Architects&#x27; Journal&quot; placed it at No. 1 in their list of &quot;comic book cities&quot;.

== Development ==
When the series &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; was being developed in 1976–77 it was originally planned that the story would be set in New York, in the near future. However, when artist Carlos Ezquerra drew his first story for the series, a skyscraper in the background of one panel looked so futuristic that editor Pat Mills instructed him to draw a full-page poster of the city. Ezquerra&#x27;s vision of the city – with massive tower blocks and endless roads suspended vast distances above the ground with no visible means of support – was so futuristic that it prompted a rethink, and a whole new city was proposed. Art director Doug Church suggested that the city should extend along the entire Eastern Seaboard, and be called Mega-City One, and his idea was adopted.

While the first &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; story is set in &quot;New York 2099AD&quot;, prog 3 retconned that and said New York was just part of Mega-City One. The back of prog 3 included an Ezquerra &quot;Futuregraph&quot; poster of Mega-City One (a page from an unused &quot;Dredd&quot; story), which said the city stretched from Montreal to Georgia and had 150 million citizens; it was part of the &quot;United States of the West&quot; (USW). Prog 4 then established that Mega-City One was surrounded by wildernesses from the Atomic Wars. The 150 million population was later revised to 100 million in earlier strips and abruptly bumped to 800 million later on. The United States of the West concept was dropped entirely; a &quot;United Cities of North America&quot; of three megacities was mentioned in prog 42 and then itself dropped in favour of Mega-City One being an independent entity.

In early strips, the Judges existed alongside a regular police force, were popular with the citizens, and the people enjoyed robots doing the work, with the &quot;Grand Judge&quot; saying they would not consent to work more than ten hours a week. Over time, the strip would have the Judges as a feared police-state force with sole power; prog 118 (written when unemployment was going up in Britain) established that citizens resented being unemployed and took up bizarre crazes to deal with the boredom, and this remained part of the strip from then on.

== Description ==
Mega-City One evolved out of a growing conurbation stretching from Boston to Washington DC, which took form in the 21st century to cope with the escalating population crisis in the United States and – as a solution chosen to deal with the high crime rate – led to the introduction of the Judge system.

Mega-City One was one of three major areas to survive the nuclear war in 2070, due to an experimental laser missile-defense system built not long before. The other two being Mega-City Two (encompassing California, Washington and Oregon) and Texas City. Apart from those megacities, the United States has been reduced to the Cursed Earth.

Eventually, Mega-City One extended to Miami, Florida, which became a holiday resort, and spread west into Ohio and/or West Virginia. The megacity was built over the top of the old cities and the polluted Ohio River, creating the lawless Undercity, though a few buildings like the Empire State Building and Statue of Liberty were moved to Mega-City One for the tourists. Maps of the city show that in the early 22nd century, it stretched roughly from southern Maine down through Florida and to the north-east has absorbed the Quebec City-Windsor Corridor in Canada. 800 million citizens lived in the city at this point.

The population and city sprawl were halved by nuclear attack and Soviet invasion in 2104 (in the 1982 story &quot;The Apocalypse War&quot;), with the loss of the entire south in a saturation nuclear strike. The north-west and upper north were also lost, leaving the city stretching from roughly New Hampshire through North Carolina and losing the Canadian territory. A small part of the north west survived: the North West Hab Zone, separated from the rest of the city by a stretch of radioactive wasteland called Nuke Alley and linked to the main city by a bridge. The population remained at around 400 million from 2104 until 2134.

Mega-City One has a far greater population density than any city in the present-day world. Most city dwellers (citizens) live in huge apartment blocks (50,000+), though many citizens live a perpetually nomadic existence in vehicular mo-pads (mobile homes) due to inadequate housing provisions. These citizens travel the city via the many public transport routes available, rarely stopping. Some mo-pads are quite luxurious, complete with swimming pools.

Most of the city&#x27;s energy supply is covered by geothermal energy in the form of a controlled volcano called the Power Tower.

For administrative purposes the city is divided into 305 sectors, most of them renamed to fit the new size of the city after the Apocalypse War, and clumped into Central, North, South, East, and West. Sectors 1 (the centre) to 300 constitute the main city. The North-West Hab Zone encompasses sectors 301-5. The Hab Zone was mostly ignored by the city and Sector 301 became disparagingly nicknamed &quot;The Pit&quot; due to its high crime rate, until Chief Judge Volt had it cleaned up in 2118. Other slum areas have been called &quot;Angeltown&quot; (Sector 13&#x27;s slums) and &quot;the Low Life&quot;.

Following the events of the 2011–12-story Day of Chaos (set in 2134), Mega-City One was left in ruins and almost 90% of its population was killed. After decades of being the main megacity and superpower on Earth, the city is now bankrupt and in severe decline with many judges considering the situation unsustainable.

However over the following few years the city began to grow again due to immigration, taking in of refugees and the gradual return of millions of citizens who sat out the plague overseas and off world. By October 2137 the population stood at seventy two million and was growing rapidly reaching 100 million around 2139. However the destruction of the Academy of Law during Chaos Day has disrupted the supply of cadets, and it is all the remaining judges can do to cope with the expanding population as it will be years before replacement of losses is reliable again.

In 2019 a story set in 2141 stated that the population had been revised upwards to 130 million, due to a number of reasons, including the overestimation of the number of deaths in Chaos Day, a declining death rate since then, and births and immigration. It also confirmed that many citizens fled either before or during the Chaos plague and have been slowly returning in the seven years since, and that the Chaos bug disproportionately killed the elderly ensuring a higher number of fertile age survivors to repopulate the city. By this point then Chief Judge Hershey believed the city could once again safely absorb such a vast increase in numbers, as many undamaged blocks remained available to be re-inhabited.

=== Other territories ===
Mega-City One has protectorates and colonies outside of the city walls:
* Mega-City One held joint jurisdiction over Atlantis, an underwater city located mid way across the Atlantic along with Brit Cit until 2143 when it was destroyed by a mafia hit squad during a failed hit, killing most of its population.
* Various colonies on other planets, used as both settings and background detail in &quot;Dredd&quot; and its spin-off strips. Law and the city&#x27;s central government are enforced by Colonial-Marshal Judges; indigenous aliens and MC-1 colonialists are often oppressed and some cause insurgencies. Military forces are often mentioned as being space based (see Military). The spin-off strip &quot;Insurrection&quot; showed that the Special Judicial Service have an outer-space army to deal with any colonies where the judicial staff declare independence. The main push into space began roughly in 2095, under Chief Judge Goodman, as a way of supplying the city with resources that a post-war Earth could no longer provide. The most famous colony is the penal colony on Titan, where corrupt Judges are sent.
* Various farms, mines, prisons, and protectorate townships in the Cursed Earth. The Cursed Earth Auxiliaries patrol the area for Justice Department. The city used to have mutant camps, where mutants born in the city were deported, but these were ended after the repeal of the mutant apartheid laws.
* Townships One through Four: since 2130, the bulk of mutant citizens live in large towns outside of the city. Law enforcement is mostly done by mutant deputies, and unlike the city they still use the jury trial system (unless a judge demands otherwise).

== City Blocks ==
Blocks are huge and can be considered to be a small town in themselves. Each one will typically possess a hospital, gymnasium, school, and shopping district. A citizen can quite literally live their whole lives without leaving their block. Due to the high unemployment rate, boredom is rife among citizens – this, coupled with the high loyalty citizens develop to their blocks, along with a city-defence militia for most city blocks, leads to many &quot;Block Wars&quot;, riots (more like small wars) between two or more blocks.

Blocks are named after famous or historical figures, often with current events in mind. A typical example – shortly after the Nicole Kidman and Tom Cruise separation there was an episode with block war breaking out between the &quot;Kidman&quot; and &quot;Cruise&quot; Blocks. A proposed crackdown on civil rights in Britain led to a block being named David Blunkett Block in one story.

== Government ==
Since the abolition of democratic government in America in 2070, Mega-City One has been a dictatorship run by the Justice Department. It subsequently became an independent city-state following the break-up of the United States and had already been granted autonomy within the Union in 2052. Its ruler is the Chief Judge, in current stories (as of September 2023) Judge Logan. He is accountable to a council of five senior judges. The citizens are permitted to have an elected city council and mayor, but with no significant power: the idea is that a facade of democracy will placate most people.

In 2113 a referendum was held in which the people were allowed to decide whether to restore democratic government, but by this time the memory of democracy had become so distant that the majority of citizens did not bother to vote, and most of those who did opted to retain the &quot;status quo&quot;.

In the early years of &quot;Judge Dredd&quot;, Mega-City One had not been established as a dictatorship – &quot;The Purple People Breeder&quot; (&quot;2000 AD Sci-Fi Special 1978&quot;) mentioned &quot;presidential candidate Howard Surb&quot;, while &quot;Ryan&#x27;s Revenge&quot; (&quot;Dan Dare Annual 1979&quot;) had the Mayor giving orders to Justice Department. The Luna-One story arc briefly mentioned the governing body &quot;the Grand Council of Judges&quot; and &quot;the Triumvirate&quot;, part of a unified state called the United Cities of North America, but this was dropped by prog 61.

===List of chief judges===
# Judge Fargo (2031–2051)
# Judge Solomon (2051–2057)
# Judge Goodman (2057–2101)
# Judge Cal (2101)
# Judge Griffin (2101–2104)
# Judge McGruder (2104–2108)
# Judge Silver (2108–2112)
# Judge McGruder (2112–2116)
# Judge Greel (acting chief judge, 2116)
# Judge Volt (2116–2121)
# Judge Hershey (2122–2131)
# Judge Francisco (2131)
# Judge Sinfield (acting chief judge, 2131–2132) (usurper)
# Judge Francisco (2132–2134)
# Judge Hershey (2134–2141)
# Judge Logan (2141–incumbent)

===List of mayors===
&quot;(This is not a complete list of mayors, but only of those who appeared in the comic.)&quot;
* Mayor Amalfi
* Mayor Jim Grubb
* Mayor Dave the Orangutan, an actual orangutan who was elected as a mass protest vote against incompetent politicians.
* Mayor Lindberg
* Mayor Katz
* Mayor Donald Byron Ambrose, actually serial killer PJ Maybe in disguise (having murdered the real Ambrose – and Katz – before the election)
* Mayor Tony Blore
* Mayor Denny Oneman

The identity of the current mayor is not known (as of May 2024).

A story in &quot;2000 AD&quot; #32 featured a cameo role by a character referred to as &quot;City Father Washington,&quot; whose status and role in the city&#x27;s history has not been elaborated on.

==Judges==

Judges are the product of many (normally 15) years&#x27; of training and psychological conditioning. Training takes place in the Academy of Law and generally begins at age five. The Judges recruit promising children, and also grow their own 
clones.
Their standard issue firearm is the Lawgiver handgun, which can fire six different kinds of ammunition. It has a handprint-reading sensor which only allows its owner to use it, and a self-destruct device to kill or maim unauthorised users. Judges ride Lawmaster bikes, which are heavily armed and have artificial intelligence.

The Judges themselves are not above the law – a violation that would earn a citizen a few months in an Iso[lation]-Cube may earn a Judge a twenty-year sentence of hard labour on Saturn&#x27;s moon, Titan, after surgical modification to enable the convict to survive Titan&#x27;s atmosphere. They were also expected to live in celibacy, to avoid personal attachments that might bias them or make them vulnerable to manipulation and blackmail.

The Justice Department has its own domestic intelligence division (the Public Surveillance Unit), and their own medical facilities. There are a number of specialist divisions within the Judges, notably Psi Division, which consists of psychic judges used to predict the future and read minds, and Tek Division, made of forensic scientists and engineers. The SJS (Special Judicial Squad) monitors and polices the Judges internally.

Block Judges (Judges assigned to a particular city block) also hear civil cases in each City Block, where they try civil claims.
When a street judge retires from service at the end of his career, he may choose to take the &quot;Long Walk&quot;, leaving Mega-City One for exile outside its borders. He may do this either in the Cursed Earth, a radioactive desert outside the city walls, or in the Undercity, the ruins of New York that lie beneath the mega-city. The Long Walk begins with a brief ceremony at the city gates, wherein the retiring judge walks through an honour guard of judges as they discharge their firearms into the air, while another judge formally bids him farewell. Judges who take the Long Walk are expected never to return, but to die &quot;bringing law to the lawless.&quot; Alternatively, retiring judges may instead be placed in administrative or teaching posts instead of taking the Long Walk.

===Origin===
The Judge System was created by Eustace Fargo, then special government prosecutor for street crime, between 2027 and 2031, to combat a rising tide of violent crime and to speed up the process of justice. While there was heavy protest in Congress over the idea of abandoning due process, the electorate was in favour and President Gurney (who supported Fargo&#x27;s plan) was re-elected with a massive majority. The original uniforms heavily resembled those of normal American police officers, albeit with helmets and heavy body armour, and rode Lawranger motorcycles. Following the Third World War of 2070 and discovering that President Booth had stolen the election, the Judges seized power.

== Civilian population ==
The citizens are shown to be a mixed bag. 98% are unemployed (due to advances in robotics) and range from lazy and sloth-like to highly rebellious violent criminals, bent on destroying and killing as much as they can for whatever reason they can think of at that time, if any. Most of the Judges show a lack of empathy towards them. For example, in his Christmas message, Chief Judge Francisco asked citizens if a large number that were on welfare could commit suicide in order to help balance the budget for the following year. Some Judges openly view citizens as a nuisance to be removed, or like Judge Manners, as a sub-human race to be used and abused as the Judges see fit.

The citizens occupy their time with many strange and outright bizarre hobbies, such as simping (recreational stupidity), bat gliding, sky surfing and peeping (spying on people at home and in public), which is illegal when done for voyeuristic purposes, but legal when done under the authority of a Judge. If any of these ever get out of hand and there is no legal justification for banning, Judges simply impose a heavy tax on them, restricting them to only the few very wealthy citizens.

Most are poorly educated and many can barely read or write, some sectors are said to be entirely illiterate, but Judges aren&#x27;t that concerned, as it makes it easier for them to control and they can weed out the more intelligent simply when major crimes occur. Those that can read though are not much better, for example, when a book that detailed how to commit suicide was released, thousands of previously non-suicidal citizens (including the book&#x27;s author) killed themselves since they had read how to do it in the book. At one point in some of the more dangerous blocks, Judges put sedatives into the air systems to help keep the citizens docile and easier to control.

Some show huge promise, intelligence, and have extremely useful skills, many top scientists and engineers are not Judges. Most of the city&#x27;s biggest advancements in areas such as food, new materials, technology (unrelated to weaponry), medicine and architecture and construction design (including the Halls of Justice) came from ordinary citizens. All the major businesses and entertainment (apart from Justice Department propaganda channels) figures are citizens as are a lot of the city&#x27;s diplomats, but they always report to a Judge before making any decisions. Not all valued skills are the same as the real world ones, examples of this are human taxidermy and professional gluttony. Most of the highly intelligent citizens end up in crime such as PJ Maybe, and Nero Narcos, as they are very limited in the wealth or power they can attain (the amount of real power a citizen can gain though is very limited) legally.

== Law ==

Mega-City One&#x27;s laws are harsh, with many crimes not found in present-day law. Possession of sugar, for example, is illegal, as is the smoking of tobacco outside of licensed Smokatoriums, and coffee is banned as an illegal stimulant. The laws are enforced by the Judges, who are a combination of a judge and police officer. Ordinary laws are enforced more harshly than the present day, as a political choice to deal with the high crime rate. Most ordinary citizens are sent to the Iso-Cubes, tiny cells located within huge prisons. For example, one strip saw a citizen sentenced to a month in the iso-cubes for littering, while in another story a citizen was given 6 months for jaywalking. Judges impose immediate sentences on the spot, usually lengthy sentences of imprisonment (or &quot;encubement&quot;). In extreme cases, even the death penalty may be imposed, although relatively sparingly compared with the present day, and reserved for mass murder or the endangerment of the security of the city, but sometimes it is used simply to make an example or to intimidate the citizens. Nevertheless, many criminals are shot to death while resisting arrest, and resistors who survive Judge assault often receive a whole-life cube term.

The Judges themselves are not exempt from the law; in fact they are expected to obey it more strictly than any other. A violation that would earn a citizen a few months in an Iso-Cube would get a Judge a twenty-year sentence, served as hard labor on Saturn&#x27;s moon, Titan, after surgical modification to enable the convict to survive outside without needing an expensive space suit. (Titan is a moon of Saturn in reality, but was located over Jupiter in an early Dredd strip.) When Judges do make a minor mistake (anything where the citizen is alive and not in an intensive care ward) such as wrongful arrest or search, they do have to pay the citizen a compensation fee if there are no crimes to be charged with. On that basis, if they can&#x27;t find any evidence for the main charge, then they will look for any minor crime or misdemeanors to charge the citizen with to get themselves off the hook.

Firearm possession is only legal with the proper firearms permit, which is very hard to obtain. The only real exception is for Citidef units, which may use heavy weapons. (Since Block Mania the security on these is extreme and they are only issued during wartime.) In spite of this, many firearms are in circulation; some are sold on the black market while others are left over from the various invasions that have occurred over the past thirty years. Some families still possess twentieth-century handguns that have been handed down through the years. These are sometimes found by crime blitzes and will usually earn culprits the same penalty as a lasblaster from their time period.

Torture is normally illegal, but in extreme circumstances and with orders from the Chief Judge they employ it (both physical and psychological), for example when time is of the essence due to the city being in severe danger (or the Justice Department&#x27;s authority is). They used that reason to torture Total War cell leaders, leading to the deaths of several of them. The Judges covered this up, &quot;arresting&quot; them by faking heart attacks, strokes or whatever was realistic or convenient at that time and then told their next of kin they had died, with this they could do whatever they wanted to them. They also used torture on the leading democrats before the democratic march, such as keeping an elderly democrat awake all night and then releasing him without charge, knowing he would have to march all day the following day and making severe threats to another involving his young children.

== Military ==
The original United States Armed Forces no longer exists: the explanation in &quot;Origins&quot; was that Chief Judge Goodman had built up the Judges until they were a match for the United States Army, as a precaution against President Booth. When Booth was overthrown after the Atomic Wars, the remains of the US Army were routed and finally destroyed in 2071&#x27;s Battle of Armageddon. (In the immediate aftermath of the war, military discipline broke down and the Judges had to kill or arrest soldiers that were preying on the citizens.)

Mega-City One&#x27;s military forces are inconsistently portrayed. During crises inside the city, regular Judges or Citi-Def are almost always shown doing the fighting instead and the military is usually mentioned in outer space – &quot;Day of Chaos&quot; eventually explained that they&#x27;re unlicensed to act against the civilian population. From &quot;The Cursed Earth&quot; onwards, the city&#x27;s armed forces have usually been presented as a branch of the Judges (&quot;Judge-Troopers&quot;): stories by Gordon Rennie introduced a Defence-Div, 1990s spin-off &quot;Maelstrom&quot; had heavily armed STAR (Strategic Target Attack Retaliation) Judges to carry out targeted strikes, and the &quot;Insurrection&quot; serials give the Special Judicial Service its own space fleet and armed force to stamp out rebellions. In contrast, stories by John Wagner have presented the military as a separate group, with some members believing the Judges are too lenient. Uniforms differ depending on the story. The STAR Judges were given an origin as founded in 2108 by Commander Brand, with Brand and his original squad secretly left to die after committing an act of genocide in 2111 (this was covered up as a legitimate act of war and the STARs turned into martyrs, allowing Mega-City One to still claim the devastated planet).

The main military force mentioned is the Space Corps, composed of marines and fleets, who fight against alien races that threaten the colonies. (When originally introduced in &quot;The Corps&quot; spinoff, they were Judges from the Academy of Law but in later stories these are recruited citizens.) Another force are the Genetic Infantry: genetically engineered men, bred in a lab to be dedicated soldiers. (The story &quot;Warzone&quot; had an ex-Genetic Infantry soldier who was a primitive version of the Genetic Infantry from &quot;Rogue Trooper&quot;.) The Citi-Defs (Citizen Defence) are a reserve force composed of citizens. Each city block contains a Citi-Def force in case of crises, though usually they turn up in &quot;Dredd&quot; as rogue factions waging block wars.

In very rare, desperate and often last stand scenarios the Justice Departments auxiliaries are issued weapons and fight alongside Judges, such as in the latter stages of both the Apocalypse War and Judgement Day.

Mega-City One also runs spy networks and a Black Ops Division of Judges. Under Judge Bachmann, their agents were brainwashed to worship the city as a god.

Following &quot;Day of Chaos&quot;, the regular military (particularly the Space Corps) have been helping to keep order in Mega-City One. Tensions exists between them and the Judges. By 2136, following Chaos Day and a dual war with the Xhind/colonial insurgency, Mega-City One no longer had the military power to stop a rebellion on Titan.

== Crimes ==

Many crimes in Mega-City One are controlled by flamboyant mob bosses:
* &quot;Blitzers:&quot; hitmen with self-destruct bombs implanted inside them which detonate if they surrender when apprehended.
* &quot;Body-sharking:&quot; loaning money to people willing to put a loved one into cryonic storage for collateral.
* &quot;Chump-dumping:&quot; conning aliens into believing Earth is a paradise, taking their money, and then dumping them into space.
* &quot;Face changing crimes:&quot; the illicit use of face changing machines to commit crimes and fraud.
* &quot;Futsies:&quot; People who can no longer handle the fast pace of life begin to suffer from &quot;Future Shock,&quot; become psychotic and begin to commit crimes.
* &quot;Numbers racket:&quot; buying computer passcodes for industrial theft.
* &quot;Organ leggers:&quot; those who cut up citizens and sell their organs on the black market.
* &quot;Perp running:&quot; transporting felons off-world.
* &quot;Psycos:&quot; telepathic protection rackets.
* &quot;Stookie glanding:&quot; butchering Stookies, an intelligent alien race, for the anti-aging drug they produce.
* &quot;Umpty-baggers:&quot; pushers of umpty, a candy that tastes so good it forms an instant psychological addiction.

== Leisure ==
Most work in Mega-City One is carried out by robots; this has led to problems with boredom and unemployment. Boredom has fostered many problems in the city, with citizens spending their leisure time rioting over jobs, experimenting on their neighbors, and running amok in the streets. Weird fads include Block Wars (wars between neighboring apartment blocks, waged by each block&#x27;s defense militia), &quot;ugliness clinics&quot;, and odd fashions.

Leisure in Mega-City One consists of a number of weird and wonderful futuristic hobbies and attractions, including:
* The Aggro Dome was conceived as a way for frustrated citizens to let off steam without endangering their fellow Meggers. Within the domes, citizens can vent their anger on robots, mock storefronts, and parked vehicles. Aggro Limited, the owners of the Aggro Dome franchise, petitioned for Judge replicoids to be added to a number of their buildings as a target for client retaliation. The request was promptly refused. After problems on opening day Dredd did his best to close the place for good but failed. Eventually the dome closed in the mid 2120s after visitor numbers fell too low to turn a profit.
* The Alien Zoos are ever-popular attractions, featuring the most bizarre creatures from the Milky Way galaxy and beyond.
* The Central Mega-City Library is open free of charge to the public and is the storehouse of information on Mega-City One and beyond, past and present. Late fees are very high.
* The Dream Palace is a popular leisure activity – for some, a growing necessity – and the ultimate in escapism. Customers are plugged into dream machines where their dreams are made real. Morpheus, Inc. own the original chain of dream palaces, but were unsuccessful in blocking the expansion of rival Dream Parlours, back street services utilizing reconditioned dream machines. Some parlours offer other &quot;diversions&quot; to supplement their income.
* The Mega-City Chamber of Horrors features robot replicas of history&#x27;s most infamous villains.
* The Mega-City Museum is one of the tallest buildings in Mega-City One. It specializes in the history of Mega-City One, and is home to the most complete records of pre-atomic American civilization in North America. A transceiver beacon is sited atop the museum&#x27;s roof, for use by the Justice Department.
* The Museum of Death focuses on murderers, warfare that resulted in mass death, and historical instruments of torture.
* The Palais-De-Boing is a chain of purpose-built structures designed for Boingers. Boinging is illegal outside of the Palais-De-Boing.
* The Smokatoriums are giant, stinking domes – the only locations within Mega-City One limits where it is legal to smoke tobacco and nicotine-related products.
* The White Cliffs of Dover were imported from a cash-starved Brit-Cit in the aftermath of the Atomic War. It remains a popular attraction even though it is nothing more than a crumbling pile of rock, chalk, and sand.
* Stookie is an illegal drug made from the glands of an intelligent alien species that stops its users&#x27; aging. Withdrawal from Stookie causes users to rapidly reach their &#x27;real&#x27; ages. In one of the Judge Dredd novels, an injection of &quot;pure, undiluted&quot; Stookie causes the user to revert to a younger age.
* Sky surfing, where citizens use powered, floating surfboards to race and perform stunts.
* Batgliding, in which citizens don winged bat suits to fly on the thermals above Mega-City One.

== Transit systems ==
The high population density of Mega-City One requires a complex system of transport. This often serves as accommodation as well as a means of getting around the city.

=== Pedestrian ===
* Back street: Two-way passages, located in Old Town and City Bottom.
* Broad-Way: A large pedestrian plaza.
* Crossway: Any pedway intersection (a.k.a. Crosslink).
* Eeziglide: One-way pedestrian conveyance that functions as a human conveyor-belt.
* Pedway: Pedestrian-only walkway found right across the City at all levels. Subpeds are enclosed pedways that run under Pedways.
* Zipstrip: One or two-way pedestrian walkway that links blocks and smaller interchanges. Enclosed zipstrips are called Pipeways.

=== Vehicular ===
* Boomway: One or two-way multi-level Mega-Way (between four and ten lanes width, two to four levels height).
* Filter: One-way exit or entrance to and from parking areas.
* Flyover: Skedway that passes over a city block (a.k.a. Overzoom).
* Inter-Block Zoom: Maglev train-system which replaced the old Sky-Rail network in the late twenty-first century. Provides a link between all the city blocks in any given sector.
* Intersection: Road junction.
* Judge&#x27;s Lane: Two-way road that runs parallel to major roadways, reserved for Justice Department usage.
* Median Strip: Protective barrier which prevents accidents in one half of a road from spreading to the other half.
* Mega Circular: Two-way, six-lane Meg-Way which bypasses through-sector traffic to benefit long-distance drivers.
* Meg-Way: Largest road design in Mega-City One. Two-way, between four and twenty lanes, and central reservation (a.k.a. Megaway, Speedway, Throughway, X-Pressway).
* Parkarama: Ground vehicle park.
* Podport: Hover vehicle park.
* Skedway: One-way highway, between one and five lanes. Interskeds connect one skedway to another (a.k.a. Feedway). Underskeds are single-lane roads, often reserved for public service traffic only, that pass underneath skeds. Overskeds are the same, but pass over skeds.
* Sky-Rail: Obsolete monorail public transit-system introduced in the early 21st century. One-third of Mega-City One still actively uses the Sky-Rail network while it awaits upgrading to the zoom-system. The largest Sky-Rail intersection in the City is Hell&#x27;s Junction.
* Slipzoom: One-way, between one and four lanes, used for larger interchanges. An Underzoom (a.k.a. Flyunder) is a single-lane road often reserved for public service traffic only that passes under a Slipzoom.
* Superslab: The longest Meg-Way in Mega-City One, bisecting the City from north to south. Twenty-four lanes, 1,220 kilometers in length (a.k.a. Mega-City 500).
* Wayby: Small zones set aside Meg-Ways and Skedways in regular intervals where drivers can pull-off and temporarily park their vehicles.
* Zoomtube: The most recent traffic innovation in Mega-City One. An enclosed road-system where all traffic is platooned and computer-controlled for optimum speed and driver-safety.

== History ==
As &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; stories are set 122 years into the future and progress forward in &#x27;real time&#x27; (stories from 1977 are set in 2099, and stories from 2025 are set in 2147), they have an extensive fictional chronology.

Stories in earlier issues would link &quot;Dredd&quot; to the chronology of the &quot;Invasion!&quot;, &quot;Ro-Busters&quot;, and &quot;Harlem Heroes&quot; strips: Mega-City One&#x27;s construction is mentioned in &quot;Ro-Busters&quot; once it had moved to&quot; 2000 AD&quot;, and in a story that follows from &quot;Invasion!&quot;, while Mega-City One appears in &quot;Harlem Heroes&quot; and its lead character Giant is the father of Judge Giant. The former two strips have since been retconned out of Dredd history.
* Before 2027: By the late 2020s a conurbation stretches from New York to Washington DC in an attempt to contain the populace of the East Coast states. This will eventually become the first Mega-City, a new kind of urban development to house greater numbers of people. The development causes huge amounts of civil unrest and gang-related crime.
* 2027: An alliance of street gangs, led by the P Street Posse, storms the White House itself. Due to intimidation of the jury, no convictions occur. This incident will lead to the creation of the Judge System to police the country. Eustace Fargo is appointed Special Prosecutor for Street Crime by President Thomas Gurney.
* 2028: President Gurney re-elected due to his support for instant street justice.
* 2031: First deployment of the Judges in the United States, led by Chief Judge Fargo. Special centres train the new recruits, often hand-picked from the regular police, and old style judges have to undergo the new judge training program with the power to convict and sentence criminals on the spot.
* 2039: The success of Mega-City One inspires the creation of more Mega-Cities – Mega-City Two is planned to cover the Western seaboard and Texas City will cover Texas and other southern states. Other nations will follow.
* 2050: Earth is a mess of pollution, starvation, and wars. On June 3, Major Indira Knight, who developed America&#x27;s orbital laser weapons, is the first human to leave the solar system. The Harlem Heroes win the World Aeroball Championship.
* 2051: Fargo resigns and attempts suicide, but survives with serious injuries. He is secretly placed in suspended animation and his death is faked. Deputy Chief Judge Solomon becomes chief judge.
* 2052: Congress passes the Autonomy Act, giving extensive powers of self-government to the three American mega-cities. Each mega-city has its own chief judge: Solomon continues to serve as chief judge of Mega-City One.
* 2057: Deputy Chief Judge Goodman becomes chief judge and creates the Council of Five. Psi Division created.
* 2064: A new process of accelerated cloning, with DNA taken from senior Judges, is created by Morton Judd to quickly bolster Justice Department&#x27;s ranks. Joe and Rico Dredd are two of the first clones from this process, growing to physiological age 5 in a matter of months.
* 2066: Six clones, including the Dredd twins, are inducted into the Academy of Law.
* 2068: Vice President Robert L. Booth is elected president, gaining support under the line that the rest of the world was living off America&#x27;s backs. (It later emerges that he rigged the election.)
* 2069: International relations are soured when Booth sends troops to seize control of foreign oil reserves in the Middle East. This will later be consider part of World War Three between &quot;Western Capitalist Nations&quot; and Arab states but Brit-Cit is the only European state not to condemn it.
* 2070: President Booth starts the Atomic Wars on June 12, 2070 to mass public support; this comes as the senior judges are discussing whether to confront him. Despite Booth&#x27;s promises, America&#x27;s nuclear screens fail to keep out many of the retaliatory strikes. Most of the planet is devastated in a nuclear holocaust, and the world&#x27;s Mega-Cities are among the few to survive relatively unscathed due to experimental laser defences. All Judges and the military are deployed to maintain order in the decaying society, with the Judges forced to constantly fight against soldiers for committing criminal acts. It is discovered that Booth rigged the election and killed a witness to conceal the crime. Shocked and betrayed, the citizens of America rise up against the government and call for the Judges to take over the country. Fargo, secretly reawoken from suspended animation, advises Goodman to take over as ruler of the United States in a coup. Booth is sentenced to 100 years in suspended animation, but has enough loyal followers and robotic Mek-troops to fight a civil war against the Judges until 2071.
* 2071: The Battle of Armageddon. At the heart of the Cursed Earth, near Mega-City Two, Booth&#x27;s army is finally defeated at the cost of the lives of one hundred thousand judges and troopers. The Hiroshima Accord is settled by the various global Mega-Cities.
* 2070+: Massive inflow of homeless refugees from the Cursed Earth pour into the Mega-Cities, causing a massive amount of block construction. Space is becoming even tighter. Genetic apartheid laws are soon brought in to keep mutants out of Mega-City One: officially this is because the mutants are irrationally violent against &quot;norms&quot;, and to protect the gene pool from contamination.
* 2077–78: Mega-City One citizens are still running water through geiger counters. A desire for decadence causes the bloody new deathsport inferno to take the world by storm. The Harlem Heroes reform as the Harlem Hellcats. When the Hellcats refuse to work with the gambling syndicates, they&#x27;re forced to play to the death against robots; the brutality of the &#x27;78 Hellcats Murders leads to scared fans leaving and a judicial crackdown that destroys the sport.
* 2080: The Mega-City 5000 bike race is banned when the Mutant and Spacer gangs start killing each other mid-race. (It will continue illegally until 2100) The first competitive eating contests begin.
* 2083–86: Civil war breaks out between Mega-City One and Texas City, the latter feeling it is being dominated by the other Mega-Cities while MC-One and Two oppose its secession in the interests of unity and the highly valuable resources Texas owns. The war leads to years of stalemate, and Mega-City One decides the conflict is pointless and allows Texas to secede. Note: this event was possibly retconned by the story &quot;Origins&quot;.
* 2088: Establishment of Luna-1, a moon-based Mega-City, by all three American Mega-Cities to renew and cement relations between them. Government of the colony is divided initially between all three cities, with a senior judge being sent every six months to take over as Judge-Marshal.
* 2089: The first instance of Future Shock Syndrome or &quot;futsie&quot;.
* 2095: Chief Judge Goodman announces a policy of mass interstellar colonisation, as post-war Earth is low on resources. A decadent youth culture has built up around drugs, the pinstripe sound, and illegal comics.
* 2099: Population is now over 800 million. Chief Judge Goodman, possessed by a malevolent psychic mutant called the Monkey, is forced to undermine the stability of the city to have it descend into anarchy; Judge Dredd takes the Monkey out. The Statue of Judgement is erected in honour of the Judges. Renegade droid Call-Me-Kenneth starts the highly destructive First Robot War, devastating large areas of the city. Judge Dredd becomes the last Judge-Marshal of Luna-1 to serve a six-month tour of duty: Judge Tex succeeds him as permanent Marshal of Luna-1.
* 2101: Deputy Chief Judge Cal, head of the Special Judicial Squad, has Goodman assassinated and assumes control. He brainwashes most of the Judges into obeying him, brings in alien Kleggs as mercenaries, and implements increasingly insane and dictatorial rules – twice sentencing the entire city to death. Judge Dredd leads a rebellion against him and eventually succeeds, with resistance member Judge Griffin taking over as chief judge. Under Cal, a vast wall has been built around Mega-City One. The powerful mutant Father Earth leads a massed attack on Mega-City One, destroying Power Tower (a controlled volcano) and unleashing a flood of lava, before being stopped. A few months later, an invasion of mutant spiders leads to the burning of entire sectors.
* 2102: Judge Death arrives in Mega-City One and kills dozens before he is captured. The dying Psi-Judge Feyy predicts an apocalypse will occur in 2120 that can only be averted if a figure known as the Judge Child, who will become Chief Judge, can be found; Judge Dredd leads a mission to retrieve the Child, only to determine him to be evil and leave him stranded on an alien world.
* 2103: The Soviet block of East-Meg One, using robotic pirate Captain Skank as a proxy, secretly seize control of Mega-City One nuclear weapons and launch an attack on the city, destroying several sectors; after being caught, they nuke one of their own sectors as compensation. Judge Death is freed by the other Dark Judges; they go on a killing spree in Billy Carter Block before their physical forms are destroyed.
* 2104: Orlok the Assassin drugs the city water supply, increasing the aggression of the population and leading to block wars springing up across the entire city – which turns out to have just been a diversion. With the Judges tied up with the Block Mania, the Sov Judges of East-Meg One launch the Apocalypse War. A coordinated attack shatters Mega-City One&#x27;s defences, leaves multiple blocks destroyed by nuclear weaponry (the south of the city faces &quot;total nuke out!&quot; killing 150 million), and leads to a massed invasion by Sov forces. A bitter resistance is put up by Judges and Citizen-Defence units, despite heavy losses and the death (after being brainwashed into a Sov agent) of Chief Judge Griffin. Victory is achieved when a team led by Dredd causes the nuclear devastation of the entire East-Meg One. Judge McGruder becomes the new chief judge and oversees the rebuilding of the devastated city.
* 2107: A time travel mission is deployed to 2120 to determine the truth of Feyy&#x27;s death-bed prediction. The Mega-City One of the future is discovered to be devastated and ruled by demonic creatures (including a zombie Judge Dredd) under a mutated form of the Judge Child – now revealed to be responsible for the great disaster. The Judges take action to ensure this future is averted. Later the Dark Judges gain physical form again and, using personal teleporters, cause massacres across the city – even in the Grand Hall of Justice – without being stopped. They are eventually defeated and trapped in dimensional limbo.
* 2108: Shojun the Warlord unleashes the demonic Seven Samurai on Mega-City One, killing thousands – including the head of Psi-Division. McGruder steps down and is replaced by Judge Silver. Pro-democracy activists take over a TV station and are executed live on air by Dredd.
* 2109: Under Silver&#x27;s orders, Dredd leads the Judges in a dirty-tricks operation to undermine the upcoming Democratic March – including having Wally Squad (undercover) Judges in the crowd provoke a riot, so the Judges have an excuse to go in and use violence while seemingly having the moral high ground.
* 2110: Morton Judd and his Judge-clones – the Judda – launch an attack on the Hall of Justice. They are defeated and their base in the Oz Radback is destroyed. A Dredd-clone named Kraken survives and is eventually turned into a Mega-City Judge.
* 2112: Fortean manifestations occur in the city and across the globe, as the subterranean Deros attempt to invade; an East Meg 2/MC1 Psi team stops them. Dredd resigns and takes the Long Walk, following doubts about the Judge System caused both by Kraken and his role in breaking up the Democratic March. Silver covers up Dredd&#x27;s retirement and Kraken assumes Dredd&#x27;s place. While in the Cursed Earth, Dredd is injured and rendered amnesiac by the Sisters of Death. Meanwhile, the Sisters of Death are able to psychically influence Kraken into helping them cross over into Mega-City One and to free the Dark Judges from limbo. The city is turned into a Necropolis – the Judges are under psychic control, with Silver abandoning his post and being turned into a zombie for Death&#x27;s amusement; decay, disease, starvation and suicide are rampant; and the Dark Judges hold daily cullings. A handful of judges who escaped brainwashing, including Dredd and McGruder returned from their Long Walks, are able to banish the Sisters, execute Kraken and capture the Dark Judges (except Death), but not before 60 million citizens have been killed. McGruder assumes the post of Chief Judge again, but without a Council of Five. The Hunters Club organises the sponsored charity massacre &quot;Death Aid&quot; for Necropolis orphans. The anonymous figure later known as Tempest takes covert control of Mega-City One&#x27;s criminal underworld.
* 2113: Under Dredd&#x27;s urging, a referendum is held where the citizens will vote whether or not, following the failure of the Judges to stop Necropolis, to bring back democracy. Judge Grice and others attempt to assassinate Dredd to stop this, and are arrested. The citizens, as Dredd anticipated, vote to keep the Judges – those few that can be bothered to vote. The undead Silver tries to reassume command but is executed for dereliction of duty.
* 2114: Judgement Day – the time-travelling Sabbat the Necromagus unleashes zombies upon every Mega-City on Earth. An international coalition of Judges is sent to take him out, but not before five entire Mega-Cities have been nuked when it appears they&#x27;re lost to the zombies. The final death toll is three billion. Following the loss of many Judges to the zombies, McGruder instigates the Mechanismo project – robot Judges – to the outrage of many Senior Judges, as it becomes clear she is increasingly senile and unstable.
* 2115: Grice breaks out of the Titan penal colony and takes over the city by infecting the population with the deadly Meat Virus, incapacitating many Judges. After much random death and destruction, including the destruction of the Statue of Judgement, Grice is defeated. Dredd deliberately sabotages the Mechanismo project.
* 2116: A gathering of Senior Judges attempt to make McGruder step down but to no avail. After her pet Mechanismo project goes wrong and a rogue Mechanismo robot tries to kill her, she finally steps down from office. An election is held among the Judges and Judge Volt becomes the new chief judge.
* 2117: Satan emerges from the fallen Icarus asteroid, shrugs off every Justice Department attack and threatens to destroy the city; Psi-Judge Anderson barely defeats him.
* 2118: Judicial crackdown on the Frendz crime syndicate in Sector 301 leads to major retaliation, with heavy rioting and gang violence that puts the Sector&#x27;s judges in a retreat. After a siege at Traffic Station Alamo, the battle is won by the Judges. McGruder dies in battle in the Cursed Earth (rather than compulsory euthanasia). Mega-City One briefly attacked by dune sharks.
* 2121: Fifteen million children depart the city for an underground haven in the Cursed Earth. Crime lord Nero Narcos triggers the Mark II Lawgivers to self-destruct and then starts the Second Robot War. The Judges are briefly overthrown before Dredd, with help from Brit-Cit, reprograms Narcos&#x27; robot reinforcements to turn on their comrades and the Judges are able to retake control. Judge Volt commits suicide over the event, which is hushed up; Judge Hershey becomes the new chief judge.
* 2123: An army composed of perps from parallel universes, led by an alter-dimensional Judge Cal, invade Mega-City One. Mega-City One, Brit-Cit, and Hondo ally to prevent a partnership between East-Meg Two and the alien Lawlords, an obvious first step in a Lawlord conquest of Earth.
* 2124: Orlok captured, but not before releasing a virus that kills tens of thousands of citizens. Judge Death escapes confinement.
* 2125: Mutant terrorist Mr Bones attacks the Hall of Justice with a hostile alien species. Orlok put on trial and then executed on live TV.
* 2126: Terrorist group Total War triggers multiple nuclear bombs, resulting in the deaths of four million people.
* 2127: Hundreds of thousands of citizens have been left homeless by the bombings, and live in overcrowded, crime-ridden emergency camps. The Half-Life plague, spread by a traitor in Psi Division, spreads a wave of murderous violence that eventually kills one million people. The Sisters of Death launch another attack, with entire blocks being wiped out by plagues and poltergeist activity.
* 2128: Mega-City One leads a peacekeeping mission to Ciudad Barranquilla during a civil war; this turns out to be a pretense for regime change, putting in a new Supreme Judge that they can control.
* 2129: Death of Judge Fargo. A portal opens to the dark-matter composed fifth dimension Kaluza; demonic creatures invade the city, slaughtering whole sectors and causing crime-increasing psychic backlash until the Judges invaded Kaluza and shut the portal down. Thirty city-blocks designed by Findhorn Gask turn out to secretly be giant robots, which come to life and rampage through the city, before being convinced to stop and turned into a satellite city. Council of Five discusses and rejects a proposal by Dredd to end the mutant ban; rejection followed by a massive crackdown by Dredd on the city&#x27;s Mutant Farm facilities. Attempted coup by Space Corps veterans under General Vincent. Serial killer PJ Maybe, under a false identity, becomes Mayor of Mega-City One.
* 2130: The anti-mutant laws are discussed again due to pressure from Dredd and repealed out of fear he will resign otherwise; there is widespread rioting by citizens as a result, followed by frequent hate crimes against mutant migrants.
* 2131: Events and disasters from the Bible devastate the Low Life. Senior judges, against the mutant rights laws, force a vote on replacing Hershey as chief judge in the hope of undoing the changes. Judge Francisco becomes chief judge, and the entire Council of Five is replaced. The decision is made to build townships for mutants, and Dredd is exiled to them. The townships will use mutants as Deputies and allow trial-by-jury. Subtle conflict exists between Francisco and his Council.
* 2132: Deputy Chief Judge Sinfield usurps Francisco using brainwashing drugs and becomes acting chief judge. Laws become even harsher for mutants. PJ Maybe attempts to assassinate Sinfield, hospitalising him, and his identity is discovered by the Judges. Sinfield is arrested and Francisco returns to office. MC-1 covertly deploys psychic weapons in Sino-Cit territory, testing how they can handle psi-warfare. After a vicious war with corrupt Judges, the Hondo yakuza take over the Low Life&#x27;s criminal underworld.
* 2133: Francisco attempts to balance the budget with various cost-cutting measures, with the buzzword &quot;the Big Community&quot;. A nuclear bomb is detonated in Sector 17, killing half a million people. The Low Life&#x27;s Judges, particularly the Wally Squad, are purged due to criminal infiltration. The Black Ops Division under Judge Bachmann quietly assassinates the Township Chief Judge of mutant Township Three and his deputies, in order to put a less liberal Judge in charge. New elections for Mayor are held, with several candidates killed by an escaped Maybe; East-Meg agents capture a prominent biologist and prepare to unleash the &quot;Chaos Bug&quot; bio-weapon on the city.
* 2134: The Chaos Bug is released, in conjunction with multiple terrorist assaults and Sov sabotage – foreign allies only send robots due to fear of infection. Most of the Academy of Law and Public Surveillance are killed (and the Statue of Judgement destroyed); the Dark Judges temporarily escape. A (rejected) proposal to simply murder the infected is made public, sparking a vast uprising that devastates the city and allows the Bug to spread; an overwhelmed Justice Department is forced to genuinely murder the infected and only wins against the uprising because the smoke from burning blocks drives insurgents off the streets. By the time the virus dies out, 350 million citizens and 60% of the judges are dead; Justice Department is near collapse, bolstered by a 40,000 strong mutant army from the Cursed Earth townships. Francisco resigns and Hershey forms an interim government. The economy has collapsed and welfare ends; Space Corps Marines are recalled to the city to help restore order but are soon at odds with both Judges and citizens after trying to airstrike a rebellious block. Judge Bachmann attempts a coup, in which many judges and citizens are killed; it is prevented in part by a returning Judge Smiley, founder of Black Ops.
* 2135: After a trial attack on Gateway colony, the alien Xhind launch an invasion of human space; the war lasts sixteen weeks. The Battle of 43 Rega is Mega-City One&#x27;s one chance to stop the Xhind reaching the Inner Colonies and relies on a peace deal with Luther&#x27;s rebel forces; immediately after victory, MC-1 forces massacre the rebels.
* 2136: Under ex-Judge Aimee Nixon, the Titan convicts revolt and leave to form an independent colony on Enceladus; the weaker MC-1 is forced to accept this. Justice Department is exposed as having 24/7 surveillance in all of the newly built city blocks and suspend the program after widespread riots (the journalist who broke the story is later &#x27;murdered&#x27;). The alien Lawlords take control of the 2050s orbital lasers and declare rule over Mega-City One, but are beaten back.
* 2137: By October 2137 the population stands at seventy two million and is growing rapidly. However the destruction of the Academy of Law during Chaos Day has disrupted the supply of cadets, and it is all the remaining judges can do to cope with the expanding population as it will be years before replacement of losses is reliable again.
* 2138: Texas City attempts to take over Mega-City One in a coup, but is thwarted by Judge Dredd and others.
* 2139: Mega City Population estimated at 100 million citizens. 
* 2140: Late in the year Dredd discovers the involvement of Judge Smiley in the events that led up to the Apocalypse War. With assistance from other Judges, Dredd ambushes and kills Smiley on the west wall. 
* 2141: Continuing return of those who fled the city and the discovery that the initial death toll from Chaos day had been overestimated sees the city&#x27;s population return to 130 million. Chief Judge Hershey announces her intention to leave the role for the second time and nominates Judge Logan to succeed her in the subsequent election. After appointing a Mechanismo robot to the Council of Five there was an attempted coup against him by former council members. Intervention by Dredd lead to the conspirators surrendering and being detained.

== Other cities mentioned in &quot;Judge Dredd&quot; ==
The first mention of other megacities came in &quot;Robot Wars&quot;, with a Texas City Oil freighter. In the later &quot;Luna 1&quot;, when Dredd was appointed Judge-Marshall of the Luna-1 colony, the narration states that the colony is run by &quot;the 3 great cities of North America&quot; of which one is Texas City in the next issue. &quot;The First Luna Olympics&quot; would introduce &quot;the Sov-Cities&quot;. Mega-City Two on the West coast was introduced in the story &quot;The Cursed Earth&quot; (1978). Since then, the exact number, location, nature, and even name of megacities fluctuates depending on the writer and strip.

== In other media ==
===Film===

Mega-City One is the initial setting of the 1995 film, though the majority of the second act shifts to Cursed Earth and the outer walls. Nigel Phelps was the production designer that oversaw the design of the city, chosen because he previously designed the fantastical version of Gotham City for Tim Burton&#x27;s &quot;Batman&quot;. Other illustrators that contributed designs for the city included Simon Murton and Matt Codd.

Mega-City One is the setting of the 2012 film &quot;Dredd&quot;, though it occupies a smaller area than described in the comics. According to Judge Dredd (Karl Urban), the boundaries of Mega-City One reach &quot;from Boston to Washington D.C.&quot; (similar to the real-life concept of the Northeast megalopolis) and contains a population of 800 million. The city blocks are large, brutalist structures that tend to be slum areas; each block can seal itself off with blast shields and communications blackouts in case of war. Technology is much less advanced (outside of Justice Department equipment) and all non-Judge vehicles resemble early-21st-century models.

===TV===

&quot;Judge Dredd: Mega City One&quot; is a TV series that was announced as in development on 10 May 2017. The population of the city in the TV series is advertised as &quot;four hundred million citizens&quot;.

== References ==
==Sources==
* &quot;The A–Z of Judge Dredd,&quot; by Mike Butcher (Hamlyn, 1995). ()

== External links ==
* Travels in Toon Town – part 2, &quot;Building Design&quot;, September 26, 2007
* Lowlife: Creation Part Five: All The Joy I See Through These Architect&#x27;s Eyes, by D&#x27;Israeli, April 1, 2009</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="0" end="13" title="Mega-City One" label="Mega-City One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="61" end="72" title="Judge Dredd" label="Judge Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q471822" start="131" end="142" title="megalopolis" label="megalopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189650" start="176" end="197" title="Eastern United States" label="Eastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="377" end="389" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="441" end="447" title="retcon" label="retcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q621952" start="527" end="551" title="Architects&amp;#x27; Journal" label="Architects&amp;#x27; Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042063" start="823" end="838" title="Carlos Ezquerra" label="Carlos Ezquerra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043544" start="953" end="962" title="Pat Mills" label="Pat Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="1740" end="1748" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="1752" end="1759" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q245260" start="2916" end="2927" title="conurbation" label="conurbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422082" start="2939" end="2967" title="Northeast megalopolis" label="from Boston to Washington DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="3165" end="3170" title="Judge (2000 AD)" label="Judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q211031" start="3282" end="3310" title="Strategic Defense Initiative" label="laser missile-defense system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="3625" end="3629" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="3637" end="3650" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="3756" end="3765" title="Undercity (Judge Dredd)" label="Undercity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="3799" end="3820" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="3825" end="3842" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="3978" end="3983" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419251" start="4044" end="4072" title="Quebec City-Windsor Corridor" label="Quebec City-Windsor Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="4253" end="4271" title="The Apocalypse War" label="The Apocalypse War"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="4434" end="4447" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="4456" end="4470" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434998" start="5016" end="5027" title="mobile home" label="mobile home"/>
<link wikidata="Q127993" start="5281" end="5298" title="geothermal energy" label="geothermal energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="6010" end="6022" title="Day of Chaos" label="Day of Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565" start="8675" end="8680" title="Titan (moon)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124757" start="9759" end="9763" title="riot" label="riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q37459" start="9943" end="9956" title="Nicole Kidman" label="Nicole Kidman"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="9961" end="9971" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q264196" start="10169" end="10183" title="David Blunkett" label="David Blunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="10394" end="10404" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10585" end="10596" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Logan" label="Judge Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="10698" end="10710" title="city council" label="city council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11753" end="11764" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Fargo" label="Judge Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11779" end="11792" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Judge Solomon" label="Judge Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11807" end="11820" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Goodman" label="Judge Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="11835" end="11844" title="Judge Cal" label="Judge Cal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11854" end="11867" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Griffin" label="Judge Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11882" end="11896" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#McGruder" label="Judge McGruder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11911" end="11923" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Silver" label="Judge Silver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11967" end="11978" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Greel" label="Judge Greel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12008" end="12018" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Volt" label="Judge Volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="12033" end="12046" title="Judge Hershey" label="Judge Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12061" end="12076" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Francisco" label="Judge Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12086" end="12100" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Sinfield" label="Judge Sinfield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12203" end="12214" title="List of Judge Dredd characters#Logan" label="Judge Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41050" start="12423" end="12432" title="orangutan" label="orangutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="12588" end="12596" title="PJ Maybe" label="PJ Maybe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13283" end="13291" title="Judge Dredd (character)#Weapon" label="Lawgiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="13753" end="13759" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3950862" start="13773" end="13778" title="Titan in fiction" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143812" start="13841" end="13864" title="Atmosphere of Titan" label="Titan&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917466" start="14252" end="14259" title="psychic" label="psychic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="14537" end="14547" title="City Block (Judge Dredd)" label="City Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="14845" end="14854" title="Undercity (Judge Dredd)" label="Undercity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060409" start="15016" end="15028" title="Honor guard" label="honour guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="15414" end="15427" title="Chief Judge Fargo" label="Eustace Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068288" start="15656" end="15667" title="due process" label="due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102618" start="15964" end="15979" title="Atomic Wars" label="Third World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="16009" end="16024" title="President Robert L. Booth" label="President Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q183548" start="17013" end="17024" title="Voyeurism" label="voyeuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="20389" end="20395" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565" start="20409" end="20414" title="Titan (moon)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q223571" start="20514" end="20524" title="space suit" label="space suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="20546" end="20552" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="20586" end="20593" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="21046" end="21053" title="Firearm" label="Firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151222" start="21095" end="21110" title="Gun law in the United States" label="firearms permit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="21224" end="21235" title="Block Mania" label="Block Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="21384" end="21396" title="black market" label="black market"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="21695" end="21705" title="Laser" label="lasblaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="22666" end="22692" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="22835" end="22853" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538080" start="23710" end="23723" title="Gordon Rennie" label="Gordon Rennie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="24565" end="24576" title="Space Corps (comics)" label="Space Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898583" start="24590" end="24597" title="marines" label="marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048401" start="25060" end="25073" title="Rogue Trooper" label="Rogue Trooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947495" start="26087" end="26095" title="mob boss" label="mob boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q633581" start="26313" end="26320" title="cryonics" label="cryonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916554" start="26689" end="26701" title="Future Shock" label="Future Shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="26716" end="26725" title="psychosis" label="psychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178844" start="26971" end="26977" title="felony" label="felons"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="27011" end="27021" title="telepathy" label="telepathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="27141" end="27145" title="medication" label="drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="27255" end="27268" title="psychology" label="psychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="27269" end="27278" title="Substance use disorder" label="addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11012" start="27340" end="27345" title="robot" label="robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q34255" start="27378" end="27385" title="boredom" label="boredom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="27599" end="27608" title="Block War" label="Block War"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="27689" end="27696" title="militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12493" start="27998" end="28002" title="dome" label="dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="28564" end="28573" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q898449" start="28874" end="28882" title="escapism" label="escapism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60393" start="28911" end="28924" title="dream machine" label="dream machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q954187" start="29546" end="29557" title="transceiver" label="transceiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321258" start="29558" end="29564" title="beacon" label="beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="29671" end="29679" title="murderer" label="murderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="29749" end="29756" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="30027" end="30035" title="nicotine" label="nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q754785" start="30060" end="30081" title="White Cliffs of Dover" label="White Cliffs of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501349" start="31684" end="31697" title="parking lot" label="parking areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="34526" end="34532" title="retcon" label="retcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="34978" end="34989" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="35100" end="35112" title="Judge (2000 AD)" label="Judge System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="35136" end="35149" title="Chief Judge Fargo" label="Eustace Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="35378" end="35395" title="Chief Judge Fargo" label="Chief Judge Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043043" start="36182" end="36201" title="suspended animation" label="suspended animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="36239" end="36252" title="Judge Solomon" label="Judge Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="36515" end="36528" title="Judge Goodman" label="Judge Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36565" end="36580" title="Council of Five" label="Council of Five"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36582" end="36594" title="Psi Division" label="Psi Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="36699" end="36710" title="Morton Judd" label="Morton Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="36763" end="36766" title="Judge Dredd" label="Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="36771" end="36781" title="Rico Dredd" label="Rico Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="36976" end="37006" title="President Robert L. Booth" label="Vice President Robert L. Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102618" start="37509" end="37520" title="Atomic Wars" label="Atomic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q620562" start="37784" end="37801" title="nuclear holocaust" label="nuclear holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="40322" end="40328" title="retcon" label="retcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102618" start="40351" end="40358" title="Origins (Judge Dredd story)" label="Origins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="41186" end="41205" title="Statue of Judgement" label="Statue of Judgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="41303" end="41318" title="The Robot Wars" label="First Robot War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="41521" end="41530" title="Judge Cal" label="Judge Cal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="41897" end="41910" title="Jürgen Griffin" label="Judge Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42019" end="42031" title="List of minor characters in Judge Dredd#Father Earth" label="Father Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="42270" end="42281" title="Judge Death" label="Judge Death"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42464" end="42475" title="Judge Child" label="Judge Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="42959" end="42970" title="Dark Judges" label="Dark Judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="43072" end="43090" title="Orlok the Assassin" label="Orlok the Assassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="43308" end="43319" title="Block Mania" label="Block Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="43363" end="43377" title="Apocalypse War" label="Apocalypse War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="43891" end="43905" title="Judge McGruder" label="Judge McGruder"/>
<link wikidata="Q182154" start="43996" end="44007" title="time travel" label="time travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="44621" end="44639" title="Shojun the Warlord" label="Shojun the Warlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="44789" end="44801" title="Judge Silver" label="Judge Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="45038" end="45049" title="Wally Squad" label="Wally Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="45381" end="45387" title="Judge Kraken" label="Kraken"/>
<link wikidata="Q443325" start="45454" end="45461" title="Charles Fort" label="Fortean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="45629" end="45638" title="The Long Walk (Judge Dredd)" label="Long Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="45905" end="45921" title="Dark Judges" label="Sisters of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985699" start="46110" end="46120" title="Necropolis (Judge Dredd story)" label="Necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="47071" end="47082" title="Judge Grice" label="Judge Grice"/>
<link wikidata="Q211174" start="47350" end="47363" title="Judgement Day (Judge Dredd story)" label="Judgement Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="47737" end="47747" title="Mechanismo" label="Mechanismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="49160" end="49171" title="Nero Narcos" label="Nero Narcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="49193" end="49202" title="Lawgiver (Judge Dredd)" label="Lawgivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="49240" end="49256" title="The Doomsday Scenario" label="Second Robot War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49321" end="49329" title="Brit-Cit" label="Brit-Cit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="49508" end="49521" title="Judge Hershey" label="Judge Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q224952" start="49579" end="49583" title="perp" label="perp"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221140" start="49590" end="49608" title="Parallel universe (fiction)" label="parallel universes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49992" end="50000" title="List of minor characters in Judge Dredd#Mr Bones" label="Mr Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302517" start="50036" end="50057" title="Judge Dredd vs. Aliens" label="hostile alien species"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50406" end="50418" title="Psi Division" label="Psi Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="50669" end="50688" title="Ciudad Barranquilla" label="Ciudad Barranquilla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51274" end="51289" title="Council of Five" label="Council of Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="51467" end="51478" title="Space Corps (Judge Dredd)" label="Space Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628685" start="51525" end="51533" title="PJ Maybe" label="PJ Maybe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="51567" end="51589" title="Mayor of Mega-City One" label="Mayor of Mega-City One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="51603" end="51619" title="Mutants (Judge Dredd)" label="anti-mutant laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692914" start="51887" end="51895" title="Low Life (comics)" label="Low Life"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52081" end="52096" title="Council of Five" label="Council of Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="52167" end="52182" title="Tour of Duty (Judge Dredd story)" label="Dredd is exiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q859284" start="52948" end="52965" title="Big Society" label="the Big Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="53174" end="53188" title="Judge Bachmann" label="Judge Bachmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="53543" end="53552" title="Day of Chaos" label="Chaos Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="53762" end="53781" title="Statue of Judgement" label="Statue of Judgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808031" start="54462" end="54481" title="Space Corps (comics)" label="Space Corps Marines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54743" end="54755" title="List of minor characters in Judge Dredd#Smiley" label="Judge Smiley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55153" end="55164" title="List of minor characters in Judge Dredd#Nixon" label="Aimee Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303" start="55235" end="55244" title="Enceladus" label="Enceladus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989592" start="57754" end="57766" title="Nigel Phelps" label="Nigel Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962070" start="57775" end="57794" title="production designer" label="production designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q732858" start="57897" end="57908" title="Gotham City" label="Gotham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="57913" end="57923" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q116852" start="57931" end="57949" title="Batman (1989 film)" label="&amp;quot;Batman&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q276772" start="58098" end="58103" title="Dredd" label="Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q132430" start="58201" end="58211" title="Karl Urban" label="Karl Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="58263" end="58269" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422082" start="58336" end="58357" title="Northeast megalopolis" label="Northeast megalopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q994776" start="58428" end="58437" title="Brutalist architecture" label="brutalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203150" start="59227" end="59241" title="D&amp;#x27;Israeli (cartoonist)" label="D&amp;#x27;Israeli"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423331" wikidata="Q1515863" url="?curid=423331" title="IDEF">
<text>IDEF, initially an abbreviation of ICAM Definition and renamed in 1999 as Integration Definition, is a family of modeling languages in the field of systems and software engineering. They cover a wide range of uses from functional modeling to data, simulation, object-oriented analysis and design, and knowledge acquisition. These definition languages were developed under funding from U.S. Air Force and, although still most commonly used by them and other military and United States Department of Defense (DoD) agencies, are in the public domain.

The most-widely recognized and used components of the IDEF family are IDEF0, a functional modeling language building on SADT, and IDEF1X, which addresses information models and database design issues.

== Overview of IDEF methods ==
IDEF refers to a family of modeling language, which cover a wide range of uses, from functional modeling to data, simulation, object-oriented analysis/design and knowledge acquisition. Eventually the IDEF methods have been defined up to IDEF14: 
* IDEF0: Function modeling
* IDEF1: Information modeling
* IDEF1X: Data modeling
* IDEF2: Simulation model design
* IDEF3: Process description capture
* IDEF4: Object-oriented design
* IDEF5: Ontology description capture
* IDEF6: Design rationale capture
* IDEF7: Information system auditing
* IDEF8: User interface modeling
* IDEF9: Business constraint discovery
* IDEF10: Implementation architecture modeling
* IDEF11: Information artifact modeling
* IDEF12: Organization modeling
* IDEF13: Three-schema mapping design
* IDEF14: Network design

In 1995 only the IDEF0, IDEF1X, IDEF2, IDEF3 and IDEF4 had been developed in full. Some of the other IDEF concepts had some preliminary design. Some of the last efforts were new IDEF developments in 1995 toward establishing reliable methods for business constraint discovery IDEF9, design rationale capture IDEF6, human system, interaction design IDEF8, and network design IDEF14.

The methods IDEF7, IDEF10, IDEF11, IDEF 12 and IDEF13 haven&#x27;t been developed any further than their initial definition.

== History ==
IDEF originally stood for ICAM Definition, initiated in the 1970s at the US Air Force Materials Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio by Dennis E. Wisnosky, Dan L. Shunk, and others. and completed in the 1980s. IDEF was a product of the ICAM initiative of the United States Air Force. The IEEE recast the IDEF abbreviation as Integration Definition.&quot;

The specific projects that produced IDEF were ICAM project priorities 111 and 112 (later renumbered 1102). The subsequent Integrated Information Support System (IISS) project priorities 6201, 6202, and 6203 attempted to create an information processing environment that could be run in heterogeneous physical computing environments. Further development of IDEF occurred under those projects as a result of the experience gained from applications of the new modeling techniques. The intent of the IISS efforts was to create &#x27;generic subsystems&#x27; that could be used by a large number of collaborating enterprises, such as U.S. defense contractors and the armed forces of friendly nations.

At the time of the ICAM 1102 effort there were numerous, mostly incompatible, data model methods for storing computer data — sequential (VSAM), hierarchical (IMS), network (Cincom&#x27;s TOTAL and CODASYL, and Cullinet&#x27;s IDMS). The relational data model was just emerging as a promising way of thinking about structuring data for easy, efficient, and accurate access. Relational database management systems had not yet emerged as a general standard for data management.

The ICAM program office deemed it valuable to create a &quot;neutral&quot; way of describing the data content of large-scale systems. The emerging academic literature suggested that methods were needed to process data independently of the way it was physically stored. Thus the IDEF1 language was created to allow a neutral description of data structures that could be applied regardless of the storage method or file access method.

IDEF1 was developed under ICAM program priority 1102 by Robert R. Brown of the Hughes Aircraft Company, under contract to SofTech, Inc. Brown had previously been responsible for the development of IMS while working at Rockwell International. Rockwell chose not to pursue IMS as a marketable product but IBM, which had served as a support contractor during development, subsequently took over the product and was successful in further developing it for market. Brown credits his Hughes colleague Timothy Ramey as the inventor of IDEF1 as a viable formalism for modeling information structures. The two Hughes researchers built on ideas from and interactions with many luminaries in the field at the time. In particular, IDEF1 draws on the following techniques:
* the evolving natural language information model (ENALIM) technique of G. M. Nijssen (Control Data Corporation) — this technique is now more widely known as NIAM or the object–role model ORM;
* the network data structures technique, popularly called the CODASYL approach, of Charles Bachman (Honeywell Information Systems);
* the hierarchical data management technique, implemented in IBM&#x27;s IMS data management system, developed by R. R. Brown (Rockwell International);
* the relational approach to data of E. F. Codd (IBM);
* The entity–relationship approach (E–R) of Peter Chen (UCLA).
The effort to develop IDEF1 resulted in both a new method for information modeling and an example of its use in the form of a &quot;reference information model of manufacturing.&quot; This latter artifact was developed by D. S. Coleman of the D. Appleton Company (DACOM) acting as a sub-contractor to Hughes and under the direction of Ramey. Personnel at DACOM became expert at IDEF1 modeling and subsequently produced a training course and accompanying materials for the IDEF1 modeling technique.

Experience with IDEF1 revealed that the translation of information requirements into database designs was more difficult than had originally been anticipated. The most beneficial value of the IDEF1 information modeling technique was its ability to represent data independent of how those data were to be stored and used. It provided data modelers and data analysts with a way to represent data requirements during the requirements-gathering process. This allowed designers to decide which DBMS to use after the nature of the data requirements was understood and thus reduced the &quot;misfit&quot; between data requirements and the capabilities and limitations of the DBMS. The translation of IDEF1 models to database designs, however, proved to be difficult.

== The IDEF modeling languages ==

=== IDEF0 ===

The IDEF0 functional modeling method is designed to model the decisions, actions, and activities of an organization or system. It was derived from the established graphic modeling language structured analysis and design technique (SADT) developed by Douglas T. Ross and SofTech, Inc. In its original form, IDEF0 includes both a definition of a graphical modeling language (syntax and semantics) and a description of a comprehensive methodology for developing models. The US Air Force commissioned the SADT developers to develop a function model method for analyzing and communicating the functional perspective of a system. IDEF0 should assist in organizing system analysis and promote effective communication between the analyst and the customer through simplified graphical devices.

=== IDEF1X ===

To satisfy the data modeling enhancement requirements that were identified in the IISS-6202 project, a sub-contractor, DACOM, obtained a license to the logical database design technique (LDDT) and its supporting software (ADAM). LDDT had been developed in 1982 by Robert G. Brown of The Database Design Group entirely outside the IDEF program and with no knowledge of IDEF1. LDDT combined elements of the relational data model, the E–R model, and generalization in a way specifically intended to support data modeling and the transformation of the data models into database designs. The graphic syntax of LDDT differed from that of IDEF1 and, more importantly, LDDT contained interrelated modeling concepts not present in IDEF1. Mary E. Loomis wrote a concise summary of the syntax and semantics of a substantial subset of LDDT, using terminology compatible with IDEF1 wherever possible. DACOM labeled the result IDEF1X and supplied it to the ICAM program.

Because the IDEF program was funded by the government, the techniques are in the public domain. In addition to the ADAM software, sold by DACOM under the name Leverage, a number of CASE tools use IDEF1X as their representation technique for data modeling.

The IISS projects actually produced working prototypes of an information processing environment that would run in heterogeneous computing environments. Current advancements in such techniques as Java and JDBC are now achieving the goals of ubiquity and versatility across computing environments which was first demonstrated by IISS.

=== IDEF2 and IDEF3 ===

The third IDEF (IDEF2) was originally intended as a user interface modeling method. However, since the Integrated Computer-Aided Manufacturing (ICAM) program needed a simulation modeling tool, the resulting IDEF2 was a method for representing the time varying behavior of resources in a manufacturing system, providing a framework for specification of math model based simulations. It was the intent of the methodology program within ICAM to rectify this situation but limitation of funding did not allow this to happen. As a result, the lack of a method which would support the structuring of descriptions of the user view of a system has been a major shortcoming of the IDEF system. The basic problem from a methodology point of view is the need to distinguish between a description of what a system (existing or proposed) is supposed to do and a representative simulation model that predicts what a system will do. The latter was the focus of IDEF2, the former is the focus of IDEF3.

=== IDEF4 ===

The development of IDEF4 came from the recognition that the modularity, maintainability and code reusability that results from the object-oriented programming paradigm can be realized in traditional data processing applications. The proven ability of the object-oriented programming paradigm to support data level integration in large complex distributed systems is also a major factor in the widespread interest in this technology from the traditional data processing community.

IDEF4 was developed as a design tool for software designers who use object-oriented languages such as the Common Lisp Object System, Flavors, Smalltalk, Objective-C, C++, and others. Since effective usage of the object-oriented paradigm requires a different thought process than used with conventional procedural or database languages, standard methodologies such as structure charts, data flow diagrams, and traditional data design models (hierarchical, relational, and network) are not sufficient. IDEF4 seeks to provide the necessary facilities to support the object-oriented design decision making process.

=== IDEF5 ===

IDEF5, or integrated definition for ontology description capture method, is a software engineering method to develop and maintain usable, accurate, domain ontologies. In the field of computer science ontologies are used to capture the concept and objects in a specific domain, along with associated relationships and meanings. In addition, ontology capture helps coordinate projects by standardizing terminology and creates opportunities for information reuse. The IDEF5 Ontology Capture Method has been developed to reliably construct ontologies in a way that closely reflects human understanding of the specific domain.

In the IDEF5 method, an ontology is constructed by capturing the content of certain assertions about real-world objects, their properties and their interrelationships, and representing that content in an intuitive and natural form. The IDEF5 method has three main components: A graphical language to support conceptual ontology analysis, a structured text language for detailed ontology characterization, and a systematic procedure that provides guidelines for effective ontology capture.

=== IDEF6 ===

IDEF6, or integrated definition for design rationale capture, is a method to facilitate the acquisition, representation, and manipulation of the design rationale used in the development of enterprise systems. Rationale is the reason, justification, underlying motivation, or excuse that moved the designer to select a particular strategy or design feature. More simply, rationale is interpreted as the answer to the question, “Why is this design being done in this manner?” Most design methods focus on what the design is (i.e. on the final product, rather than why the design is the way it is).

IDEF6 is a method that possesses the conceptual resources and linguistic capabilities needed
# to represent the nature and structure of the information that constitutes design rationale within a given system, and
# to associate that rationale with design specifications, models, and documentation for the system.
IDEF6 is applicable to all phases of the information system development process, from initial conceptualization through both preliminary and detailed design activities. To the extent that detailed design decisions for software systems are relegated to the coding phase, the IDEF6 technique should be usable during the software construction process as well.

=== IDEF8 ===
IDEF8, or integrated definition for human-system interaction design, is a method for producing high-quality designs of interactions between users and the systems they operate. Systems are characterized as a collection of objects that perform functions to accomplish a particular goal. The system with which the user interacts can be any system, not necessarily a computer program. Human-system interactions are designed at three levels of specification within the IDEF8 method. The first level defines the philosophy of system operation and produces a set of models and textual descriptions of overall system processes. The second level of design specifies role-centered scenarios of system use. The third level of IDEF8 design is for human-system design detailing. At this level of design, IDEF8 provides a library of metaphors to help users and designers specify the desired behavior in terms of other objects whose behavior is more familiar. Metaphors provide a model of abstract concepts in terms of familiar, concrete objects and experiences.

=== IDEF9 ===
IDEF9, or integrated definition for business constraint discovery, is designed to assist in the discovery and analysis of constraints in a business system. A primary motivation driving the development of IDEF9 was an acknowledgment that the collection of constraints that forge an enterprise system is generally poorly defined. The knowledge of what constraints exist and how those constraints interact is incomplete, disjoint, distributed, and often completely unknown. Just as living organisms do not need to be aware of the genetic or autonomous constraints that govern certain behaviors, organizations can (and most do) perform well without explicit knowledge of the glue that structures the system. In order to modify business in a predictable manner, however, the knowledge of these constraints is as critical as knowledge of genetics is to the genetic engineer.

=== IDEF14 ===
IDEF14, or integrated definition for network design method, is a method that targets the modeling and design of computer and communication networks. It can be used to model existing (&quot;as is&quot;) or envisioned (&quot;to be&quot;) networks. It helps the network designer to investigate potential network designs and to document design rationale. The fundamental goals of the IDEF14 research project developed from a perceived need for good network designs that can be implemented quickly and accurately.

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* Ovidiu S. Noran (2000). Business Modelling: UML vs. IDEF Paper Griffith University

==External links==

* Integrated DEFinition Methods
* Data Modeling
* The IDEF Process Modeling Methodology by Robert P. Hanrahan 1995</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1515863" start="0" end="4" title="IDEF" label="IDEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515863" start="35" end="50" title="IDEF" label="ICAM Definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515863" start="74" end="96" title="IDEF" label="Integration Definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237775" start="260" end="295" title="object-oriented analysis and design" label="object-oriented analysis and design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941921" start="809" end="826" title="modeling language" label="modeling language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522551" start="1030" end="1035" title="IDEF0" label="IDEF0"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1057" end="1062" title="IDEF1X#History" label="IDEF1"/>
<link wikidata="Q385210" start="1087" end="1093" title="IDEF1X" label="IDEF1X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515863" start="1111" end="1116" title="IDEF2" label="IDEF2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792558" start="1144" end="1149" title="IDEF3" label="IDEF3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969994" start="1181" end="1186" title="IDEF4" label="IDEF4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969997" start="1213" end="1218" title="IDEF5" label="IDEF5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969999" start="1251" end="1256" title="IDEF6" label="IDEF6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1322" end="1327" title="IDEF8" label="IDEF8"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1355" end="1360" title="IDEF9" label="IDEF9"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1551" end="1557" title="IDEF14" label="IDEF14"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522551" start="1592" end="1597" title="IDEF0" label="IDEF0"/>
<link wikidata="Q385210" start="1599" end="1605" title="IDEF1X" label="IDEF1X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515863" start="1607" end="1612" title="IDEF2" label="IDEF2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792558" start="1614" end="1619" title="IDEF3" label="IDEF3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969994" start="1624" end="1629" title="IDEF4" label="IDEF4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1850" end="1855" title="IDEF9" label="IDEF9"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969999" start="1882" end="1887" title="IDEF6" label="IDEF6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1922" end="1927" title="IDEF8" label="IDEF8"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1948" end="1954" title="IDEF14" label="IDEF14"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042822" start="2123" end="2127" title="Integrated Computer-Aided Manufacturing" label="ICAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q730187" start="2205" end="2236" title="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base" label="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258375" start="2248" end="2266" title="Dennis E. Wisnosky" label="Dennis E. Wisnosky"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="2371" end="2394" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="2400" end="2404" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661985" start="2698" end="2720" title="Data processing" label="information processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19933904" start="2754" end="2767" title="heterogeneous" label="heterogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934969" start="3102" end="3120" title="defense contractor" label="defense contractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172480" start="3243" end="3253" title="data model" label="data model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067705" start="3290" end="3300" title="Sequential access" label="sequential"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514276" start="3302" end="3306" title="VSAM" label="VSAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q871236" start="3309" end="3321" title="Hierarchical model" label="hierarchical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571984" start="3323" end="3326" title="Information Management System" label="IMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416406" start="3329" end="3336" title="Network model" label="network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120387" start="3338" end="3344" title="Cincom" label="Cincom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023961" start="3362" end="3369" title="CODASYL" label="CODASYL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193036" start="3375" end="3383" title="Cullinet" label="Cullinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303669" start="3391" end="3395" title="IDMS" label="IDMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q755662" start="3402" end="3423" title="relational data model" label="relational data model"/>
<link wikidata="Q192588" start="3538" end="3575" title="Relational database management system" label="Relational database management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172560" start="3854" end="3872" title="Data independence" label="data independently"/>
<link wikidata="Q175263" start="3891" end="3908" title="data structure" label="physically stored"/>
<link wikidata="Q196253" start="4154" end="4177" title="Hughes Aircraft Company" label="Hughes Aircraft Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553552" start="4197" end="4210" title="SofTech, Inc." label="SofTech, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1571984" start="4272" end="4275" title="Information Management System" label="IMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="4293" end="4315" title="Rockwell International" label="Rockwell International"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="4378" end="4381" title="International Business Machines" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694402" start="4886" end="4892" title="NIAM" label="ENALIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610339" start="4907" end="4920" title="G. M. Nijssen" label="G. M. Nijssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129191" start="4922" end="4946" title="Control Data Corporation" label="Control Data Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694402" start="4993" end="4997" title="NIAM" label="NIAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694402" start="5023" end="5026" title="object–role modeling" label="ORM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023961" start="5090" end="5097" title="CODASYL" label="CODASYL"/>
<link wikidata="Q62894" start="5111" end="5126" title="Charles Bachman" label="Charles Bachman"/>
<link wikidata="Q898208" start="5128" end="5157" title="Honeywell Information Systems" label="Honeywell Information Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273930" start="5273" end="5284" title="R. R. Brown" label="R. R. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="5286" end="5308" title="Rockwell International" label="Rockwell International"/>
<link wikidata="Q92596" start="5348" end="5358" title="E. F. Codd" label="E. F. Codd"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="5360" end="5363" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q624546" start="5372" end="5400" title="entity–relationship model" label="entity–relationship approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q92831" start="5410" end="5420" title="Peter Chen" label="Peter Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="5422" end="5426" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070189" start="6928" end="6968" title="Structured Analysis and Design Technique" label="structured analysis and design technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302019" start="6989" end="7004" title="Douglas T. Ross" label="Douglas T. Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553552" start="7009" end="7022" title="SofTech, Inc." label="SofTech, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="7112" end="7118" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="7123" end="7132" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508775" start="7269" end="7283" title="function model" label="function model"/>
<link wikidata="Q367664" start="7556" end="7569" title="data modeling" label="data modeling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7660" end="7665" title="DACOM" label="DACOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q385210" start="7693" end="7726" title="logical database design technique" label="logical database design technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q385210" start="8454" end="8460" title="IDEF1X" label="IDEF1X"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="8580" end="8593" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q868714" start="8680" end="8684" title="Computer-aided software engineering" label="CASE"/>
<link wikidata="Q385210" start="8695" end="8701" title="IDEF1X" label="IDEF1X"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="8951" end="8955" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q722772" start="8960" end="8964" title="JDBC" label="JDBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042822" start="9218" end="9257" title="Integrated Computer-Aided Manufacturing" label="Integrated Computer-Aided Manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042822" start="9549" end="9553" title="Integrated Computer-Aided Manufacturing" label="ICAM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9729" end="9738" title="user view" label="user view"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515863" start="10061" end="10066" title="IDEF2" label="IDEF2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792558" start="10095" end="10100" title="IDEF3" label="IDEF3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969994" start="10137" end="10142" title="IDEF4" label="IDEF4"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="10249" end="10276" title="object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661985" start="10317" end="10332" title="data processing" label="data processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q180634" start="10461" end="10479" title="distributed system" label="distributed system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969994" start="10599" end="10604" title="IDEF4" label="IDEF4"/>
<link wikidata="Q252340" start="10705" end="10730" title="Common Lisp Object System" label="Common Lisp Object System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427564" start="10732" end="10739" title="Flavors (programming language)" label="Flavors"/>
<link wikidata="Q235086" start="10741" end="10750" title="Smalltalk" label="Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188531" start="10752" end="10763" title="Objective-C" label="Objective-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="10765" end="10768" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="10915" end="10932" title="database language" label="database language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625091" start="10966" end="10981" title="structure chart" label="structure chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q747385" start="10984" end="11001" title="data flow diagram" label="data flow diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q267136" start="11020" end="11037" title="database model" label="data design model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969997" start="11226" end="11231" title="IDEF5" label="IDEF5"/>
<link wikidata="Q324254" start="11381" end="11391" title="ontology (computer science)" label="ontologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q330906" start="11461" end="11479" title="concept and object" label="concept and object"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271801" start="11495" end="11501" title="Domain analysis" label="domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725664" start="11626" end="11637" title="terminology" label="terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="11668" end="11679" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q46744" start="11810" end="11823" title="understanding" label="understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969999" start="12354" end="12359" title="IDEF6" label="IDEF6"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264368" start="12499" end="12515" title="design rationale" label="design rationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318054" start="12543" end="12561" title="enterprise systems" label="enterprise systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="14838" end="14853" title="business system" label="business system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="15696" end="15704" title="computer network" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068715" start="15709" end="15730" title="communication network" label="communication network"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423334" wikidata="Q3397733" url="?curid=423334" title="Pontiac, Quebec">
<text>Pontiac () is a municipality in the Outaouais Region of western Quebec, Canada, on the north shore of the Ottawa River. It is part of Les Collines-de-l&#x27;Outaouais Regional County Municipality, included in the National Capital Region. It should not be confused with Pontiac Regional County Municipality, which is also in the Outaouais but not included in the National Capital Region.

It was created by the 1975 amalgamation of the municipalities of North Onslow, South Onslow, Quyon and Eardley, and named after the Odawa war chief Pontiac.

Pontiac has a low cost of living and is trying to attract new immigrants coming to Canada to improve the local economy. A large portion of Gatineau Park is within this municipality.

==Communities==

*Beech Grove
*Breckenridge
*Eardley
*Heyworth
*Lusk
*Luskville
*Mohr
*North Onslow
*Onslow Corners
*Pontiac village
*Quyon
*Ruthledge
*Steel
*Wyman

==History==
The first European settlers in this area were Joseph Mondion and his family, who built a homestead in 1786 on what is known today as Indian Point. In 1800 his property was taken over by the XY Company, followed by the North West Company in 1804, and then the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company in 1821, when these two companies merged. The HBC operated a small trading post, which closed in 1837.

Onslow and Eardley Townships were already plotted on the Gale and Duberger Map of 1795, and it was early in the 19th century that these townships were opened to logging and settlement. One of the first settlements was on Pontiac Bay, founded by Philemon Wright and named at times Wright shanties, Pontiac Village, and Pontiacville. Quyon was founded in 1848 when a sawmill was built by John Egan at the mouth of the Quyon River.

The Township Municipality of Onslow (likely named after George Onslow, 1st Earl of Onslow) was formed in 1855, with John Behan as first mayor. In January 1875, Quyon village separated from Onslow to form its own municipality, and the following year, the township split into Onslow South (&quot;Onslow-Partie-Sud&quot;) and Onslow, renamed to Onslow North (&quot;Onslow-Partie-Nord&quot;) in 1878.

==Demographics==


According to the 2016 Canadian Census, the population&#x27;s mother tongue was 55.5% French, 38.6% English, and 3.2% other languages, including Portuguese, German, Arabic, Spanish, Dutch, and Russian. Approximately 64.3% of people are bilingual, speaking both French and English.

==Local government==

List of former mayors:
* William Burke (1975–1979)
* Marcel Lavigne (1979–1990)
* Edward McCann (1990–1994)
* Marcel Lavigne (1994–1998)
* Bruce R. Campbell (1998–2005)
* Edward McCann (2005–2013)
* Roger Larose (2013–2017)
* Joanne Labadie (2017–2021)
* Roger Larose (2021–present)

==See also==
* List of anglophone communities in Quebec
* List of municipalities in Quebec
* Pontiac Airpark
* Pontiac Airpark Water Aerodrome

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3397733" start="0" end="7" title="Pontiac, Quebec" label="Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860957" start="16" end="28" title="Types of municipalities in Quebec" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989278" start="36" end="52" title="List of regions of Quebec" label="Outaouais Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="64" end="70" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q60974" start="106" end="118" title="Ottawa River" label="Ottawa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451121" start="134" end="195" title="Les Collines-de-l&amp;#x27;Outaouais Regional County Municipality" label="Les Collines-de-l&amp;#x27;Outaouais Regional County Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q668850" start="213" end="236" title="National Capital Region (Canada)" label="National Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517934" start="269" end="305" title="Pontiac Regional County Municipality" label="Pontiac Regional County Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273058" start="481" end="486" title="Quyon" label="Quyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q314960" start="536" end="543" title="Pontiac (Ottawa leader)" label="Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364212" start="685" end="698" title="Gatineau Park" label="Gatineau Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273058" start="863" end="868" title="Quyon" label="Quyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597657" start="1097" end="1107" title="XY Company" label="XY Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142049" start="1125" end="1143" title="North West Company" label="North West Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="1166" end="1191" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1353" end="1382" title=":File:Carte de Gale et Duberger 1795.PNG" label="Gale and Duberger Map of 1795"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378901" start="1541" end="1556" title="Philemon Wright" label="Philemon Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231462" start="1682" end="1691" title="John Egan (Canadian politician)" label="John Egan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543039" start="1782" end="1815" title="George Onslow, 1st Earl of Onslow" label="George Onslow, 1st Earl of Onslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955163" start="2160" end="2180" title="2016 Canadian Census" label="2016 Canadian Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q120570088" start="2745" end="2785" title="List of anglophone communities in Quebec" label="List of anglophone communities in Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199242" start="2788" end="2820" title="List of municipalities in Quebec" label="List of municipalities in Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228218" start="2823" end="2838" title="Pontiac Airpark" label="Pontiac Airpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228219" start="2841" end="2872" title="Pontiac Airpark Water Aerodrome" label="Pontiac Airpark Water Aerodrome"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423335" wikidata="Q2001879" url="?curid=423335" title="Cruise-missile submarine">
<text>A cruise missile submarine is a submarine that carries and launches cruise missiles (SLCMs consisting of land-attack cruise missiles and anti-ship missiles) as its primary armament. Missiles greatly enhance a warship&#x27;s ability to attack surface combatants and strike land targets; although torpedoes are a more discreet option for submerged submarines, missiles give a much longer stand-off range, shorter time to impact the target, as well as the ability to engage multiple targets on different headings at the same time. Many cruise missile submarines retain the capability to deploy nuclear warheads on their missiles, but they are considered distinct from ballistic missile submarines due to the substantial differences between the two weapons systems&#x27; flight characteristics; cruise missiles fly aerodynamically using flight surfaces like wings or fins, while a ballistic missile uses its engine power alone as it may exit the atmosphere.

The United States Navy&#x27;s hull classification symbols for cruise missile submarines are SSG and SSGN – the &quot;SS&quot; denotes submarine, the &quot;G&quot; denotes guided missile, and the &quot;N&quot; denotes that the submarine is nuclear-powered.

The earliest designs of cruise missile submarines had to surface to launch their missiles, while later designs could do so underwater via dedicated vertical launching system (VLS) tubes. Many modern attack submarines can launch cruise missiles (and dedicated anti-ship missiles) from their torpedo tubes while some designs also incorporate a small number of VLS canisters, giving an overlap between cruise missile submarines and traditional attack submarines. Nonetheless, vessels classified as attack submarines are designed to use torpedoes as their main armament and have a more multi-role mission profile due to their greater speed and maneuverability. This is in contrast to cruise missile submarines which are typically larger, slower boats carrying a larger number of missiles and often possess a special compartment dedicated solely to the cruise missile tubes.

==U.S. Navy==

The U.S. Navy&#x27;s first cruise missile submarines were developed in the early 1950s to carry the SSM-N-8 Regulus missile. The first of these was a converted World War II era , , which was fitted with a hangar capable of carrying a pair of Regulus missiles. &quot;Tunny&quot; was used as a test-bed for developing techniques of use for the missile system, before a second boat, was subsequently converted. Starting in 1957, these two boats undertook the first nuclear deterrent patrols.

Subsequently, two larger diesel submarines of the were purpose built for the carriage of the Regulus missile, with each capable of accommodating up to four missiles, while a further boat, the nuclear-powered , could carry up to five missiles. Between September 1959 and July 1964, the five Regulus missile boats undertook deterrent patrols in the Pacific Ocean, in concert with the newly commissioned ballistic missile submarines (SSBN) in the Atlantic, until sufficient SSBNs were in service to replace them.

From 2002 to 2008, the U.S. Navy modified the four oldest submarines: , , , and into SSGNs. The conversion was achieved by installing VLS in a &quot;multiple all-up-round canister&quot; (MAC) configuration in 22 of the 24 missile tubes, replacing one Trident missile with seven smaller Tomahawk cruise missiles. The two remaining tubes were converted to lockout chambers for use by special forces personnel. This gave each converted submarine the capability to carry up to 154 Tomahawks. The large diameter tubes can also be modified to carry and launch other payloads, such as UAVs or UUVs although these capabilities have not yet been fully implemented. In addition to generating a significant increase in stand-off strike capabilities, this conversion also counts as an arms reduction towards the START II treaty, because it reduces the number of nuclear weapons that are forward-deployed. USS &quot;Florida&quot; (SSGN-728) launched cruise missiles against Libyan targets as part of Operation Odyssey Dawn in March 2011.

Currently, Virginia-class submarines (&quot;Block I–IV&quot;) serve as universal ships, both attack submarines and cruise-missile submarines with 12 × Vertical launching system (VLS) for Tomahawk cruise missiles. The future Virginia-class (&quot;Block V&quot;) submarines with 40 Tomahawk cruise missiles are slated to supplement and eventually replace the Ohio SSGNs when they are retired; the &quot;USS Ohio&quot; itself is more than 40 years old. 

==Soviet Navy/Russian Navy==
The Soviet Navy (and its successor, the Russian Navy) has operated a wide variety of dedicated cruise missile submarines (unbolded project numbers were prototypes/never entered military service):
Khruschev encouraged the development of missiles in the Soviet Union; thus the issues of effective nuclear deterrence and delivery and US Carrier Strike Groups were to be solved through advances in missilery. Submerged submarines are more concealable than surface ships; missiles carried upon them were therefore safer from attack by NATO surface fleets, land-based aircraft, and long-range patrol bombers. Thus the strategic and tactical strike missions were solved through the equipment of submarines with large, long-range cruise missiles: first through the modification of existing boats, then by boats being built for the task.

The Whiskey variants and Echo I cruise missile submarines deployed with a nuclear land attack version of the P-5 Pyatyorka (SS-N-3 Shaddock) from the late 1950s to 1964, concurrently with the US Regulus force, until the strategic land attack mission was transferred entirely to the SSBN force. Along with the Julietts and Echo IIs, these continued as SSGs or SSGNs with an antiship variant of the P-5 until circa 1990. The &quot;Echo I&quot;s were an exception; they could not accommodate the anti-ship targeting radar and served as SSNs after the land attack missiles were withdrawn.

Apart from true guided-missile submarines, late-Soviet attack submarines could launch various types of torpedo tube-launched missiles starting with the RK-55 and continuing with the Kalibr family of missiles. Cruise-missile capable Soviet submarines may have a different designation to incapable sister boats (&quot;Victor&quot; III (Project 671RTM) boats became Project 671RTMK as they gained this ability, K for Крылатая ракета; cruise missile). Due to standardization of torpedo tube diameters, which are 533 mm, modern Russian attack submarine classes (even the diesel Kilo and Lada) are capable of launching long-range strategic cruise missiles from their torpedo tubes, without needing specialized compartments for missile tubes.

&lt;gallery class=&quot;center&quot; mode=&quot;nolines&quot; widths=&quot;250&quot; noborder=&quot;no&quot; caption=&quot;Soviet and Russian ДПЛРК and ПЛАРК (Diesel-/Atomic Cruise-missile Submarines)&quot;&gt;
File:DN-ST-84-01654-Papa class-Oct 1983.JPEG|K-222, the sole Project 661 submarine underway, 1983
File:DN-ST-86-11105-Juliett_class_submarine-11_Aug_1986.JPEG|A Project 651 boat underway, 1986
File:2023.09.29.143258 U-461 Peenemünde DE.jpg|K-24 (now U-461 of the Peenemünde Maritime Museum), Project 651 &quot;Juliett&quot; cruise missile submarine, with rear SS-N-3 Shaddock launch tubes in raised position
File:DN-SC-89-03179 INS Chakra submarine.jpg|INS Chakra underway, c. 1988
File:Oscar class submarine 2.JPG|Project 949 (Oscar-I) underway. The Oscar-classes are notably girthy; the very large P-700 missiles were placed outside the pressure hull, twelve launch tubes on each side
File:Oscar class submarine 1.JPG|Project 949A (Oscar-II) underway. Pr. 949A boats had a different tail fin which accommodated the towed-array sonar (cylinder visible at the bottom of photo), an easy way to distinguish this class from its immediate predecessor
File:Model Yasen-class submarine at the exhibition «Army 2016».jpg|Yasen-class model at Army 2016
File:АПКР &quot;Северодвинск&quot;.jpg|&quot;Severodvinsk&quot; underway, 2016
&lt;/gallery&gt;

==See also==
*List of submarine classes in service
*List of submarine operators
*List of NATO reporting names for guided-missile submarines
*Missile boat (surface ship)
*Transporter erector launcher (land vehicle)

==References==
==External links==
*US Stingray style sub motherships test missiles. The Register, 31 May 2007</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2001879" start="2" end="26" title="Cruise-missile submarine" label="cruise missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="32" end="41" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="68" end="82" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631562" start="85" end="89" title="Submarine-launched cruise missile" label="SLCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="105" end="131" title="land-attack cruise missile" label="land-attack cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q643532" start="137" end="154" title="anti-ship missile" label="anti-ship missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="209" end="216" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="295" end="302" title="torpedo" label="torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598659" start="386" end="401" title="Standoff missile" label="stand-off range"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555170" start="591" end="606" title="Nuclear weapons delivery" label="nuclear warhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q683570" start="665" end="692" title="ballistic missile submarine" label="ballistic missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="877" end="894" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q832435" start="933" end="952" title="Sub-orbital spaceflight" label="exit the atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="959" end="977" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708390" start="985" end="1011" title="hull classification symbol" label="hull classification symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001879" start="1047" end="1050" title="Cruise-missile submarine" label="SSG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001879" start="1055" end="1059" title="Cruise-missile submarine" label="SSGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="1126" end="1140" title="guided missile" label="guided missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142489" start="1194" end="1209" title="Nuclear marine propulsion" label="nuclear-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140509" start="1360" end="1391" title="vertical launching system" label="vertical launching system (VLS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818021" start="1411" end="1427" title="attack submarine" label="attack submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007432" start="2024" end="2035" title="Compartment (ship)" label="compartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120584" start="2119" end="2150" title="Regulus missile submarines" label="first cruise missile submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340751" start="2198" end="2213" title="SSM-N-8 Regulus" label="SSM-N-8 Regulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q637802" start="2560" end="2577" title="Mutual assured destruction" label="nuclear deterrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073517" start="3350" end="3365" title="Trident missile" label="Trident missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q150115" start="3385" end="3408" title="Tomahawk (missile family)" label="Tomahawk cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q549046" start="3453" end="3468" title="lockout chamber" label="lockout chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="3677" end="3681" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="UAVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496586" start="3685" end="3689" title="unmanned underwater vehicle" label="UUVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187969" start="3899" end="3907" title="START II" label="START II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="4060" end="4065" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q878102" start="4086" end="4108" title="Operation Odyssey Dawn" label="Operation Odyssey Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q633556" start="4136" end="4160" title="Virginia-class submarine" label="Virginia-class submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818021" start="4218" end="4234" title="attack submarine" label="attack submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140509" start="4276" end="4307" title="vertical launching system" label="Vertical launching system (VLS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q150115" start="4312" end="4336" title="Tomahawk (missile family)" label="Tomahawk cruise missiles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4349" end="4363" title="Virginia-class submarine#Block V" label="Virginia-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q150115" start="4405" end="4429" title="Tomahawk (missile family)" label="Tomahawk cruise missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q796754" start="4610" end="4621" title="Soviet Navy" label="Soviet Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="4646" end="4658" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="4802" end="4811" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Khruschev"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4891" end="4932" title="Nuclear weapons delivery#Cruise missile" label="effective nuclear deterrence and delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4307465" start="4937" end="4960" title="Carrier strike group" label="US Carrier Strike Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q658414" start="5193" end="5206" title="patrol bomber" label="patrol bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087043" start="5363" end="5375" title="modding" label="modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330530" start="5545" end="5558" title="P-5 Pyatyorka" label="P-5 Pyatyorka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330003" start="6125" end="6137" title="torpedo tube" label="torpedo tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358725" start="6174" end="6179" title="RK-55" label="RK-55"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333260" start="6204" end="6217" title="3M-54 Kalibr" label="Kalibr family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475075" start="6332" end="6371" title="Victor-class submarine" label="&amp;quot;Victor&amp;quot; III (Project 671RTM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132506" start="6530" end="6536" title="Type 53 torpedo" label="533 mm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6538" end="6577" title="List of active Russian Navy ships#Nuclear attack submarines" label="modern Russian attack submarine classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="6588" end="6594" title="Diesel-electric submarine" label="diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q55520" start="6595" end="6599" title="Kilo-class submarine" label="Kilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078065" start="6604" end="6608" title="Lada-class submarine" label="Lada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754034" start="7015" end="7042" title="Soviet submarine K-222" label="K-222, the sole Project 661"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7220" end="7225" title="List of submarine museums#Germany" label="U-461"/>
<link wikidata="Q490398" start="7233" end="7243" title="Peenemünde" label="Peenemünde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206135" start="7423" end="7433" title="Soviet submarine K-43" label="INS Chakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q13557299" start="7609" end="7622" title="pressure hull" label="pressure hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419642" start="7787" end="7804" title="Towed array sonar" label="towed-array sonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q65123753" start="8005" end="8014" title="Army (International Military-Technical Forum)" label="Army 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q387941" start="8054" end="8078" title="Russian submarine Severodvinsk (K-560)" label="&amp;quot;Severodvinsk&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436962" start="8126" end="8162" title="List of submarine classes in service" label="List of submarine classes in service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435748" start="8164" end="8191" title="List of submarine operators" label="List of submarine operators"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8193" end="8251" title="List of NATO reporting names for submarines#Guided-missile submarines" label="List of NATO reporting names for guided-missile submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q843215" start="8253" end="8265" title="Missile boat" label="Missile boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083136" start="8282" end="8310" title="Transporter erector launcher" label="Transporter erector launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363733" start="8411" end="8423" title="The Register" label="The Register"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423339" wikidata="Q1136885" url="?curid=423339" title="Sanrio">
<text>is a Japanese entertainment company. It designs, licenses, and manufactures products focusing on the &quot;kawaii&quot; (&quot;cute&quot;) segment of Japanese popular culture. Their products include stationery, school supplies, gifts, and accessories, which are sold worldwide, including at specialty brand retail stores in Japan. Sanrio&#x27;s best-known character is Hello Kitty, a cartoon cat and one of the most successful marketing brands in the world.

Besides selling character goods, Sanrio takes part in film production and publishing. They own the rights to the &quot;Mr. Men&quot; characters and Japanese licensing rights to the &quot;Peanuts&quot; characters. Their animatronics branch, Kokoro Company, Ltd. (&quot;kokoro&quot; being Japanese for &quot;heart&quot;), is best known for the Actroid android. The company also runs a KFC franchise in Saitama Prefecture.

==History==
Shintaro Tsuji founded Sanrio on August 10, 1960, then known as the Yamanashi Silk Company using in capital. In 1962, Tsuji expanded his enterprise from silk to rubber sandals with flowers painted on them. Tsuji noticed his success gained by merely adding a cute design to the sandals. He began using existing cartoon characters for his merchandise. In the late 1960s the company began producing goods with the dog character Snoopy, from the American comic strip &quot;Peanuts&quot;, after acquiring the Japanese licensing rights.

In 1973 the company was officially established under the name Sanrio. In the book or &quot;These are Sanrio&#x27;s Secrets&quot; Tsuji, Sanrio&#x27;s founder, said that , part of the company&#x27;s former name, has an alternative on&#x27;yomi reading of &quot;Sanri&quot;. The remaining &quot;o&quot; was added from the sound people make when they are excited. The company&#x27;s European website gives another origin of the name, saying the name comes from the Spanish words &quot;san&quot; (&#x27;holy&#x27;) and &quot;río&quot; (&#x27;river&#x27;).

Tsuji hired his own designers to create characters for Sanrio, so as to not have to pay outside royalty fees. The first original Sanrio character, Coro Chan, was introduced in 1973. Hello Kitty was added to the lineup of early Sanrio characters in 1974 and the first related merchandise was released the following year. The popular feline whose mouth is usually invisible has had both peaks and drops in sales over the years but always has been the highest contributor to Sanrio&#x27;s sales. Sanrio constantly adds new characters to its lineup. Specific characters are rotated in and out of active production. For a short time, Osamu Tezuka&#x27;s baby unicorn character Unico, who starred in two feature-length anime movies in the early 1980s, was also part of the Sanrio&#x27;s lineup; however, the rights to Unico shifted to Osamu Tezuka&#x27;s own company after Tezuka&#x27;s death in 1989.

In late 2003, Sanrio won the &quot;Top Brand with a Conscience&quot; award from the Medinge Group of Sweden for its communication principles. The company has partnered with UNICEF since 1984. In 2006, Sanrio launched Sanrio Digital together with Typhoon Games to expand to the Internet, online games, and mobile services.

Beginning with Jewelpet in 2008, Sanrio started collaborating with Sega Toys in creating characters intended to become media franchises. Subsequent collaborations include  Rilu Rilu Fairilu from 2016 and Beatcats from 2020.

2010 was Sanrio&#x27;s 50th anniversary. In conjunction with this, Build-A-Bear Workshop released limited edition stuffed toys of several Sanrio characters, including Hello Kitty, Chococat, My Melody and Keroppi.

Hello Kitty is alleged to be drawn in a similar style to the rabbit Miffy. On August 26, 2010, Mercis BV, representing Miffy&#x27;s creator Dick Bruna brought suit against Sanrio. They claimed that one of Hello Kitty&#x27;s companion characters, a rabbit named Cathy, infringes on the copyright and trademark of Miffy. On November 2, 2010, a Dutch court ruled against Sanrio and ordered the company to stop marketing Cathy products in Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands. Following the March 11, 2011, earthquake and tsunami in Japan, Sanrio and Mercis reached an out-of-court settlement on June 7, 2011, for Sanrio to halt production worldwide of merchandise that feature Cathy. They also jointly announced a €150,000 donation to earthquake victims.

In December 2011, Sanrio Global acquired the rights to the &quot;Mr. Men&quot; characters, which includes the subsidiary Mr Men Films Ltd, taking over Chorion&#x27;s THOIP company.

In 2019 the European Commission fined Sanrio 6.2 million euros (approx. 6.9 million US dollars) for blocking cross-border sales of its licensed products.

In June 2020, it was announced that the company&#x27;s founder and president, Shintaro Tsuji would step down from the role and hand control of the company to his grandson, Tomokuni Tsuji. Tomokuni was just 31 at the time, making him the youngest chief executive of a listed Japanese company. Shintaro Tsuji ran the company for 60 years.

==Locations==

Sanrio Inc. is Sanrio&#x27;s American subsidiary. Sanrio Inc. has offices in South San Francisco, California, and Torrance, California. Sanrio&#x27;s first Western Hemisphere store opened in San Jose&#x27;s Eastridge Mall. In 2008, Sanrio opened its high-end boutique called &quot;Sanrio Luxe&quot; in New York City&#x27;s Times Square. In the Western Hemisphere, Sanrio character-branded products are sold in upwards of 13,000 locations including department, specialty, and national chain stores and over 85 Sanrio boutiques. In April 2010, the first and only Sanrio-licensed eatery (Sanrio Cafe) in the U.S. opened at Pearlridge&#x27;s Downtown phase in Aiea, Hawaii.

In 2004, Sanrio Co. Ltd., expanded its license to one of its major licensee and plush suppliers Nakajima USA to include the owning and operating of all Sanrio branded stores in the US, overseeing the relationships between individual licensed stores and supplying all categories of products for the retail stores in the US and wholesale accounts.

Sanrio hosts two theme parks in Japan, Sanrio Puroland in Tama, Tokyo, and Harmonyland in Hiji, Ōita, Kyūshū.

==Characters==

Sanrio has created over 450 characters as of 2022, the best known of which is the white cat character Hello Kitty from 1974. Other well-known characters include the rabbit My Melody from 1975, the frog Keroppi from 1988, the penguin Bad Badtz-Maru from 1993, the white dog Cinnamoroll from 2001, the rabbit Kuromi from 2005, the animal series Jewelpet from 2008, the egg character Gudetama from 2013, and the red panda Aggressive Retsuko from 2015.

Notable designers of Sanrio characters include Yuko Shimizu, original designer of Hello Kitty, Yuko Yamaguchi, lead designer for most of Hello Kitty&#x27;s history and Miyuki Okumura, original designer of Cinnamoroll.

Since 1986 Sanrio has held the annual Sanrio Character Ranking poll where fans can vote on their favorite characters. It began in the &quot;Strawberry Newspaper&quot; (:ja:いちご新聞) published by Sanrio in Japan, but now voting also takes place online.

Besides their own original characters, Sanrio also owns the rights to the &quot;Mr. Men&quot; characters and Japanese licensing rights to the &quot;Peanuts&quot; characters.

==Filmography==

===Theatrical===
From 1977 to 1985, Sanrio produced movies through their Sanrio Films label. After &quot;A Journey Through Fairyland,&quot; Sanrio switched gears and started doing short films, OVAs, and TV shows based on their characters. In 2006, Sanrio announced they are again going to do feature-length films.
===Other animation===
Sanrio began its involvement in the production of TV and direct-to-video animation during the late 1980s and early 1990s, starting with the US-made &quot;Hello Kitty&#x27;s Furry Tale Theater&quot; in 1987. The character My Melody got her first starring role in an animated series in the anime television series, &quot;Onegai My Melody&quot;, which first aired on TV Osaka on April 3, 2005, and was produced by Studio Comet. The Sugarbunnies franchise was later adapted into a 7-minute short series in 2007 and was popular enough to gain two sequels.

Jewelpet was also adapted into an anime metaseries in 2009, which was also produced by Studio Comet, spanning 6 official seasons and one theatrical movie, making it the longest-running anime adaptation of a Sanrio franchise in history.

&quot;Show by Rock!!&quot;, a game by Sanrio and Geechs got an anime adaptation produced by Bones in 2015 - and was licensed in the United States by Funimation. &quot;Aggretsuko&quot; also get three animated adaptations by Fanworks, one aired on TBS and the later two were released officially on Netflix.

* &quot;Mr. Men&quot; (1974) — Flicks Films
* &quot;Little Miss&quot; (1983) — Flicks Films
* &quot;Button Nose&quot; (1985) — Topcraft
* &quot;Hello Kitty&#x27;s Furry Tale Theater&quot; (1987) — DIC Entertainment
* &quot;Hello Kitty and Friends&quot; (1989—1998) — Grouper Production
* &quot;Mr. Men and Little Miss&quot; (1995—1997) — Marina Productions/Breakthrough Films and Television
* &quot;Flint the Time Detective&quot; (1998) — Group TAC
* &quot;Hello Kitty&#x27;s Paradise&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Hello Kitty&#x27;s Animation Theater&quot; (2001) — Group TAC
* &quot;Hello Kitty&#x27;s Stump Village&quot; (2005) — Studio Tomorrow/SOVIK Venture Capital
* &quot;Onegai My Melody&quot; (2005) — Studio Comet
* &quot;U*SA*HA*NA: Dream Ballerina&quot; (2006) — Asahi Production
* &quot;Hello Kitty: Ringo no Mori Fantasy&quot; (2006) — Asahi Production
* &quot;Onegai My Melody ~KuruKuru Shuffle!~&quot; (2006) — Studio Comet 
* &quot;Hello Kitty: Ringo No Mori No Mystery&quot; (2007) — Asahi Production
* &quot;Sugarbunnies&quot; (2007) — Asahi Production 
* &quot;Onegai My Melody Sukkiri♪&quot; (2007) — Studio Comet
* &quot;Hello Kitty: Ringo no Mori to Parallel Town&quot; (2007) — Asahi Production 
* &quot;Sugarbunnies Chocolat!&quot; (2008) — Asahi Production 
* &quot;Onegai♪My Melody Kirara&quot; (2008) — Studio Comet
* &quot;The Mr. Men Show&quot; (2008) - Renegade Animation
* &quot;Sugarbunnies Fleur&quot; (2009) — Asahi Production 
* &quot;Jewelpet&quot; (2009) — Studio Comet
* &quot;Jewelpet Twinkle&quot; (2010) — Studio Comet
* &quot;Jewelpet Sunshine&quot; (2011) — Studio Comet
* &quot;Jewelpet Kira Deco!&quot; (2012) — Studio Comet
* &quot;Jewelpet Happiness&quot; (2013) — Studio Comet
* &quot;Lady Jewelpet&quot; (2014) — Zexcs
* &quot;Show by Rock!!&quot; (2015) — Bones
* &quot;&quot; (2015) — Studio Deen and TMS Entertainment
* &quot;Rilu Rilu Fairilu ~ Yousei no Door ~&quot; (2016) — Studio Deen
* &quot;Show by Rock!!#&quot; (2016) — Bones
* &quot;Rilu Rilu Fairilu ~ Mahou no Kagami ~&quot; (2017) — Studio Deen
* &quot;Sanrio Boys&quot; (2018) — Pierrot
* &quot;Aggretsuko&quot; (2018–2023) — Fanworks
* &quot;Oshiete Mahou no Pendulum ~ Rilu Rilu Fairilu ~&quot; (2018) - Studio Deen
* &quot;Show by Rock!! Mashumairesh!!&quot; (2020) — Kinema Citrus
* &quot;Mewkledreamy&quot; (2020) — J.C.Staff
* &quot;Show by Rock!! Stars!!&quot; (2021) — Kinema Citrus
* &quot;Mewkledreamy Mix!&quot; (2021) — J.C.Staff

=== Variety shows ===
A few children&#x27;s variety shows by Sanrio aired on TV Tokyo.
* &quot;Daisuki! Hello Kitty&quot; (1993—1994)
* &quot;Asobou!! Hello Kitty&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Hello Kitty to Bad Badtz-Maru&quot; (1994—1998)
* &quot;Kitty&#x27;s Paradise&quot; (1999—2011)
* &quot;Sanrio Characters Pon Pon Jump!&quot; (2017-2020)
* &quot;Fun Fun Kitty!&quot; (2020-2022)

== Video games ==
Sanrio Digital produces and publishes digital content based on Sanrio intellectual property assets like Hello Kitty, My Melody, Badtz Maru and many others. Among the games are: &quot;Hello Kitty: Roller Rescue&quot;, &quot;Hello Kitty: Birthday Adventures&quot;, and &quot;Hello Kitty Seasons&quot;. &quot;Hello Kitty Island Adventure&quot; (2023) is a Sanrio game created for Apple Arcade, PC and Nintendo Switch.

==Publishing==
Sanrio publishes many books featuring its own characters. It also publishes art books (for instance, those by Keibun Ōta). Sanrio publishes books in many languages, including Japanese and English. Sanrio published video games in the early 1990s under the name &quot;Character Soft&quot;.

==References==
===Footnotes===
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
== Further reading ==
* 

==External links==

*Official Sanrio website
*Official Sanrio website 
*Sanrio Digital
*Sanrio Internet Community</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q281639" start="107" end="113" title="kawaii" label="kawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158957" start="150" end="174" title="Japanese popular culture" label="Japanese popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q875696" start="199" end="209" title="stationery" label="stationery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065579" start="239" end="250" title="Fashion accessory" label="accessories"/>
<link wikidata="Q191794" start="369" end="380" title="Hello Kitty" label="Hello Kitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005333" start="578" end="585" title="Mr. Men" label="Mr. Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115636" start="646" end="653" title="Peanuts" label="Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q494002" start="678" end="690" title="animatronics" label="animatronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938887" start="801" end="808" title="Actroid" label="Actroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q181787" start="809" end="816" title="Android (robot)" label="android"/>
<link wikidata="Q524757" start="842" end="845" title="KFC" label="KFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q128186" start="859" end="877" title="Saitama Prefecture" label="Saitama Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4506113" start="892" end="906" title="Shintaro Tsuji" label="Shintaro Tsuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="1045" end="1049" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q207369" start="1317" end="1323" title="Snoopy" label="Snoopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115636" start="1361" end="1368" title="Peanuts" label="Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q718498" start="1654" end="1666" title="on&amp;#x27;yomi" label="on&amp;#x27;yomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="2073" end="2085" title="Royalty payment" label="royalty fees"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585709" start="2124" end="2133" title="Coro Chan" label="Coro Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191794" start="2159" end="2170" title="Hello Kitty" label="Hello Kitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q193300" start="2606" end="2618" title="Osamu Tezuka" label="Osamu Tezuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504585" start="2649" end="2654" title="Unico" label="Unico"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="3047" end="3053" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136885" start="3091" end="3105" title="Sanrio Digital" label="Sanrio Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861179" start="3120" end="3133" title="Typhoon Games" label="Typhoon Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q116634" start="3161" end="3172" title="online game" label="online game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7475959" start="3212" end="3220" title="Jewelpet" label="Jewelpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q100350796" start="3264" end="3273" title="Sega Toys" label="Sega Toys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3368" end="3386" title=" Rilu Rilu Fairilu" label=" Rilu Rilu Fairilu"/>
<link wikidata="Q102350782" start="3401" end="3409" title="Beatcats" label="Beatcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002992" start="3489" end="3510" title="Build-A-Bear Workshop" label="Build-A-Bear Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q682582" start="3536" end="3547" title="stuffed toy" label="stuffed toy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501505" start="3704" end="3709" title="Miffy" label="Miffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q628346" start="3776" end="3786" title="Dick Bruna" label="Dick Bruna"/>
<link wikidata="Q36204" start="4127" end="4165" title="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami" label="March 11, 2011, earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005333" start="4458" end="4465" title="Mr. Men" label="Mr. Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105067" start="4544" end="4551" title="Chorion (company)" label="Chorion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="4587" end="4606" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q927122" start="5160" end="5191" title="South San Francisco, California" label="South San Francisco, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q489197" start="5197" end="5217" title="Torrance, California" label="Torrance, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="5274" end="5282" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330897" start="5290" end="5304" title="Eastridge Center" label="Eastridge Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="5406" end="5418" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158234" start="5703" end="5713" title="Pearlridge" label="Pearlridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q423505" start="5739" end="5751" title="Aiea, Hawaii" label="Aiea, Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960192" start="5850" end="5862" title="Nakajima USA" label="Nakajima USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="6118" end="6128" title="theme park" label="theme park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133851" start="6140" end="6155" title="Sanrio Puroland" label="Sanrio Puroland"/>
<link wikidata="Q213263" start="6159" end="6170" title="Tama, Tokyo" label="Tama, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184795" start="6191" end="6195" title="Hiji, Ōita" label="Hiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q133924" start="6197" end="6201" title="Ōita Prefecture" label="Ōita"/>
<link wikidata="Q13987" start="6203" end="6209" title="Kyūshū" label="Kyūshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q191794" start="6330" end="6341" title="Hello Kitty" label="Hello Kitty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6400" end="6409" title="List of Sanrio characters#My Melody (1975)" label="My Melody"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6430" end="6437" title="List of Sanrio characters#Keroppi (1988)" label="Keroppi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6461" end="6475" title="List of Sanrio characters#Bad Badtz-Maru (1993)" label="Bad Badtz-Maru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972831" start="6501" end="6512" title="Cinnamoroll" label="Cinnamoroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585709" start="6535" end="6541" title="Kuromi" label="Kuromi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6571" end="6579" title="List of Sanrio characters#Jewelpet (2008)" label="Jewelpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q20039752" start="6609" end="6617" title="Gudetama" label="Gudetama"/>
<link wikidata="Q41960" start="6637" end="6646" title="red panda" label="red panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324232" start="6647" end="6665" title="Aggretsuko" label="Aggressive Retsuko"/>
<link wikidata="Q464270" start="6725" end="6737" title="Yuko Shimizu" label="Yuko Shimizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060806" start="6773" end="6787" title="Yuko Yamaguchi" label="Yuko Yamaguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11445871" start="6846" end="6860" title="Miyuki Okumura" label="Miyuki Okumura"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7065" end="7074" title=":ja:いちご新聞" label=":ja:いちご新聞"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005333" start="7227" end="7234" title="Mr. Men" label="Mr. Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115636" start="7295" end="7302" title="Peanuts" label="Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129904" start="7829" end="7866" title="Hello Kitty&amp;#x27;s Furry Tale Theater" label="Hello Kitty&amp;#x27;s Furry Tale Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573191" start="7994" end="8010" title="Onegai My Melody" label="Onegai My Melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324709" start="8039" end="8047" title="TV Osaka" label="TV Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173719" start="8086" end="8098" title="Studio Comet" label="Studio Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634967" start="8104" end="8116" title="Sugarbunnies" label="Sugarbunnies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7475959" start="8227" end="8235" title="Jewelpet" label="Jewelpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18010871" start="8470" end="8484" title="Show by Rock!!" label="Show by Rock!!"/>
<link wikidata="Q834471" start="8556" end="8561" title="Bones (studio)" label="Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q169325" start="8613" end="8623" title="Funimation" label="Funimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324232" start="8631" end="8641" title="Aggretsuko" label="Aggretsuko"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766400" start="8710" end="8713" title="TBS Television (Japan)" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="8760" end="8767" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8778" end="8785" title="Mr. Men#TV series" label="Mr. Men"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8822" end="8833" title="Mr. Men#TV series" label="Little Miss"/>
<link wikidata="Q9196134" start="8870" end="8881" title="Button Nose" label="Button Nose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532077" start="8897" end="8905" title="Topcraft" label="Topcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129904" start="8914" end="8951" title="Hello Kitty&amp;#x27;s Furry Tale Theater" label="Hello Kitty&amp;#x27;s Furry Tale Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q515708" start="8967" end="8984" title="DIC Entertainment" label="DIC Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035156" start="8993" end="9016" title="List of Hello Kitty animated series" label="Hello Kitty and Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321359" start="9064" end="9087" title="Mr. Men and Little Miss" label="Mr. Men and Little Miss"/>
<link wikidata="Q700408" start="9169" end="9193" title="Flint the Time Detective" label="Flint the Time Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q961397" start="9209" end="9218" title="Group TAC" label="Group TAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035156" start="9227" end="9254" title="List of Hello Kitty animated series" label="Hello Kitty&amp;#x27;s Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035156" start="9276" end="9312" title="List of Hello Kitty animated series" label="Hello Kitty&amp;#x27;s Animation Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035156" start="9346" end="9378" title="List of Hello Kitty animated series" label="Hello Kitty&amp;#x27;s Stump Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573191" start="9440" end="9456" title="Onegai My Melody" label="Onegai My Melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173719" start="9472" end="9484" title="Studio Comet" label="Studio Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803364" start="9536" end="9552" title="Asahi Production" label="Asahi Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035156" start="9561" end="9595" title="List of Hello Kitty animated series" label="Hello Kitty: Ringo no Mori Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803364" start="9611" end="9627" title="Asahi Production" label="Asahi Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573191" start="9636" end="9672" title="Onegai My Melody" label="Onegai My Melody ~KuruKuru Shuffle!~"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173719" start="9688" end="9700" title="Studio Comet" label="Studio Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803364" start="9763" end="9779" title="Asahi Production" label="Asahi Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634967" start="9788" end="9800" title="Sugarbunnies" label="Sugarbunnies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803364" start="9816" end="9832" title="Asahi Production" label="Asahi Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573191" start="9842" end="9867" title="Onegai My Melody" label="Onegai My Melody Sukkiri♪"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173719" start="9883" end="9895" title="Studio Comet" label="Studio Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803364" start="9963" end="9979" title="Asahi Production" label="Asahi Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634967" start="9989" end="10011" title="Sugarbunnies" label="Sugarbunnies Chocolat!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803364" start="10027" end="10043" title="Asahi Production" label="Asahi Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573191" start="10053" end="10076" title="Onegai My Melody" label="Onegai♪My Melody Kirara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173719" start="10092" end="10104" title="Studio Comet" label="Studio Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233910" start="10113" end="10129" title="The Mr. Men Show" label="The Mr. Men Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313036" start="10145" end="10163" title="Renegade Animation" label="Renegade Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634967" start="10172" end="10190" title="Sugarbunnies" label="Sugarbunnies Fleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803364" start="10206" end="10222" title="Asahi Production" label="Asahi Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634885" start="10232" end="10240" title="Jewelpet (anime)" label="Jewelpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173719" start="10256" end="10268" title="Studio Comet" label="Studio Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634885" start="10277" end="10293" title="Jewelpet (anime)" label="Jewelpet Twinkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173719" start="10309" end="10321" title="Studio Comet" label="Studio Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634885" start="10330" end="10347" title="Jewelpet (anime)" label="Jewelpet Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173719" start="10363" end="10375" title="Studio Comet" label="Studio Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634885" start="10384" end="10403" title="Jewelpet (anime)" label="Jewelpet Kira Deco!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173719" start="10419" end="10431" title="Studio Comet" label="Studio Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634885" start="10440" end="10458" title="Jewelpet (anime)" label="Jewelpet Happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173719" start="10474" end="10486" title="Studio Comet" label="Studio Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019901" start="10495" end="10508" title="Lady Jewelpet" label="Lady Jewelpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q197069" start="10524" end="10529" title="Zexcs" label="Zexcs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18010871" start="10538" end="10552" title="Show by Rock!!" label="Show by Rock!!"/>
<link wikidata="Q834471" start="10568" end="10573" title="Bones (studio)" label="Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q507806" start="10598" end="10609" title="Studio Deen" label="Studio Deen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054807" start="10614" end="10631" title="TMS Entertainment" label="TMS Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q21831254" start="10640" end="10676" title="Rilu Rilu Fairilu" label="Rilu Rilu Fairilu ~ Yousei no Door ~"/>
<link wikidata="Q507806" start="10692" end="10703" title="Studio Deen" label="Studio Deen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18010871" start="10712" end="10727" title="Show by Rock!!" label="Show by Rock!!#"/>
<link wikidata="Q834471" start="10743" end="10748" title="Bones (studio)" label="Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q21831254" start="10757" end="10794" title="Rilu Rilu Fairilu" label="Rilu Rilu Fairilu ~ Mahou no Kagami ~"/>
<link wikidata="Q507806" start="10810" end="10821" title="Studio Deen" label="Studio Deen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28690097" start="10830" end="10841" title="Sanrio Boys" label="Sanrio Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q611346" start="10857" end="10864" title="Pierrot (company)" label="Pierrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324232" start="10873" end="10883" title="Aggretsuko" label="Aggretsuko"/>
<link wikidata="Q21831254" start="10921" end="10968" title="Rilu Rilu Fairilu" label="Oshiete Mahou no Pendulum ~ Rilu Rilu Fairilu ~"/>
<link wikidata="Q507806" start="10984" end="10995" title="Studio Deen" label="Studio Deen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18010871" start="11004" end="11033" title="Show by Rock!!" label="Show by Rock!! Mashumairesh!!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410686" start="11049" end="11062" title="Kinema Citrus" label="Kinema Citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q85874146" start="11071" end="11083" title="Mewkledreamy" label="Mewkledreamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065717" start="11099" end="11108" title="J.C.Staff" label="J.C.Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q18010871" start="11117" end="11139" title="Show by Rock!!" label="Show by Rock!! Stars!!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410686" start="11155" end="11168" title="Kinema Citrus" label="Kinema Citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q85874146" start="11177" end="11194" title="Mewkledreamy" label="Mewkledreamy Mix!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065717" start="11210" end="11219" title="J.C.Staff" label="J.C.Staff"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11802" end="11828" title="Hello Kitty: Roller Rescue" label="Hello Kitty: Roller Rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q121770549" start="11925" end="11953" title="Hello Kitty Island Adventure" label="Hello Kitty Island Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q62513347" start="11996" end="12008" title="Apple Arcade" label="Apple Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="12017" end="12032" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383566" start="12160" end="12170" title="Keibun Ōta" label="Keibun Ōta"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423343" wikidata="Q1078913" url="?curid=423343" title="Plastic arts">
<text>Plastic arts are art forms which involve physical manipulation of a &quot;plastic medium&quot;, such as clay, wax, paint or even plastic in the modern sense of the word (a ductile polymer) to create works of art. The term is used more generally to refer to the visual arts (such as painting, sculpture, ceramics, architecture, film and photography), rather than literature and music. Materials for use in the plastic arts, in the narrower definition, include those that can be carved or shaped, such as stone or wood, concrete, glass, or metal.

==History==
The word &quot;plastic&quot; draws from the Ancient Greek (&quot;plastikós&quot;), which means &#x27;to mold&#x27; or &#x27;to shape&#x27;. It has long preceded its dominant modern meaning as a synthetic material. The term &quot;plastic arts&quot; has been used historically to denote visual art forms (painting, sculpture, and ceramics) as opposed to literature or music. 

The related terms &quot;plasticity&quot; and &quot;plasticism&quot; became more widely used in the early 20th century by critics discussing modern painting, particularly the works of Paul Cézanne.
The oldest known &quot;plastic art&quot; dates back to 30,000–34,000 BP. 

==Application to literature==
In contrast to the limiting of &#x27;plastic arts&#x27; to sculpture and architecture by Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling in 1807, the German critic August Wilhelm Schlegel (1767–1845) applied the concept not only to visual arts, but also poetry.

Classical poetry lines he saw using plastic isolation, and rhyme falling under the Romantic (domain).

In Schlegel&#x27;s Viennese lectures (1809–1811), published in 1827 as &quot;On the Theory and History of the Plastic Arts&quot;, he contrasted the plasticism of Classical Art with picturesque Romanticism: 

==Gallery==
==See also==
* 
* 
* (according to Mondrian)
* 

==References==
==Further reading==
* Barnes, A. C., &quot;The Art in Painting&quot;, 3rd ed., 1937, Harcourt, Brace &amp; World, Inc., NY. 
* Bukumirovic, D. (1998). &quot;Maga Magazinovic&quot;. Biblioteka Fatalne srpkinje knj. br. 4. Beograd: Narodna knj.
* Fazenda, M. J. (1997). &quot;Between the pictorial and the expression of ideas: the plastic arts and literature in the dance of Paula Massano&quot;. N.p.
* Gerón, C. (2000). &quot;Enciclopedia de las artes plásticas dominicanas: 1844–2000&quot;. 4th ed. Dominican Republic s.n.
* Schlegel, August Wilhelm., (1966) &quot;Vorlesungen uber dramatische Kunst und Literatur&quot;, Stuttgart: Kohlhammer Verlag, 1966, p. 21f.

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1078913" start="0" end="12" title="Plastic arts" label="Plastic arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="17" end="25" title="art form" label="art form"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="104" end="108" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695" start="110" end="113" title="wax" label="wax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="115" end="120" title="paint#Art" label="paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="172" end="179" title="ductile" label="ductile"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="180" end="187" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q838948" start="199" end="211" title="work of art" label="works of art"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="261" end="272" title="visual arts" label="visual arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="503" end="508" title="Rock (geology)" label="stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="512" end="516" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="518" end="526" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="528" end="533" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="538" end="543" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="752" end="770" title="Plastic" label="synthetic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="1116" end="1128" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Paul Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="1199" end="1201" title="Before present" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q60070" start="1324" end="1358" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q57281" start="1386" end="1409" title="August Wilhelm Schlegel" label="August Wilhelm Schlegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="1476" end="1482" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="1781" end="1792" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q151803" start="1843" end="1851" title="Mondrian" label="Mondrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q710269" start="1894" end="1907" title="Albert C. Barnes" label="Barnes, A. C."/>
<link wikidata="Q57281" start="2397" end="2422" title="August Wilhelm Schlegel" label="Schlegel, August Wilhelm."/>
<link wikidata="Q1778642" start="2504" end="2521" title="Kohlhammer Verlag" label="Kohlhammer Verlag"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423351" wikidata="Q11288478" url="?curid=423351" title="Wegmans">
<text>Wegmans Food Markets, Inc. is a privately held American supermarket chain. It is now headquartered in Gates, New York, but was founded on January 30, 1916, in Rochester, New York.

As of late 2024, Wegmans had 111 stores in eight states (New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Maryland, Massachusetts, Virginia, North Carolina, Delaware) and the District of Columbia. The company said in 2022 it planned soon to add seven new stores, including in Connecticut.

Wegmans has appeared on &quot;Fortune&quot;″s annual &quot;100 Best Companies to Work For&quot; list since the list first appeared in 1998. The company has been listed among the top four on the &quot;100 Best Companies to Work For&quot; list since 2016, but as of 2022, the company has been listed among the top six.

The largest Wegmans store is located in DeWitt, New York, and measures about . Wegmans smallest store is located in East Rochester, New York, on Fairport Road, measuring ; this is also the oldest store still in operation without a façade update, having opened in 1958.

==History==
Wegmans is a privately owned company, founded in 1916 by brothers John and Walter Wegman as the Rochester Fruit and Vegetable Company. Originally starting as a produce cart, the first store opened in 1917 at 72 West Main St. in Rochester, New York. Wegmans is headquartered in the Rochester suburb of Gates. Danny Wegman is the chairman. His daughter, Colleen Wegman, has been president and CEO since 2017; his other daughter, Nicole Wegman, is senior vice president. Danny&#x27;s father, Robert Wegman, who died in 2006, was the previous chairman, and was the son of co-founder Walter Wegman. During his life, Robert Wegman was a pioneer in the retail food business, as well as a generous donor to educational institutions and other charities. On January 30, 2016, Wegmans celebrated its 100th anniversary.

The Wegmans are a Roman Catholic family and have been active in donating to Roman Catholic causes. Robert B. Wegman and Peggy Wegman have donated millions of dollars to Roman Catholic schools in the Diocese of Rochester. The National Catholic Register has praised Wegmans for being one example of &quot;a cadre of privately held companies that have put into practice the Catholic social vision&quot; that human dignity is of greater importance than private profit, claiming that the Wegmans business philosophy &quot;came from the lesson the Sisters of Mercy taught [Robert B. Wegman] as a boy in Catholic elementary school&quot;. John H. Garvey, former President of the Catholic University of America, delivered a speech about the Catholic origins of Wegmans at the Religious Freedom &amp; Business Foundation&#x27;s 2022 gala.

Wegmans eliminated plastic bags from all of its locations by the end of 2022, with paper bags available for a charge of five cents per bag.

===Expansion===
In 1965, the chain expanded beyond the Rochester area, with a store in Hornell in the Southern Tier of New York State, then in 1968 in Syracuse, and again in 1977 with its first Buffalo store. The first store outside New York opened in 1993 in Erie, Pennsylvania, and the expansion continued with a store in New Jersey in 1999, Virginia in 2004, Maryland in 2005, Massachusetts in 2011, North Carolina in 2019, and Washington, D.C. and Delaware in 2022. As a part of the company&#x27;s continued expansion efforts, Wegmans opened its fifth Maryland location in Columbia on June 17, 2012. Its sixth Maryland location opened in Crofton on October 28, 2012, followed by a Germantown location on September 15, 2013. Wegmans opened a store at the Montgomery Mall in North Wales, Pennsylvania, on November 3, 2013, the first store to be part of a shopping mall since the closing of the Midtown Plaza store in Rochester.

Wegmans, having long planned to expand into New England, opened its first store in that region in Northborough, Massachusetts, on October 16, 2011. 2014 saw Wegmans opening two more Massachusetts stores, in Newton, Chestnut Hill, on April 27, and in Burlington on October 26. Its fourth Massachusetts store opened in Westwood on October 11, 2015. The eighth Maryland store opened in Owings Mills, Maryland, in September 2016. In late 2016, Wegmans opened Virginia stores in Short Pump (August), Midlothian, and Charlottesville (November). The Hanover Township, New Jersey, location opened in July 2017. The Montvale, New Jersey, location opened in September 2017. The Medford, Massachusetts, location opened on November 5, 2017. The Natick, Massachusetts, location opened on April 29, 2018. The Chantilly, Virginia, location opened on June 3, 2018. The Lancaster, Pennsylvania, location opened on September 23, 2018. The Virginia Beach, Virginia, location opened on April 28, 2019. The chain&#x27;s first store in North Carolina, located in Raleigh, opened on September 29, 2019. It was also the chain&#x27;s 100th store. The chain&#x27;s first location in New York City, at Admiral&#x27;s Row in Brooklyn&#x27;s Navy Yard, opened on October 27, 2019.

The West Cary, North Carolina, location opened on July 29, 2020. The Harrison, New York, location, in Westchester County, opened on August 5, 2020. The Tysons, Virginia, location opened on November 4, 2020. The Chapel Hill, North Carolina, location opened on February 24, 2021. The Wake Forest, North Carolina, location opened on May 19, 2021. The Carlyle, Virginia, location opened on May 11, 2022. The City Ridge, Washington, D.C., location opened on July 13, 2022. The Wilmington, Delaware, location, the chain&#x27;s first location in that state, opened on October 26, 2022. The Reston, Virginia, location opened on February 1, 2023. Six other locations are in the works, including Holly Springs, North Carolina; Norwalk, Connecticut, the chain&#x27;s first location in that state; Rockville, Maryland; Yardley, Pennsylvania; Manhattan on Astor Place; and Lake Grove, New York, the chain&#x27;s first store on Long Island. Wegmans scrapped plans to build new stores in Annapolis, Maryland; Middletown, New Jersey; Arcola, Virginia; and Cary, North Carolina.

In July 2021, Wegmans announced it would launch the company&#x27;s first Manhattan store in 2023. The store opened on October 18, 2023, at 770 Broadway, the site of a former Kmart. In April 2022, Wegmans announced it would open its first Long Island location, located in Lake Grove. Two years after, Wegmans announced that the Lake Grove location would open on February 26, 2025. On June 1, 2023, the Natick store (#132), which was located in the Natick Mall, was announced to be closed later that summer. On July 23, 2023, the Natick store closed.

On April 15, 2024, Wegmans announced that they will open their first store in Charlotte, North Carolina, located in the Ballantyne neighborhood, in 2026. On January 13, 2025, Wegmans announced plans for a location in Cranberry Township, Pennsylvania, its first location in the Pittsburgh area.

On February 26, 2025, the first Wegmans on Long Island, New York opened, located in Lake Grove.

===Chase-Pitkin Home and Garden Centers===
Wegmans was the parent company of Chase-Pitkin, a regional home improvement retailer. On October 4, 2005, Wegmans announced that it would close all Chase-Pitkin stores by early 2006 and focus on its supermarket operations. The decision to exit the home improvement business was reportedly due to the increasing dominance of national chains such as Lowe&#x27;s and The Home Depot. Chase-Pitkin stores were closed individually at various times throughout March 2006.

===Discontinuation of tobacco products===
In January 2008, Wegmans announced that it would no longer sell tobacco products, due to tobacco&#x27;s negative effects on human health and the environment, and would offer smoking cessation programs to all employees. The decision drew praise from the American Lung Association of New York State, which presented Wegmans with the Lung Champion Award.

==Stores==
As of June 2024, Wegmans had 111 stores in operation throughout the east coast of the United States.

There are four regions within Wegmans Food Markets, Inc.

* New York: Rochester, Southern Tier, Finger Lakes, Buffalo, and Syracuse
* Pennsylvania/Delaware
* Virginia/North Carolina/Washington D.C. and Maryland
* New Jersey/Metro NY and New England

==Operations==

Wegmans is ranked 29th on the &quot;Supermarket News&quot; list of the Top 75 North American Food Retailers based on sales volume. In 2009, &quot;Stores Magazine&quot; showed it to be the 74th-largest retailer in the United States with estimated revenues of $4.67 billion. As of 2006, it was the 66th largest privately held company, as determined by &quot;Forbes&quot;. On Forbes&#x27;s 2005 list, Wegmans ranked 54th.

Most of Wegmans&#x27; newer stores are of the superstore or megamarket type, with a large area, a variety of foods aimed at an upscale clientele, and, in many stores, Market Café in-store dining areas. From 2002 to 2009, Wegmans owned and operated Tastings, a full-service restaurant at its Pittsford, New York, store. Tastings was replaced by The Food Bar, a &quot;seafood shack&quot;-styled restaurant in the same space; and later by The Burger Bar, serving hamburgers. Along with the Burger Bar, Wegmans offers many other food options. This includes a Sub Shop, Sushi Bar, Pizza Shop, and a Salad Bar – all of which offer quick, prepackaged items for one&#x27;s convenience. Next Door by Wegmans, a stand-alone restaurant operated by Wegmans, opened across the street from the Pittsford store in 2009.

In January 2007, Wegmans announced two business ventures: (1) opening a liquor store in Pittsford (adding to its two existing wine centers, in Virginia and New Jersey); and (2) the creation of a $28 million Culinary Innovation Center in Chili, New York, a corporate research-and-development facility, including a new central kitchen, replacing some of the operations at its meat center. The liquor store opened in April 2008 as Century Pittsford Wines. The store is . This business model has been replicated at three other New York Wegmans locations: in Buffalo, DeWitt, and Johnson City. Ownership of each liquor store is held by a different member of the Wegman family, due to New York State regulations prohibiting individuals or corporations from owning multiple liquor stores.

After Wegmans updated its logo to a script font, in November 2010, Walgreens filed a trademark infringement lawsuit against Wegmans, claiming the &quot;W&quot; in the Wegmans logo was too similar to that of Walgreens. The lawsuit was settled in April 2011, with Wegmans agreeing to discontinue use of its &quot;W&quot; logo by June 2012, although the supermarket retains the right to use the &quot;Wegmans&quot; name in script. According to Jo Natale, Wegmans director of media relations, &quot;The cost of making relatively minor changes to a limited number of products was much less than the cost of litigating this case to the end.&quot;

Wegmans offers a pick-up service called &quot;Personal Shopping&quot; at selected locations. In June 2017, Wegmans partnered with Instacart to provide home delivery service. In February 2020, Wegmans announced that its Brooklyn store would offer grocery delivery to Manhattan residents as an expansion to its Instacart partnership. Delivery fees start at $3.99, and Manhattan customers are given a two- to five-hour delivery window.

In April 2020, in response to the COVID-19 outbreak, Wegmans began limiting the number of people in its stores, provided its employees with masks, and installed plexiglass shields at all checkout areas.

==Wegmans brand==
In 1979, Wegmans began offering their own house brand of some products, offering basic commodities at a lower price than national brands. Products such as toilet paper, paper towels, detergent, pasta, and many other popular food products. These Wegmans brand products are typically those that get discounted under their rewards program. The &quot;Shoppers Club&quot; program frequently discounts Wegmans brand products to prices that are lower than their name-brand counterparts. The Wegmans brand has gradually expanded. In 1992, it began another line of products, &quot;Food You Feel Good About&quot;, which contain no artificial colors, flavors, or preservatives. The next sub-brand to be launched was Italian Classics in 1995, which introduced pastas, canned tomatoes, and olive oils imported from Italy. In 2002, Wegmans launched a line of organic products, which are labeled with a green leaf.

==Accolades and fan base==
Wegmans has received much media attention for its customer fan base, organic food, hot food bar, the depth of its food selection, and employee happiness. Food Network recognized it with its award for Best Grocery Store in 2007. &quot;Consumer Reports&quot; subscribers voted Wegmans the top grocery store in 2017; it has held the top spot since 2006. It was also profiled as part of the &quot;Here Are The Jobs&quot; segment on MSNBC&#x27;s &quot;PoliticsNation&quot; on July 6, 2012. In 2016, Market Force surveyed over 10,000 grocery store shoppers nationwide, and Wegmans was rated &quot;America&#x27;s favorite grocery store&quot;.

Wegmans has a loyal fan base of customers who have received recognition for their devotion, who have lined up overnight in the thousands for a new store opening, regularly write &quot;love letters&quot; to the store to ask for one to open in a region not presently served, and in Northborough, Massachusetts, high school students staged a musical about the store. The store&#x27;s fans have their own Twitter hashtag &quot;#Wegmania&quot; and Tumblr blog.

Wegmans has also been compared to Florida-based grocery store Publix, another regional grocer. Both stores also feature bakeries, hot-food sections, and in-house brands. Additionally, both stores have also been featured in &quot;Fortune&quot; magazine as one of the top 25 companies to work with.

==In popular culture==
The Wegmans brand was used extensively in the American TV sitcom &quot;The Office&quot;. The sitcom is set in the city of Scranton, Pennsylvania, which has a Wegmans store, although the series was filmed in suburban Los Angeles.

==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Wegmans footprint in Pennsylvania&quot; ~ 

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11288478" start="0" end="26" title="Wegmans" label="Wegmans Food Markets, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1589009" start="32" end="46" title="privately held company" label="privately held"/>
<link wikidata="Q180846" start="56" end="67" title="supermarket" label="supermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357975" start="102" end="117" title="Gates, New York" label="Gates, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="159" end="178" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="238" end="246" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="248" end="260" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="262" end="272" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="274" end="282" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="284" end="297" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="299" end="307" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="309" end="323" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="325" end="333" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="343" end="363" title="District of Columbia" label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="444" end="455" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="488" end="495" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256316" start="517" end="547" title="100 Best Companies to Work For" label="100 Best Companies to Work For"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708536" start="816" end="832" title="DeWitt, New York" label="DeWitt, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476557" start="892" end="916" title="East Rochester, New York" label="East Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357975" start="1359" end="1364" title="Gates, New York" label="Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350929" start="1547" end="1560" title="Robert Wegman" label="Robert Wegman"/>
<link wikidata="Q769585" start="1885" end="1899" title="Roman Catholicism in the United States" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q875042" start="2066" end="2086" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Rochester" label="Diocese of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745511" start="2092" end="2118" title="National Catholic Register" label="National Catholic Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334344" start="2238" end="2260" title="Catholic social teaching" label="Catholic social vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142854" start="2409" end="2425" title="Sisters of Mercy" label="Sisters of Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236842" start="2498" end="2512" title="John H. Garvey" label="John H. Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q179036" start="2538" end="2568" title="Catholic University of America" label="Catholic University of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q234061" start="3098" end="3102" title="Erie, Pennsylvania" label="Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="3104" end="3116" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="3162" end="3172" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="3182" end="3190" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="3200" end="3208" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="3218" end="3231" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="3241" end="3255" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3269" end="3285" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="3290" end="3298" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q397905" start="3415" end="3423" title="Columbia, Maryland" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q755950" start="3480" end="3487" title="Crofton, Maryland" label="Crofton"/>
<link wikidata="Q755901" start="3523" end="3533" title="Germantown, Maryland" label="Germantown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905751" start="3596" end="3611" title="Montgomery Mall (Pennsylvania)" label="Montgomery Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185625" start="3615" end="3640" title="North Wales, Pennsylvania" label="North Wales, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843102" start="3734" end="3747" title="Midtown Plaza (Rochester, New York)" label="Midtown Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="3813" end="3824" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878560" start="3867" end="3894" title="Northborough, Massachusetts" label="Northborough, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49196" start="3976" end="3982" title="Newton, Massachusetts" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q995255" start="4019" end="4029" title="Burlington, Massachusetts" label="Burlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q755623" start="4152" end="4174" title="Owings Mills, Maryland" label="Owings Mills, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374763" start="4243" end="4253" title="Short Pump, Virginia" label="Short Pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q123766" start="4280" end="4295" title="Charlottesville, Virginia" label="Charlottesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016895" start="4312" end="4340" title="Hanover Township, New Jersey" label="Hanover Township, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q178277" start="4376" end="4396" title="Montvale, New Jersey" label="Montvale, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q54145" start="4437" end="4459" title="Medford, Massachusetts" label="Medford, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q367070" start="4502" end="4523" title="Natick, Massachusetts" label="Natick, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q328451" start="4564" end="4583" title="Chantilly, Virginia" label="Chantilly, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q320514" start="4622" end="4645" title="Lancaster, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q49259" start="4690" end="4714" title="Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="Virginia Beach, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="4783" end="4797" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="4810" end="4817" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4926" end="4939" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057908" start="4944" end="4962" title="Admiral&amp;#x27;s Row" label="Admiral&amp;#x27;s Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="4966" end="4974" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q524435" start="4982" end="4991" title="Brooklyn Navy Yard" label="Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476507" start="5091" end="5109" title="Harrison, New York" label="Harrison, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q54066" start="5124" end="5142" title="Westchester County, New York" label="Westchester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374864" start="5174" end="5190" title="Tysons, Virginia" label="Tysons, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q671812" start="5233" end="5260" title="Chapel Hill, North Carolina" label="Chapel Hill, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022236" start="5304" end="5331" title="Wake Forest, North Carolina" label="Wake Forest, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="5438" end="5454" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q174224" start="5494" end="5514" title="Wilmington, Delaware" label="Wilmington, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375280" start="5605" end="5621" title="Reston, Virginia" label="Reston, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030155" start="5708" end="5737" title="Holly Springs, North Carolina" label="Holly Springs, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q54217" start="5739" end="5759" title="Norwalk, Connecticut" label="Norwalk, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q327022" start="5808" end="5827" title="Rockville, Maryland" label="Rockville, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q643516" start="5829" end="5850" title="Yardley, Pennsylvania" label="Yardley, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="5852" end="5861" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592990" start="5865" end="5876" title="Astor Place" label="Astor Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442569" start="5882" end="5902" title="Lake Grove, New York" label="Lake Grove, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="5936" end="5947" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="5995" end="6014" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q735215" start="6016" end="6038" title="Middletown, New Jersey" label="Middletown, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q512828" start="6040" end="6056" title="Arcola, Virginia" label="Arcola, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q852665" start="6062" end="6082" title="Cary, North Carolina" label="Cary, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349306" start="6224" end="6236" title="770 Broadway" label="770 Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753080" start="6259" end="6264" title="Kmart" label="Kmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970016" start="6532" end="6543" title="Natick Mall" label="Natick Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="6713" end="6738" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851439" start="6755" end="6765" title="Ballantyne (Charlotte neighborhood)" label="Ballantyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181916" start="6852" end="6884" title="Cranberry Township, Butler County, Pennsylvania" label="Cranberry Township, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="6912" end="6922" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="6973" end="6994" title="Long Island, New York" label="Long Island, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442569" start="7014" end="7024" title="Lake Grove, New York" label="Lake Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789106" start="7129" end="7145" title="home improvement" label="home improvement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373493" start="7418" end="7429" title="Lowe&amp;#x27;s" label="Lowe&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q864407" start="7434" end="7448" title="The Home Depot" label="The Home Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q446094" start="7831" end="7856" title="American Lung Association" label="American Lung Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="8104" end="8112" title="Upstate New York" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="8114" end="8123" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570547" start="8125" end="8138" title="Southern Tier" label="Southern Tier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416994" start="8140" end="8152" title="Finger Lakes" label="Finger Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="8154" end="8161" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="8167" end="8175" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="8178" end="8190" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="8191" end="8199" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="8202" end="8210" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="8211" end="8225" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="8226" end="8241" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="8246" end="8254" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="8257" end="8267" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="8268" end="8276" title="New York metropolitan area" label="Metro NY"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="8281" end="8292" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="8666" end="8672" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16766413" start="8776" end="8786" title="superstore" label="superstore"/>
<link wikidata="Q852835" start="8865" end="8874" title="clientele" label="clientele"/>
<link wikidata="Q175909" start="9021" end="9040" title="Pittsford (town), New York" label="Pittsford, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412213" start="9773" end="9788" title="Chili, New York" label="Chili, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591889" start="10386" end="10395" title="Walgreens" label="Walgreens"/>
<link wikidata="Q98091506" start="10404" end="10426" title="trademark infringement" label="trademark infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="10427" end="10434" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909236" start="11091" end="11100" title="Instacart" label="Instacart"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="11180" end="11188" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="11227" end="11236" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909236" start="11270" end="11279" title="Instacart" label="Instacart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883736" start="12628" end="12640" title="Salad bar" label="hot food bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435969" start="12699" end="12711" title="Food Network" label="Food Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957782" start="12779" end="12795" title="Consumer Reports" label="Consumer Reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="12973" end="12978" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225161" start="12992" end="13006" title="PoliticsNation" label="PoliticsNation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056617" start="13366" end="13377" title="love letter" label="love letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878560" start="13462" end="13489" title="Northborough, Massachusetts" label="Northborough, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q278485" start="13591" end="13598" title="hashtag" label="hashtag"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="13673" end="13680" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q672170" start="13701" end="13707" title="Publix" label="Publix"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="13868" end="13875" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q23831" start="14031" end="14041" title="The Office (American TV series)" label="The Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q271395" start="14082" end="14104" title="Scranton, Pennsylvania" label="Scranton, Pennsylvania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423352" wikidata="Q256439" url="?curid=423352" title="Claudia Acte">
<text>Claudia Acte was a freedwoman of ancient Rome who became a mistress of the emperor Nero. She came from Asia Minor and might have become a slave of the Emperor Claudius, following his expansion of the Roman Empire into Lycia and Pamphylia; or she might have been purchased later, by Octavia, Claudius&#x27; daughter.

==Relationship with Nero==
The Emperor Claudius, uncle of Nero&#x27;s mother, Agrippina the Younger, married his niece in 49 AD and therefore became Nero&#x27;s stepfather. Claudius&#x27; daughter, Octavia (by his wife Messalina), became Nero&#x27;s stepsister at the same time. Nero and Octavia themselves married in 53 AD, and Nero became emperor in 54 AD, after his great-uncle/stepfather died—apparently poisoned, in the belief of contemporary historians, by his niece/wife, Agrippina, Nero&#x27;s mother.

A year into Nero&#x27;s reign, encouraged by Seneca the Younger and Burrus, and against Agrippina the Younger&#x27;s wishes, Nero took Acte as his mistress. Seneca especially was concerned that his young student would not be satisfied with his wife, Octavia, and might indulge in risky sexual exploits. This made Acte appear a safe outlet and a source of separation from Agrippina. Seneca and Burrus were on uneasy terms with Agrippina and were nervous about her political influence and methods, especially following the putative poisoning of her husband, the Emperor Claudius. However, the relationship with Acte was kept as quiet as possible so as to not damage Nero&#x27;s politically significant marriage to Octavia. Otho, Claudius Senecio and Annaeus Serenus helped Nero and Acte with their secret meetings. Serenus, a protégé of Seneca, even pretended that Acte was his own mistress in order to avert suspicion.

The couple met when Nero was 17, and their reportedly emotional, passionate relationship lasted at least three years. Nero expressed the desire to marry Acte and had a genealogy fabricated linking her royalty; he even bribed ex-consuls to prepare to swear to her royal birthright, a move that enraged his mother Agrippina, who was very conscious and proud of her own, well-established patrician ancestry.

==Influence on the Empire==
As Nero&#x27;s mistress, Acte might have had the opportunity to exert considerable influence on the Roman Empire, though it is unknown what influence she actually had. It is claimed by Tacitus that Agrippina (Nero’s mother) exercised some erotic power over her son and that Acte advised Nero to resist this power, out of fear for her own safety and with Seneca&#x27;s encouragement; she warned Nero of the potential political repercussions with the military if incest with his mother were to become public. Nero and Acte&#x27;s relationship reduced Agrippina&#x27;s sway over her son and therefore her influence on the Empire. Agrippina&#x27;s increasing efforts to separate Nero from Acte served only to increase his fondness for her; and the ensuing conflicts led Nero to take absolute control of the Empire and, eventually, to order his mother&#x27;s assassination.

==Wealth achieved==
Records of Acte&#x27;s household and estates in Velitrae, Puteoli and Sardinia attest to considerable wealth, accumulated while she was Nero&#x27;s mistress. She had left the imperial scene in ownership of a household staff as well as property. After Nero&#x27;s death, and along with two of his old nurses, Acte gave him a proper Roman burial, burning the body on a pyre. She deposited his remains in the tomb of the Domitii Ahenobarbi, the family of Nero&#x27;s biological father, in the Pincian Hills. There were found many inscriptions of her slaves and freedmen. The epitaph of Acte was discovered at Velitrae.

==In literature==
Acte appears as a character in Henryk Sienkiewicz&#x27;s novel &quot;Quo Vadis&quot;, and in &quot;Myself My Sepulchre&quot; (also titled &quot;Nero&quot;) by Mary Teresa Ronalds, and is depicted as being a secret Christian in both. She also appears in the movie &quot;Nero&quot;, played by Rike Schmid. Acte is also the main character in Alexandre Dumas&#x27; novel &quot;Acte&quot;. Acte appears also as a character in Louis de Wohl&#x27;s novel, &quot;The Glorious Folly: A Novel of the days of St. Paul&quot;. Acte&#x27;s life and her relationship with Nero are also depicted in the novel &quot;The False Nero&quot; by Lion Feuchtwanger. She is also a principal character in Simon Scarrow&#x27;s 2020 novel: &quot;&quot;The Emperor&#x27;s Exile&quot;. Acte appears in Edward Lowell&#x27;s 1870 play, &quot;Nero the Parricide,&quot; and is last seen as a slave to Poppaea.

==See also==
* Antonia Caenis
* Galeria Lysistrate
* Marcia (mistress of Commodus)
* List of enslaved people

==Notes==
==References==

===Primary sources===
* Tacitus, &quot;Annals&quot;, 13.12, 13.13, 13.46, 14.2, 14.63
* Suetonius, &quot;Lives of the Twelve Caesars&quot;: &quot;Nero&quot; 28, 50
* Dio Cassius, &quot;Roman History&quot; 61.7

===Secondary sources===
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q256439" start="0" end="12" title="Claudia Acte" label="Claudia Acte"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="19" end="29" title="freedman" label="freedwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="33" end="45" title="ancient Rome" label="ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="83" end="87" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="103" end="113" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="159" end="167" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="200" end="212" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18927" start="218" end="223" title="Lycia" label="Lycia"/>
<link wikidata="Q585250" start="228" end="237" title="Pamphylia" label="Pamphylia"/>
<link wikidata="Q231262" start="282" end="289" title="Claudia Octavia" label="Octavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154732" start="395" end="416" title="Agrippina the Younger" label="Agrippina the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q231262" start="515" end="522" title="Claudia Octavia" label="Octavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q229871" start="536" end="545" title="Messalina" label="Messalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="873" end="891" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q99671301" start="896" end="902" title="Burrus" label="Burrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416" start="1549" end="1553" title="Otho" label="Otho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1555" end="1571" title="Claudius Senecio" label="Claudius Senecio"/>
<link wikidata="Q564181" start="1576" end="1591" title="Annaeus Serenus" label="Annaeus Serenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="1972" end="1982" title="roman consul" label="ex-consuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q189236" start="3119" end="3127" title="Velitrae" label="Velitrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q72425" start="3129" end="3136" title="Puteoli" label="Puteoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="3141" end="3149" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q363013" start="3402" end="3414" title="roman funerals and burial" label="Roman burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q736132" start="3438" end="3442" title="pyre" label="pyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713837" start="3489" end="3507" title="Ahenobarbus (disambiguation)" label="Domitii Ahenobarbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q550215" start="3561" end="3574" title="pincian hill" label="Pincian Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q41502" start="3737" end="3755" title="Henryk Sienkiewicz" label="Henryk Sienkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q335315" start="3775" end="3784" title="Quo Vadis (novel)" label="Quo Vadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q316732" start="3975" end="3979" title="Nero (2004 film)" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3997" end="4008" title="Rike Schmid" label="Rike Schmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q38337" start="4045" end="4060" title="Alexandre Dumas" label="Alexandre Dumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q68219" start="4127" end="4140" title="Louis de Wohl" label="Louis de Wohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q77024" start="4329" end="4346" title="Lion Feuchtwanger" label="Lion Feuchtwanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q513883" start="4385" end="4405" title="Simon Scarrow" label="Simon Scarrow&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q291216" start="4598" end="4612" title="Antonia Caenis" label="Antonia Caenis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83758109" start="4615" end="4633" title="Galeria Lysistrate" label="Galeria Lysistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q517507" start="4636" end="4665" title="Marcia (mistress of Commodus)" label="Marcia (mistress of Commodus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639572" start="4668" end="4691" title="List of enslaved people" label="List of enslaved people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="4743" end="4750" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q564358" start="4758" end="4764" title="Annals (Tacitus)" label="Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="4807" end="4816" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229963" start="4824" end="4851" title="Lives of the Twelve Caesars" label="Lives of the Twelve Caesars"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="4885" end="4896" title="Dio Cassius" label="Dio Cassius"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423353" wikidata="Q4971296" url="?curid=423353" title="British avifauna">
<text>The British avifauna is the birds that have occurred in Great Britain. This article is a general discussion of the topic. A full species list can be found at List of birds of Great Britain.

In general, the avifauna of Britain is similar to that of Europe, consisting largely of Palaearctic species. As an island, it has fewer breeding species than continental Europe, with some species, like crested lark, breeding as close as northern France, yet unable to colonise Britain.

The mild winters mean that many species that cannot cope with harsher conditions can winter in Britain, and also that there is a large influx of wintering birds from the continent or beyond.

There are about 250 species regularly recorded in Great Britain, and another 350 that occur with varying degrees of rarity.

==Resident species==
About 120 species occur in Great Britain all year round. Some of these are permanent populations of sedentary non-migrants such as tawny owl or red grouse, whereas others have their numbers augmented by winter visitors from the continent (for example common starling), or depleted by winter hard-weather movements to Ireland or southern Europe (for example European goldfinch). 

Several species, particularly waders such as ringed plover and dunlin, both breed and winter in Britain, whereas these areas are separate for most other populations of those birds.

The black-tailed godwit is an interesting case. Although it is present all year, the breeding population actually migrates south, and is replaced by wintering birds of the Icelandic race.

==Visiting species==

===Summer visitors===
About 60 species are mainly summer visitors which breed in Britain but winter further south, mainly in Africa. A large number of these are insectivores such as warblers, flycatchers and common cuckoo, as would be expected from the scarcity of insects in British winters.

Several seabirds move out to sea after breeding, and terns and some auks are absent during the winter months.

In 2007, 16 million birds flew from Africa to Britain. Swifts have declined 40% between 1994 and 2007. Nightingales are down 60% since 1994, wood warblers 67% down, turtle doves 66% down, spotted flycatchers down 59%, and cuckoos down 37%.

===Winter visitors===

The mild winters make Britain attractive to about 60 species which breed further north. These are mainly larger birds, such as swans, geese, ducks, gulls and thrushes, but some smaller species, such as the snow bunting and brambling also arrive in large numbers.

The numbers of some eruptive species, like Bohemian waxwing, depend on food supplies and population numbers in their breeding areas.

===Passage migrants===

Some species neither regularly breed nor winter in Great Britain, but pass through on migration often in large numbers. Arctic breeding waders are a good example, with species such as little stint and curlew sandpiper usually being fairly common on passage.

The numbers of some passage birds depend on weather conditions. There will be more Mediterranean visitors like hoopoes and Alpine swifts in spring if there are winds from the south encouraging an overshoot of the breeding areas.

In both spring and autumn, the numbers of Scandinavian breeders such as bluethroat and wryneck are linked to the prevalence of easterly winds.

Perhaps also best placed in this category are a few seabirds which breed in the southern hemisphere, but &quot;winter&quot; in the northern hemisphere during the northern summer. These are seen off the south west of Britain in autumn. They are the great shearwater, sooty shearwater and the rare Wilson&#x27;s petrel.

===Rarities===
One of the fascinations of the British list is the number of rarities. Because of its position on the western fringes of Europe, Britain receives a number of vagrants from North America. Some American gulls, ducks and waders are regular enough to not be considered rare. These include ring-billed gull, surf scoter and pectoral sandpiper. Rare American passerines include red-eyed vireo and blackpoll warbler.

Some rarities breed in Europe, but are short-distance migrants which rarely make it to Great Britain. Examples are crested lark and Marmora&#x27;s warbler.

Siberian species such as yellow-browed warbler and Pechora pipit also occur much more regularly in Britain than further east in Europe. This is because migrating birds are likely to rest on the well-watched eastern coast after crossing the North Sea.

Only one exclusively sub-Saharan breeder has reached Britain, although it has done so twice. This is Allen&#x27;s gallinule.

Seabird rarities can of course reach Britain from great distances. Amongst the more improbable wanderers to Britain, perhaps the most surprising is the ancient murrelet from the Pacific.

==Introduced species==

Britain&#x27;s climate militates against the profusion of introduced species that can be found in warmer places like Florida, but there are populations of nine self-supporting species that have been admitted to the British list. In addition, there are feral populations of Canada goose, greylag goose and other wildfowl which would be on the British list anyway through wild breeders or vagrants.

The introduced species admitted to the British list are:
* Egyptian goose, &quot;Alopochen aegyptiacus &quot;
* Ruddy duck, &quot;Oxyura jamaicensis&quot;
* Mandarin, &quot;Aix galericulata &quot;
* Red-legged partridge, &quot;Alectoris rufa&quot;
* Golden pheasant, &quot;Chrysolophus pictus&quot;
* Lady Amherst&#x27;s pheasant, &quot;Chrysolophus amherstiae&quot;
* Common pheasant, &quot;Phasianus colchicus&quot;
* Rose-ringed parakeet, &quot;Psittacula krameri&quot;
* Little owl, &quot; Athene noctua&quot;

Western capercaillie, &quot;Tetrao urogallus&quot;, and white-tailed eagle, &quot;Haliaeetus albicilla&quot;, are reintroductions of formerly breeding species.

==See also==
*Feral parakeets in Great Britain
*List of birds of Wales
*Fauna of Scotland

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4971296" start="4" end="20" title="British avifauna" label="British avifauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="28" end="32" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="56" end="69" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q985708" start="158" end="188" title="List of birds of Great Britain" label="List of birds of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="249" end="255" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q106447" start="279" end="290" title="Palearctic realm" label="Palaearctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26982" start="393" end="405" title="crested lark" label="crested lark"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="437" end="443" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q25756" start="947" end="956" title="tawny owl" label="tawny owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q40655821" start="960" end="970" title="red grouse" label="red grouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q25469" start="1067" end="1082" title="common starling" label="common starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="1133" end="1140" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25418" start="1173" end="1191" title="European goldfinch" label="European goldfinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q26226431" start="1226" end="1231" title="wader" label="wader"/>
<link wikidata="Q26816" start="1241" end="1254" title="Common ringed plover" label="ringed plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q26650" start="1259" end="1265" title="dunlin" label="dunlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18841" start="1382" end="1401" title="black-tailed godwit" label="black-tailed godwit"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="1492" end="1500" title="bird migration" label="migrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="1550" end="1557" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1714" end="1720" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q677088" start="1750" end="1761" title="insectivore" label="insectivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6880139" start="1771" end="1779" title="Old World warbler" label="warblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q200989" start="1781" end="1792" title="Old World flycatcher" label="flycatchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18845" start="1797" end="1810" title="common cuckoo" label="common cuckoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="1891" end="1898" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q33140745" start="1936" end="1940" title="tern" label="tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q28294" start="1951" end="1954" title="auk" label="auk"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564928" start="2385" end="2389" title="swan" label="swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="2392" end="2397" title="goose" label="geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736439" start="2399" end="2403" title="duck" label="duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="2406" end="2410" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q26050" start="2416" end="2424" title="Thrush (bird)" label="thrushes"/>
<link wikidata="Q26416" start="2464" end="2476" title="snow bunting" label="snow bunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q188877" start="2481" end="2490" title="brambling" label="brambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q26135" start="2565" end="2581" title="Bohemian waxwing" label="Bohemian waxwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q27232" start="2864" end="2876" title="little stint" label="little stint"/>
<link wikidata="Q62345" start="2881" end="2897" title="curlew sandpiper" label="curlew sandpiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="3022" end="3035" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q20977" start="3050" end="3056" title="hoopoe" label="hoopoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q321267" start="3062" end="3074" title="Alpine swift" label="Alpine swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="3211" end="3222" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26578" start="3241" end="3251" title="bluethroat" label="bluethroat"/>
<link wikidata="Q31818" start="3256" end="3263" title="wryneck" label="wryneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="3365" end="3372" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074609" start="3561" end="3577" title="great shearwater" label="great shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074603" start="3579" end="3595" title="sooty shearwater" label="sooty shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q607024" start="3609" end="3629" title="Wilson&amp;#x27;s petrel" label="Wilson&amp;#x27;s petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="3819" end="3832" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="3848" end="3852" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736439" start="3855" end="3859" title="duck" label="duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q26226431" start="3865" end="3870" title="wader" label="wader"/>
<link wikidata="Q754885" start="3932" end="3948" title="ring-billed gull" label="ring-billed gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q742468" start="3950" end="3961" title="surf scoter" label="surf scoter"/>
<link wikidata="Q260716" start="3966" end="3984" title="pectoral sandpiper" label="pectoral sandpiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="4000" end="4009" title="passerine" label="passerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q582976" start="4019" end="4033" title="red-eyed vireo" label="red-eyed vireo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075924" start="4038" end="4055" title="blackpoll warbler" label="blackpoll warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q110257519" start="4190" end="4212" title="Marmora&amp;#x27;s warbler" label="Marmora&amp;#x27;s warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="4215" end="4222" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q330318" start="4240" end="4261" title="yellow-browed warbler" label="yellow-browed warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q837757" start="4266" end="4279" title="Pechora pipit" label="Pechora pipit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="4455" end="4464" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="4492" end="4498" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q746632" start="4568" end="4590" title="Allen&amp;#x27;s gallinule" label="Allen&amp;#x27;s gallinule"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="4593" end="4600" title="Seabird" label="Seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260205" start="4745" end="4761" title="ancient murrelet" label="ancient murrelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="4922" end="4929" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q26733" start="5078" end="5090" title="Canada goose" label="Canada goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q25882" start="5092" end="5105" title="greylag goose" label="greylag goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q274179" start="5262" end="5276" title="Egyptian goose" label="Egyptian goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q647461" start="5315" end="5325" title="Ruddy duck" label="Ruddy duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q200339" start="5360" end="5368" title="Mandarin duck" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q754863" start="5402" end="5422" title="Red-legged partridge" label="Red-legged partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q335113" start="5453" end="5468" title="Golden pheasant" label="Golden pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q385750" start="5504" end="5532" title="Lady Amherst&amp;#x27;s pheasant" label="Lady Amherst&amp;#x27;s pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25432" start="5572" end="5587" title="Common pheasant" label="Common pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q208060" start="5623" end="5643" title="Rose-ringed parakeet" label="Rose-ringed parakeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q129958" start="5678" end="5688" title="Little owl" label="Little owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q129059" start="5718" end="5738" title="Western capercaillie" label="Western capercaillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q25438" start="5774" end="5792" title="white-tailed eagle" label="white-tailed eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q784280" start="5832" end="5846" title="Species reintroduction" label="reintroduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413642" start="5893" end="5925" title="Feral parakeets in Great Britain" label="Feral parakeets in Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607829" start="5927" end="5949" title="List of birds of Wales" label="List of birds of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398497" start="5951" end="5968" title="Fauna of Scotland" label="Fauna of Scotland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423357" wikidata="Q946080" url="?curid=423357" title="Paychex">
<text>Paychex, Inc. is an American company that provides human resources, payroll, and employee benefits outsourcing services for small- to medium-sized businesses. Founded in 1971 and headquartered in Rochester, New York, the company has more than 100 offices serving approximately 740,000 payroll clients in the U.S. and Europe. Paychex is ranked 681st on the &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 list of largest corporations by revenue.

==History==
Paychex was founded in 1971 by Tom Golisano, who started the company with only $3,000.

The operation grew to include 18 franchises and partnerships, which were eventually consolidated into one private company in 1979. In 1983, the company became a public company via an initial public offering.

===Acquisitions===
===Small Business Employment Watch===
Paychex and IHS Markit launched a Small Business Jobs Index in 2014 that measures the health of businesses employing 50 people or less.
Today, the Paychex | IHS Markit Small Business Employment Watch shares small business jobs data going back to 2005 and wage data from 2011 to present.
The Employment Watch is frequently used by financial experts, analysts, and journalists assessing the economic outlook.
Paychex CEO Martin Mucci regularly appears in the media to provide analysis of Small Business Employment Watch data, as well as insight into what the health of Paychex as a company says about the health of small business and the economy in general.

===Awards and honors===
*Paychex named to HR Examiner&#x27;s 2020 Watchlist for the use of AI in HR
*In 2019, Paychex was named to the FORTUNE list of Future 50 companies
*Paychex was listed as number 211 on Forbes 2019 list of the World&#x27;s Best
*In 2018, Paychex was named one of the World&#x27;s Most Ethical Companies by Ethisphere for an 11th time
*In 2018, Forbes placed Paychex at number 76 on their list of the World&#x27;s Most Innovative Companies
*Rochester Democrat and Chronicle named Paychex one of the Best Places to Work in Rochester in 2016
*Paychex Flex received the 2016 TekTonic Award from HRO Magazine for being a best-in-class mobile and cloud-based technology suite

===Chief executives===
==References==
==External links==

* Wolfram Alpha Fundamentals &amp; Financials</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q946080" start="0" end="13" title="Paychex" label="Paychex, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q5467169" start="51" end="66" title="human resources" label="human resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q59434791" start="68" end="75" title="payroll" label="payroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q678774" start="81" end="98" title="employee benefits" label="employee benefits"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="196" end="215" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="356" end="379" title="Fortune 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297814" start="465" end="477" title="Tom Golisano" label="Tom Golisano"/>
<link wikidata="Q891723" start="683" end="697" title="public company" label="public company"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="705" end="728" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662481" start="800" end="810" title="IHS Markit" label="IHS Markit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="1536" end="1538" title="artificial intelligence" label="AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="1580" end="1587" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="FORTUNE"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="1653" end="1659" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837348" start="1773" end="1783" title="Ethisphere Institute" label="Ethisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="1811" end="1817" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="1988" end="1997" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423358" wikidata="Q4368021" url="?curid=423358" title="James Tien (politician)">
<text>James Tien Pei-chun, GBS, OBE, JP (; born 8 January 1947) is the former chairman and Leader of the Liberal Party (LP) and former member of the Legislative Council of Hong Kong (Legco). Originally an entrepreneur, he was also a non-official member of the Executive Council of Hong Kong (Exco), member of Central and Western and Kwai Tsing District Council and Hong Kong member to the Chinese People&#x27;s Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC).

Son of the textile entrepreneur-turned-politician Francis Tien, James was appointed to public offices since the 1980s, where he sat on the Hong Kong Basic Law Consultative Committee (BLCC) and was appointed to the Legislative Council in 1988. He returned to the LegCo in 1993 through a by-election in the Industrial (First) functional constituency nominated by the Federation of Hong Kong Industries (FHKI).

He succeeded Allen Lee to become the chairman of the Liberal Party in 1998 and was appointed to the Executive Council by Chief Executive Tung Chee-hwa in 2002. His popularity rose to peak when he resigned from the ExCo in 2003 in opposition to the Basic Law Article 23 which brought down the proposed legislation. He ran a successful campaign in the 2004 LegCo geographical constituency direct election but was defeated in 2008 and resigned from his party offices.

He threw his weight behind Henry Tang in the 2012 Chief Executive election and had been critical of the eventual winner Leung Chun-ying after the election. His vocal opposition to Leung saw his CPPCC membership being stripped away, making him the first person in history to have received this sanction. He served one more term on the LegCo from 2012 to 2016.

==Early life and family==
Tien was born in 1947 in Shanghai and moved to Hong Kong two years later with his family. His father, Francis Tien, was a successful clothing merchant, owning textile factories in Hong Kong and was appointed member of the Legislative Council and many consultative bodies for the colonial government in the 1960s and 70s. James Tien&#x27;s younger brother Michael Tien owns the fashion chain G2000 and was chairman of the Kowloon-Canton Railway Corporation before it merged with the Mass Transit Railway Corporation.

He was educated at the Diocesan Boys&#x27; School. He traveled to the United States to study chemical engineering at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign when he was 17 years old and met his wife Mary, a Vietnamese-Chinese, in college. In 1970, the couple returned to Hong Kong and he worked for his father in the factories.

== Political career ==
===Early ventures and Legislative Councillor===
He was first appointed member of the Kwai Tsing District Board in 1985 as a representative of the business sector as his factories were in Kwai Chung. He was appointed to the Hong Kong Basic Law Consultative Committee (BLCC) which oversaw the drafting of the post-1997 Hong Kong Basic Law in 1985. He was part of the Group of 89, the conservative faction of the Committee members consisting of mostly businessmen and professionals elites. In 1990, Tien joined the two pro-business conservative political groups, the Business and Professionals Federation of Hong Kong and the Liberal Democratic Federation of Hong Kong evolved out of the Group of 89.

He was first appointed to the Legislative Council in 1988, in which he served until 1991 when the first Legislative Council direct election was introduced in 1991. In 1993 when Stephen Cheong, member of the Legislative Council, representing the Industrial (First) functional constituency, died of heart attack, the Federation of Hong Kong Industries nominated Tien to replace Cheong. In 1993, he co-founded the pro-business Liberal Party which was established by the business sector in the legislature countering the liberal faction of the United Democrats of Hong Kong after its landslide victory in the 1991 Legislative Council election. In 1996, he was elected member of the Beijing-controlled Provisional Legislative Council, to counter the last colonial Legislative Council elected in 1995, making him one of the members of both Legislative Councils at the same time.

In the first SAR Legislative Council election in 1998, he ran in the Commercial (First) functional constituency representing Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce&#x27;s approximately 4,000 members. Tien was elected uncontestedly by the chamber. He became Chairman of the Liberal Party after the resignation of its first leader, Allen Lee, in December 1998 after Lee suffered his defeat in the New Territories East geographical constituency direct election.

He was also Chairman of the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce, a most influential chamber of commerce in Hong Kong between 1996 and 1997. He is also a general committee member of both the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce and the Federation of Hong Kong Industries.

===Liberal Party Chairman and Executive Councillor===
Tien joined the Executive Council, Chief Executive Tung Chee-hwa&#x27;s cabinet, in July 2002 as Chairman of the Liberal Party, following the reorganisation of the Council under the new Principal Officials Accountability System of the Chief Executive. Although being the ally of the Tung administration, James Tien openly aired his displeasure of the skimpy political rewards meted out by Tung and advocated power sharing with the government. Tien was also a member of the National Committee of the Chinese People&#x27;s Political Consultative Conference from 2003 until 2014.

After one year, on 6 July 2003, Tien announced his resignation from the Executive Council, when his calls to delay the controversial legislation of the Article 23 of the Basic Law were rejected after more than 500,000 people marched against the legislation. His resignation ultimately led to the withdrawal of the legislation and break-up of the &quot;ruling alliance&quot; of the Chief Executive, causing his popularity and that of the Liberal Party to surge. Capitalizing on the surge of popularity, Tien made his first attempt in the direct election by running in the New Territories East geographical constituency direct elections for the first time in the 2004 Legislative Council elections. In the 2005 Chief Executive election, the announcement that his ally Henry Tang had dropped out of the race was further bad news for the party. He initially said that he might stand for selection as Chief Executive, but ultimately did not. Donald Tsang was uncontestedly elected in the election. In 2007, Tien supported Tsang&#x27;s second term. Tsang appointed Tien to be the Chairman of the Hong Kong Tourism Board after he was re-elected.

Tien lost his seat in the 2008 Legislative Council elections, when the Liberal Party lost all its geographical constituency seats, and he subsequently announced that he would not stand again for Legco. He also resigned as Chairman of the Liberal Party alongside Vice-chairwoman Selina Chow who lost her seat in New Territories West. After Tien&#x27;s resignation, the Liberal Party was in the leadership crisis, as four of the seven Legislative Councillors quit the party over internal party disagreements. Miriam Lau eventually took over as chairwoman and Tien was made Honorary Chairman in December 2010 after another internal party struggle involved with his brother Michael Tien and Vice-chairman Tommy Cheung over the minimum wage legislation, which saw Michael quit the party as a result.

===Second tenure in Legco===
Tien threw his weight behind Henry Tang in the 2012 Chief Executive election. After it was clear that the Beijing authorities favoured Leung Chun-ying over Tang, Tien advocated his party to cast blank vote instead of voting for Leung. In September, Tien went back on his previous undertaking and successfully re-claimed the New Territories East seat in the 2012 Legislative Council elections. In May 2013, the party elected Tien to the new position of Leader of the Liberal Party.

Tien was one of the most vocal opponent of the Leung Chun-ying administration. During the 2014 Hong Kong protests, Tien called on Chief Executive Leung to resign, leading to the CPPCC hearing a call to eject him as a member. Tien was formally stripped of his post at the meeting on 29 October, making him the first person in history to have received this sanction. Tien stepped down from his position as the Leader of the Liberal Party after the removal.

In the 2016 Legislative Council election, James Tien ran a campaign against the second term of the Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying. He stood as a second candidate on his young party colleague Dominic Lee&#x27;s ticket. The ticket gained 20,031 votes, around 3 per cent of the vote share and both of them were not elected. In the 2017 Chief Executive election, Tien again went against the tide, to support John Tsang whose candidacy was widely considered to be opposed by the Beijing government. He became the first member in the Election Committee to handed his nomination to Tsang. Tsang eventually received 365 votes, losing to Beijing-favoured Carrie Lam in the final election.

===Post-Legco Life===
After the 2019 Yuen Long attack, James Tien called for the resignation of Carrie Lam as Chief Executive for Hong Kong.

In 2020, Tien announced the formation of a new political group along with other members of the Liberal Party called Hope for Hong Kong. Tien stated that the group would aim to explore a moderate middle ground between the pro-Beijing and pro-democracy camps after accusing the Liberal Party&#x27;s leadership of growing too close to Beijing. The group dissolved after the electoral overhaul.

==Controversies==
On 11 October 2007, it was reported that Tien had accepted MTRC CEO Chow Chung-kong&#x27;s sincere apology after the latter backed Civic Party barrister Tanya Chan Suk-chong against Liberal Party lawyer and incumbent Mark Lin Man-kit in the district council election for the Peak district.

Tien explained that Chow would have to bear all the political consequences for his choice of backing a rival party&#x27;s candidate. Tien made clear that he was personally infuriated by Chow&#x27;s unfriendly act despite the Liberal Party&#x27;s loyalty and consistent support for the rail company. Tien further stated that the MTRC would face probable dissent from Liberal members in future matters involving MTRC inside district councils.

Tien backed down on 12 October 2007 by sincerely apologising to both Chow and the public.

==See also==
* Michael Tien

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4368021" start="0" end="19" title="James Tien (politician)" label="James Tien Pei-chun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558666" start="21" end="24" title="Gold Bauhinia Star" label="GBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="26" end="29" title="Order of the British Empire" label="OBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="31" end="33" title="justice of the peace" label="JP"/>
<link wikidata="Q23060" start="99" end="112" title="Liberal Party (Hong Kong)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19208" start="143" end="175" title="Legislative Council of Hong Kong" label="Legislative Council of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545681" start="254" end="284" title="Executive Council of Hong Kong" label="Executive Council of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062068" start="303" end="322" title="Central and Western District Council" label="Central and Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449990" start="327" end="354" title="Kwai Tsing District Council" label="Kwai Tsing District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q19215" start="383" end="438" title="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Political Consultative Conference" label="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Political Consultative Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q15969689" start="499" end="511" title="Francis Tien" label="Francis Tien"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844640" start="588" end="630" title="Hong Kong Basic Law Consultative Committee" label="Hong Kong Basic Law Consultative Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248751" start="754" end="772" title="Industrial (First)" label="Industrial (First)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508804" start="773" end="796" title="functional constituency (Hong Kong)" label="functional constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192239" start="814" end="848" title="Federation of Hong Kong Industries" label="Federation of Hong Kong Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731755" start="871" end="880" title="Allen Lee" label="Allen Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741486" start="979" end="994" title="Chief Executive of Hong Kong" label="Chief Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15027" start="995" end="1008" title="Tung Chee-hwa" label="Tung Chee-hwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8421679" start="1106" end="1126" title="Hong Kong Basic Law Article 23" label="Basic Law Article 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q5895339" start="1208" end="1218" title="2004 Hong Kong legislative election" label="2004 LegCo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973947" start="1219" end="1244" title="geographical constituency" label="geographical constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q19220" start="1351" end="1361" title="Henry Tang" label="Henry Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q996722" start="1369" end="1398" title="2012 Hong Kong Chief Executive election" label="2012 Chief Executive election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15023" start="1444" end="1459" title="Leung Chun-ying" label="Leung Chun-ying"/>
<link wikidata="Q15969689" start="1812" end="1824" title="Francis Tien" label="Francis Tien"/>
<link wikidata="Q19208" start="1932" end="1951" title="Legislative Council of Hong Kong" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q80332" start="2065" end="2077" title="Michael Tien" label="Michael Tien"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512676" start="2101" end="2106" title="G2000" label="G2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q838436" start="2131" end="2165" title="Kowloon-Canton Railway Corporation" label="Kowloon-Canton Railway Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479375" start="2192" end="2224" title="Mass Transit Railway Corporation" label="Mass Transit Railway Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226763" start="2250" end="2276" title="Diocesan Boys&amp;#x27; School" label="Diocesan Boys&amp;#x27; School"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="2348" end="2390" title="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign" label="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449990" start="2671" end="2696" title="Kwai Tsing District Council" label="Kwai Tsing District Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844640" start="2809" end="2851" title="Hong Kong Basic Law Consultative Committee" label="Hong Kong Basic Law Consultative Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q15165" start="2903" end="2922" title="Hong Kong Basic Law" label="Hong Kong Basic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16923298" start="2951" end="2962" title="Group of 89" label="Group of 89"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001834" start="3150" end="3200" title="Business and Professionals Federation of Hong Kong" label="Business and Professionals Federation of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540622" start="3209" end="3251" title="Liberal Democratic Federation of Hong Kong" label="Liberal Democratic Federation of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19208" start="3315" end="3334" title="Legislative Council of Hong Kong" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q10844074" start="3383" end="3424" title="1991 Hong Kong legislative election" label="first Legislative Council direct election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155998" start="3462" end="3476" title="Stephen Cheong" label="Stephen Cheong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248751" start="3530" end="3548" title="Industrial (First)" label="Industrial (First)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508804" start="3549" end="3572" title="functional constituency (Hong Kong)" label="functional constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192239" start="3600" end="3634" title="Federation of Hong Kong Industries" label="Federation of Hong Kong Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q23060" start="3709" end="3722" title="Liberal Party (Hong Kong)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4253937" start="3825" end="3854" title="United Democrats of Hong Kong" label="United Democrats of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252745" start="3982" end="4013" title="Provisional Legislative Council" label="Provisional Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5895321" start="4064" end="4079" title="1995 Hong Kong legislative election" label="elected in 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q5895324" start="4166" end="4204" title="1998 Hong Kong legislative election" label="first SAR Legislative Council election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248609" start="4228" end="4246" title="Commercial (First)" label="Commercial (First)"/>
<link wikidata="Q282592" start="4284" end="4321" title="Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce" label="Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731755" start="4488" end="4497" title="Allen Lee" label="Allen Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242386" start="4553" end="4573" title="New Territories East (constituency)" label="New Territories East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973947" start="4574" end="4599" title="geographical constituency" label="geographical constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545681" start="4963" end="4980" title="Executive Council of Hong Kong" label="Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741486" start="4982" end="4997" title="Chief Executive of Hong Kong" label="Chief Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15027" start="4998" end="5011" title="Tung Chee-hwa" label="Tung Chee-hwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179323" start="5133" end="5174" title="Principal Officials Accountability System" label="Principal Officials Accountability System"/>
<link wikidata="Q14567930" start="5420" end="5438" title="National Committee" label="National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19215" start="5446" end="5501" title="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Political Consultative Conference" label="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Political Consultative Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q55624805" start="5658" end="5669" title="National Security (Legislative Provisions) Bill 2003" label="legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8421679" start="5677" end="5687" title="Hong Kong Basic Law Article 23" label="Article 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q15165" start="5695" end="5704" title="Hong Kong Basic Law" label="Basic Law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5725" end="5757" title="Hong Kong July 1 marches#2003" label="more than 500,000 people marched"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242386" start="6096" end="6116" title="New Territories East (constituency)" label="New Territories East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973947" start="6117" end="6142" title="geographical constituency" label="geographical constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5895339" start="6186" end="6220" title="2004 Hong Kong Legislative Council election" label="2004 Legislative Council elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q10844562" start="6229" end="6258" title="2005 Hong Kong Chief Executive election" label="2005 Chief Executive election"/>
<link wikidata="Q19220" start="6291" end="6301" title="Henry Tang" label="Henry Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5895111" start="6615" end="6638" title="Hong Kong Tourism Board" label="Hong Kong Tourism Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q986723" start="6691" end="6725" title="2008 Hong Kong legislative election" label="2008 Legislative Council elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q23060" start="6736" end="6749" title="Liberal Party (Hong Kong)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448454" start="6943" end="6954" title="Selina Chow" label="Selina Chow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972511" start="6976" end="6996" title="New Territories West (constituency)" label="New Territories West"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873376" start="7172" end="7182" title="Miriam Lau" label="Miriam Lau"/>
<link wikidata="Q80332" start="7335" end="7347" title="Michael Tien" label="Michael Tien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819303" start="7366" end="7378" title="Tommy Cheung" label="Tommy Cheung"/>
<link wikidata="Q97352409" start="7388" end="7412" title="Minimum Wage Ordinance" label="minimum wage legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19220" start="7519" end="7529" title="Henry Tang" label="Henry Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q996722" start="7537" end="7566" title="2012 Hong Kong Chief Executive election" label="2012 Chief Executive election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15023" start="7625" end="7640" title="Leung Chun-ying" label="Leung Chun-ying"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242386" start="7814" end="7834" title="New Territories East (constituency)" label="New Territories East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587168" start="7847" end="7881" title="2012 Hong Kong legislative election" label="2012 Legislative Council elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q18145420" start="8062" end="8085" title="2014 Hong Kong protests" label="2014 Hong Kong protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q17699647" start="8435" end="8468" title="2016 Hong Kong legislative election" label="2016 Legislative Council election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16923214" start="8620" end="8631" title="Dominic Lee" label="Dominic Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465885" start="8757" end="8786" title="2017 Hong Kong Chief Executive election" label="2017 Chief Executive election"/>
<link wikidata="Q19225" start="8833" end="8843" title="John Tsang" label="John Tsang"/>
<link wikidata="Q843995" start="8957" end="8975" title="Election Committee" label="Election Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19217" start="9075" end="9085" title="Carrie Lam" label="Carrie Lam"/>
<link wikidata="Q65767134" start="9142" end="9163" title="2019 Yuen Long attack" label="2019 Yuen Long attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q19217" start="9206" end="9216" title="Carrie Lam" label="Carrie Lam"/>
<link wikidata="Q97299994" start="9368" end="9386" title="Hope for Hong Kong" label="Hope for Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q105761549" start="9623" end="9641" title="2021 Hong Kong electoral changes" label="electoral overhaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479375" start="9721" end="9725" title="MTRC" label="MTRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105502" start="9730" end="9745" title="CK Chow" label="Chow Chung-kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588095" start="9815" end="9835" title="Tanya Chan" label="Tanya Chan Suk-chong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083248" start="9903" end="9928" title="2007 Hong Kong local elections" label="district council election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157797" start="9937" end="9941" title="Peak (constituency)" label="Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q186361" start="10015" end="10027" title="Punishment" label="consequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q23055" start="10056" end="10067" title="Civic Party" label="rival party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23060" start="10178" end="10191" title="Liberal Party (Hong Kong)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479375" start="10238" end="10250" title="MTRC" label="rail company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991663" start="10306" end="10313" title="dissent" label="dissent"/>
<link wikidata="Q836365" start="10375" end="10392" title="District Council of Hong Kong" label="district councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q80332" start="10501" end="10513" title="Michael Tien" label="Michael Tien"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423359" wikidata="Q2657157" url="?curid=423359" title="Titus Albucius">
<text>Titus Albucius (praetor c. 105 BC) was a noted orator of the late Roman Republic.

== Education ==
He finished his studies at Athens at the latter end of the 2nd century BC, and belonged to the Epicurean sect. He was well acquainted with Greek literature, or rather, says Cicero, was almost a Greek. On account of his affecting on every occasion the Greek language and philosophy, he was satirized by Lucilius, whose lines upon him are preserved by Cicero, and Cicero himself speaks of him as a light-minded man. He accused, though unsuccessfully, Mucius Scaevola, the augur, of maladministration (&quot;repetundae&quot;) in his province.

== Career ==
In 105 BC, Albucius was praetor in Sardinia, and in consequence of some insignificant success which he had gained over some robbers, he celebrated a triumph in the province. On his return to Rome, he applied to the Senate for the honour of a supplicatio, but this was refused, and he was accused in 103 BC of &quot;repetundae&quot; by Gaius Julius Caesar (the elder), and condemned. Pompeius Strabo had offered himself as the accuser, but he was not allowed to conduct the prosecution, because he had been the quaestor of Albucius. After his condemnation, he went into exile at Athens and pursued the study of philosophy. He left behind him some orations, which had been read by Cicero.

==See also==
* Albucia (gens)
* Lucilius
* Cicero

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2657157" start="0" end="14" title="Titus Albucius" label="Titus Albucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="16" end="23" title="praetor" label="praetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859263" start="47" end="53" title="orator" label="orator"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="66" end="80" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="126" end="132" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q179541" start="194" end="203" title="Epicurean" label="Epicurean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="272" end="278" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q298729" start="401" end="409" title="Gaius Lucilius" label="Lucilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q955339" start="548" end="563" title="Quintus Mucius Scaevola Augur" label="Mucius Scaevola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="688" end="696" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q657438" start="802" end="809" title="Roman triumph" label="triumph"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="844" end="848" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="868" end="874" title="Roman Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606381" start="895" end="906" title="supplicatio" label="supplicatio"/>
<link wikidata="Q314710" start="988" end="1019" title="Gaius Julius Caesar (proconsul of Asia, 90s BC)" label="Gaius Julius Caesar (the elder)"/>
<link wikidata="Q336538" start="1036" end="1051" title="Pompeius Strabo" label="Pompeius Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189430" start="1163" end="1171" title="quaestor" label="quaestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655915" start="1356" end="1370" title="Albucia (gens)" label="Albucia (gens)"/>
<link wikidata="Q298729" start="1373" end="1381" title="Gaius Lucilius" label="Lucilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="1384" end="1390" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423360" wikidata="Q2835561" url="?curid=423360" title="Alfred and Plantagenet">
<text>Alfred and Plantagenet is a Franco-Ontarian township in eastern Ontario, Canada, in the United Counties of Prescott and Russell. Located approximately from downtown Ottawa at the confluence of the Ottawa River and the South Nation River.

The township was formed on January 1, 1997, through the amalgamation of the townships of Alfred and North Plantagenet and the villages of Alfred and Plantagenet.

Plantagenet is named after the House of Plantagenet, the royal house established by King Henry II. Settled in 1811-12. Post office from 1838.

Near the town of Alfred, the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources has designated the Alfred Bog as &quot;a provincially significant wetland and an Area of Natural and Scientific Interest.&quot; Species of interest include the palm warbler, northern pitcher-plant, pink lady&#x27;s-slipper, cottongrass, bog elfin and bog copper butterflies, and ebony boghaunter dragonfly. It also hosts one of the most southerly herds of moose. The bog is open to the public with a boardwalk for nature walks.

University of Guelph-Ontario Agricultural College&#x27;s Alfred College was located here until 2015.

==Communities==
The township comprises the communities of Alfred, Alfred Station, Blue Corners, Centrefield, Coin Gratton, Curran, Glenburn, Jessups Falls, Lefaivre, Pendleton, Plantagenet, Plantagenet Station, Rockdale, Senecal, The Rollway, Treadwell, Wendover, and Westminster. The township administrative offices are located in Plantagenet.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Alfred and Plantagenet had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

==See also==
* List of municipalities in Ontario
*List of townships in Ontario
*List of francophone communities in Ontario

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2835561" start="0" end="22" title="Alfred and Plantagenet" label="Alfred and Plantagenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q955944" start="28" end="43" title="Franco-Ontarian" label="Franco-Ontarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936646" start="44" end="52" title="township (Canada)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058779" start="56" end="71" title="eastern Ontario" label="eastern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815593" start="88" end="127" title="United Counties of Prescott and Russell" label="United Counties of Prescott and Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="165" end="171" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60974" start="197" end="209" title="Ottawa River" label="Ottawa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304550" start="218" end="236" title="South Nation River" label="South Nation River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391516" start="388" end="399" title="Plantagenet, Ontario" label="Plantagenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q106151" start="433" end="453" title="House of Plantagenet" label="House of Plantagenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q20155411" start="631" end="641" title="Alfred Bog" label="Alfred Bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788667" start="693" end="732" title="Area of Natural and Scientific Interest" label="Area of Natural and Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075928" start="772" end="784" title="palm warbler" label="palm warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927560" start="786" end="808" title="northern pitcher-plant" label="northern pitcher-plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q744706" start="810" end="834" title="pink lady&amp;#x27;s-slipper" label="pink lady&amp;#x27;s-slipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q161739" start="836" end="847" title="cottongrass" label="cottongrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267886" start="849" end="858" title="bog elfin" label="bog elfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007060" start="863" end="873" title="bog copper" label="bog copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366237" start="891" end="907" title="ebony boghaunter" label="ebony boghaunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="968" end="973" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q11111030" start="1012" end="1021" title="boardwalk" label="boardwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q795988" start="1041" end="1061" title="University of Guelph" label="University of Guelph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205188" start="1062" end="1090" title="Ontario Agricultural College" label="Ontario Agricultural College"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="1515" end="1540" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="1554" end="1571" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308034" start="1778" end="1811" title="List of municipalities in Ontario" label="List of municipalities in Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643835" start="1813" end="1841" title="List of townships in Ontario" label="List of townships in Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008452" start="1843" end="1885" title="List of francophone communities in ontario" label="List of francophone communities in Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423362" wikidata="Q206290" url="?curid=423362" title="Citation index">
<text>A citation index is a kind of bibliographic index, an index of citations between publications, allowing the user to easily establish which later documents cite which earlier documents. A form of citation index is first found in 12th-century Hebrew religious literature. Legal citation indexes are found in the 18th century and were made popular by citators such as Shepard&#x27;s Citations (1873). In 1961, Eugene Garfield&#x27;s Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) introduced the first citation index for papers published in academic journals, first the &quot;Science Citation Index&quot; (SCI), and later the &quot;Social Sciences Citation Index&quot; (SSCI) and the &quot;Arts and Humanities Citation Index&quot; (AHCI). American Chemical Society converted its printed Chemical Abstract Service (established in 1907) into internet-accessible SciFinder in 2008. The first automated citation indexing was done by CiteSeer in 1997 and was patented. Other sources for such data include Google Scholar, Microsoft Academic, Elsevier&#x27;s Scopus, and the National Institutes of Health&#x27;s &quot;iCite&quot;.

==History==
The earliest known citation index is an index of biblical citations in rabbinic literature, the &quot;Mafteah ha-Derashot&quot;, attributed to Maimonides and probably dating to the 12th century. It is organized alphabetically by biblical phrase. Later biblical citation indexes are in the order of the canonical text. These citation indices were used both for general and for legal study. The Talmudic citation index &quot;En Mishpat&quot; (1714) even included a symbol to indicate whether a Talmudic decision had been overridden, just as in the 19th-century &quot;Shepard&#x27;s Citations&quot;. Unlike modern scholarly citation indexes, only references to one work, the Bible, were indexed.

In English legal literature, volumes of judicial reports included lists of cases cited in that volume starting with &quot;Raymond&#x27;s Reports&quot; (1743) and followed by &quot;Douglas&#x27;s Reports&quot; (1783). Simon Greenleaf (1821) published an alphabetical list of cases with notes on later decisions affecting the precedential authority of the original decision. These early tables of legal citations (&quot;citators&quot;) were followed by a more complete, book length index, Labatt&#x27;s &quot;Table of Cases...California...&quot; (1860) and in 1872 by Wait&#x27;s &quot;Table of Cases...New York...&quot;. The most important and best-known citation index for legal cases was released in 1873 with the publication of Shepard&#x27;s Citations.

William Adair, a former president of &quot;Shepard&#x27;s Citations&quot;, suggested in 1920 that citation indexes could serve as a tool for tracking science and engineering literature. After learning that Eugene Garfield held a similar opinion, Adair corresponded with Garfield in 1953. The correspondence prompted Garfield to examine &quot;Shepard&#x27;s Citations&quot; index as a model that could be extended to the sciences. Two years later Garfield published &quot;Citation indexes for science&quot; in the journal &quot;Science&quot;. In 1959, Garfield started a consulting business, the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI), in Philadelphia and began a correspondence with Joshua Lederberg about the idea. In 1961 Garfield received a grant from the U.S. National Institutes of Health to compile a citation index for Genetics. To do so, Garfield&#x27;s team gathered 1.4 million citations from 613 journals. From this work, Garfield and the ISI produced the first version of the &quot;Science Citation Index&quot;, published as a book in 1963.

==Major citation indexing services==
General-purpose, subscription-based academic citation indexes include:
*Web of Science by Clarivate Analytics (previously the Intellectual Property and Science business of Thomson Reuters)
*Scopus by Elsevier, available online only, which similarly combines subject searching with citation browsing and tracking in the sciences and social sciences.
Each of these offer an index of citations between publications and a mechanism to establish which documents cite which other documents. They are not open-access and differ widely in cost: Web of Science and Scopus are available by subscription (generally to libraries).

CiteSeer and Google Scholar are freely available online. 

Several open-access, subject-specific citation indexing services also exist, such as:
*INSPIRE-HEP which covers high energy physics, 
*PubMed, which covers life sciences and biomedical topics, and 
*Astrophysics Data System which covers astronomy and physics.

== Representativeness of proprietary databases ==
Clarivate Analytics&#x27; Web of Science (WoS) and Elsevier&#x27;s Scopus databases are synonymous with data on international research, and considered as the two most trusted or authoritative sources of bibliometric data for peer-reviewed global research knowledge across disciplines. They are both also used widely for the purposes of researcher evaluation and promotion, institutional impact (for example the role of WoS in the UK Research Excellence Framework 2021), and international league tables (Bibliographic data from Scopus represents more than 36% of assessment criteria in the THE rankings). But while these databases are generally agreed to contain rigorously-assessed, high quality research, they do not represent the sum of current global research knowledge.

It is often mentioned in popular science articles that the research output of countries in South America, Asia, and Africa are disappointingly low. Sub-Saharan Africa is cited as an example for having &quot;13.5% of the global population but less than 1% of global research output&quot;. This fact is based on data from a World Bank/Elsevier report from 2012 which relies on data from Scopus. Research outputs in this context refers to papers specifically published in peer-reviewed journals that are indexed in Scopus. Similarly, many others have analysed putatively global or international collaborations and mobility using the even more selective WoS database. Research outputs in this context refers to papers specifically published in peer-reviewed journals that are indexed either in Scopus or WoS.

Both WoS and Scopus are considered highly selective. Both are commercial enterprises, whose standards and assessment criteria are mostly controlled by panels in North America and Western Europe. The same is true for more comprehensive databases such as Ulrich&#x27;s Web which lists as many as 70,000 journals, while Scopus has fewer than 50% of these, and WoS has fewer than 25%. While Scopus is larger and geographically broader than WoS, it still only covers a fraction of journal publishing outside North America and Europe. For example, it reports a coverage of over 2,000 journals in Asia (&quot;230% more than the nearest competitor&quot;), which may seem impressive until you consider that in Indonesia alone there are more than 7,000 journals listed on the government&#x27;s Garuda portal (of which more than 1,300 are currently listed on DOAJ); whilst at least 2,500 Japanese journals listed on the J-Stage platform. Similarly, Scopus claims to have about 700 journals listed from Latin America, in comparison with SciELO&#x27;s 1,285 active journal count; but that is just the tip of the iceberg judging by the 1,300+ DOAJ-listed journals in Brazil alone. Furthermore, the editorial boards of the journals contained in Wos and Scopus databases are integrated by researchers from western Europe and North America. For example, in the journal &quot;Human Geography&quot;, 41% of editorial board members are from the United States, and 37.8% from the UK. Similarly,) studied ten leading marketing journals in WoS and Scopus databases, and concluded that 85.3% of their editorial board members are based in the United States. It comes as no surprise that the research that gets published in these journals is the one that fits the editorial boards&#x27; world view.

Comparison with subject-specific indexes has further revealed the geographical and topic bias – for example Ciarli found that by comparing the coverage of rice research in CAB Abstracts (an agriculture and global health database) with WoS and Scopus, the latter &quot;may strongly under-represent the scientific production by developing countries, and over-represent that by industrialised countries&quot;, and this is likely to apply to other fields of agriculture. This under-representation of applied research in Africa, Asia, and South America may have an additional negative effect on framing research strategies and policy development in these countries. The overpromotion of these databases diminishes the important role of &quot;local&quot; and &quot;regional&quot; journals for researchers who want to publish and read locally-relevant content. Some researchers deliberately bypass &quot;high impact&quot; journals when they want to publish locally useful or important research in favour of outlets that will reach their key audience quicker, and in other cases to be able to publish in their native language.

Furthermore, the odds are stacked against researchers for whom English is a foreign language. 95% of WoS journals are English consider the use of English language a hegemonic and unreflective linguistic practice. The consequences include that non-native speakers spend part of their budget on translation and correction and invest a significant amount of time and effort on subsequent corrections, making publishing in English a burden. A far-reaching consequence of the use of English as the &quot;lingua franca&quot; of science is in knowledge production, because its use benefits &quot;worldviews, social, cultural, and political interests of the English-speaking center&quot; ( p. 123).

The small proportion of research from South East Asia, Africa, and Latin America which makes it into WoS and Scopus journals is not attributable to a lack of effort or quality of research; but due to hidden and invisible epistemic and structural barriers (Chan 2019). These are a reflection of &quot;deeper historical and structural power that had positioned former colonial masters as the centers of knowledge production, while relegating former colonies to peripheral roles&quot; (Chan 2018). Many North American and European journals demonstrate conscious and unconscious bias against researchers from other parts of the world. Many of these journals call themselves &quot;international&quot; but represent interests, authors, and even references only in their own languages. Therefore, researchers in non-European or North American countries commonly get rejected because their research is said to be &quot;not internationally significant&quot; or only of &quot;local interest&quot; (the wrong &quot;local&quot;). This reflects the current concept of &quot;international&quot; as limited to a Euro/Anglophone-centric way of knowledge production. In other words, &quot;the ongoing internationalisation has not meant academic interaction and exchange of knowledge, but the dominance of the leading Anglophone journals in which international debates occurs and gains recognition&quot;.

Clarivate Analytics have made some positive steps to broaden the scope of WoS, integrating the SciELO citation index – a move not without criticism – and through the creation of the Emerging Sources Index (ESI), which has allowed database access to many more international titles. However, there is still a lot of work to be done to recognise and amplify the growing body of research literature generated by those outside North America and Europe. The Royal Society have previously identified that &quot;traditional metrics do not fully capture the dynamics of the emerging global science landscape&quot;, and that academia needs to develop more sophisticated data and impact measures to provide a richer understanding of the global scientific knowledge that is available to us.

Academia has not yet built digital infrastructures which are equal, comprehensive, multi-lingual and allows fair participation in knowledge creation. One way to bridge this gap is with discipline- and region-specific preprint repositories such as AfricArXiv and InarXiv. Open access advocates recommend to remain critical of those &quot;global&quot; research databases that have been built in Europe or Northern America and be wary of those who celebrate these products act as a representation of the global sum of human scholarly knowledge. Finally, let us also be aware of the geopolitical impact that such systematic discrimination has on knowledge production, and the inclusion and representation of marginalised research demographics within the global research landscape.

==See also==
* Acknowledgment index
* Chinese Science Citation Database
* Citation analysis
* CiteSeerX
* Emerging Sources Citation Index (ESCI)
* Google Scholar
* Index Copernicus
* Indian Citation Index
* Journal Citation Reports
* Korea Citation Index
* The Lens
* Microsoft Academic Search
* Redalyc
* Russian Science Citation Index
* SciELO
* Scientific journal
* Semantic Scholar
* Serbian Citation Index

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q206290" start="2" end="16" title="Citation index" label="citation index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033233" start="30" end="49" title="bibliographic index" label="bibliographic index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713" start="63" end="71" title="citation" label="citation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122410" start="348" end="355" title="citator" label="citator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494412" start="365" end="389" title="Shepard&amp;#x27;s Citations" label="Shepard&amp;#x27;s Citations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142532" start="407" end="422" title="Eugene Garfield" label="Eugene Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q671421" start="430" end="466" title="Institute for Scientific Information" label="Institute for Scientific Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q737498" start="533" end="549" title="academic journal" label="academic journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q104047209" start="568" end="590" title="Science Citation Index" label="Science Citation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090953" start="624" end="654" title="Social Sciences Citation Index" label="Social Sciences Citation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q713927" start="682" end="716" title="Arts and Humanities Citation Index" label="Arts and Humanities Citation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q247556" start="731" end="756" title="American Chemical Society" label="American Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q911173" start="779" end="804" title="Chemical Abstract Service" label="Chemical Abstract Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q911173" start="852" end="861" title="SciFinder" label="SciFinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715061" start="921" end="929" title="CiteSeer" label="CiteSeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q494817" start="992" end="1006" title="Google Scholar" label="Google Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136779" start="1008" end="1026" title="Microsoft Academic" label="Microsoft Academic"/>
<link wikidata="Q371467" start="1044" end="1050" title="Scopus" label="Scopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="1060" end="1089" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117603" start="1200" end="1219" title="rabbinic literature" label="rabbinic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="1272" end="1282" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494412" start="2553" end="2577" title="Shepard&amp;#x27;s Citations" label="Shepard&amp;#x27;s Citations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142532" start="2786" end="2801" title="Eugene Garfield" label="Eugene Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="3107" end="3114" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q671421" start="3175" end="3211" title="Institute for Scientific Information" label="Institute for Scientific Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="3222" end="3234" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218823" start="3267" end="3283" title="Joshua Lederberg" label="Joshua Lederberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="3343" end="3377" title="National Institutes of Health" label="U.S. National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q104047209" start="3578" end="3600" title="Science Citation Index Expanded" label="Science Citation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201886" start="3747" end="3761" title="Web of Science" label="Web of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q27991358" start="3765" end="3784" title="Clarivate Analytics" label="Clarivate Analytics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141267" start="3847" end="3862" title="Thomson Reuters" label="Thomson Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q371467" start="3865" end="3871" title="Scopus" label="Scopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q746413" start="3875" end="3883" title="Elsevier" label="Elsevier"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="4007" end="4022" title="social sciences" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715061" start="4295" end="4303" title="CiteSeer" label="CiteSeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q494817" start="4308" end="4322" title="Google Scholar" label="Google Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972440" start="4441" end="4452" title="INSPIRE-HEP" label="INSPIRE-HEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q180686" start="4489" end="4495" title="PubMed" label="PubMed"/>
<link wikidata="Q752099" start="4553" end="4577" title="Astrophysics Data System" label="Astrophysics Data System"/>
<link wikidata="Q27991358" start="4665" end="4684" title="Clarivate Analytics" label="Clarivate Analytics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201886" start="4691" end="4705" title="Web of Science" label="Web of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q371467" start="4732" end="4738" title="Scopus" label="Scopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q55313398" start="12247" end="12257" title="AfricArXiv" label="AfricArXiv"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12262" end="12269" title="InarXiv" label="InarXiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674285" start="12793" end="12813" title="Acknowledgment index" label="Acknowledgment index"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716557" start="12816" end="12849" title="Chinese Science Citation Database" label="Chinese Science Citation Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q206276" start="12852" end="12869" title="Citation analysis" label="Citation analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715061" start="12872" end="12881" title="CiteSeerX" label="CiteSeerX"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908122" start="12884" end="12922" title="Emerging Sources Citation Index (ESCI)" label="Emerging Sources Citation Index (ESCI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q494817" start="12925" end="12939" title="Google Scholar" label="Google Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017818" start="12942" end="12958" title="Index Copernicus" label="Index Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020027" start="12961" end="12982" title="Indian Citation Index" label="Indian Citation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701229" start="12985" end="13009" title="Journal Citation Reports" label="Journal Citation Reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431606" start="13012" end="13032" title="Korea Citation Index" label="Korea Citation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144471" start="13035" end="13043" title="The Lens" label="The Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065154" start="13046" end="13071" title="Microsoft Academic Search" label="Microsoft Academic Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305434" start="13074" end="13081" title="Redalyc" label="Redalyc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398079" start="13084" end="13114" title="Russian Science Citation Index" label="Russian Science Citation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433389" start="13117" end="13123" title="SciELO" label="SciELO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633421" start="13126" end="13144" title="Scientific journal" label="Scientific journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908627" start="13147" end="13163" title="Semantic Scholar" label="Semantic Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056988" start="13166" end="13188" title="Serbian Citation Index" label="Serbian Citation Index"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423363" wikidata="Q7717762" url="?curid=423363" title="Big Red Machine">
<text>The Big Red Machine is a nickname for the Cincinnati Reds baseball team that dominated the National League from 1970 to 1979 and is widely recognized as being among the best in baseball history.

The team won six National League West Division titles, four National League pennants, and two World Series titles. Between 1970 and 1979, it averaged over 95 wins a season, with a total record of 953 wins and 657 losses.

The core of that Reds team had the best record in the Major Leagues in 1981, but did not make the postseason because of Bowie Kuhn&#x27;s split-season playoff format due to the player&#x27;s strike.

==Origins==

The nickname was introduced in a July 4, 1969 article by Bob Hunter in the &quot;Los Angeles Herald-Examiner&quot;, but gained prominence in reference to the 1970 team, which won 70 of its first 100 games (a feat accomplished only a few times in MLB history) and posted a regular season record of 102–60 and won the National League pennant. Rookie and future-Hall of Fame manager Sparky Anderson headed the Big Red Machine, which at its peak featured Pete Rose, Johnny Bench, Joe Morgan and Tony Pérez, and was supported by Dave Concepción, George Foster, César Gerónimo and Ken Griffey, Sr. The Cincinnati Reds of the 1970s garnered more World Series appearances than any other team during that decade, and compiled an overall record of 953 wins and 657 losses. They are the only National League team since the 1921 and 1922 New York Giants to win back-to-back World Championships. Among NL teams, only the 1996 Atlanta Braves and the 2009 Philadelphia Phillies have returned to the Fall Classic with a chance to repeat as World Champions in years since, both falling to the New York Yankees of the &quot;Core Four&quot; era. The 2010–2014 San Francisco Giants did win three World Championships in five years, at least sparking the debate of whether they could be considered a National League dynasty, but they did not reach the postseason in consecutive years during this span.

== The &quot;Great Eight&quot; ==
The eight players most frequently referenced as members of the Big Red Machine include baseball&#x27;s all-time hit leader in Rose; three Hall of Fame players in Bench, Pérez and Morgan, six National League MVP selections, four National League home run season leaders, and three NL Batting Champions. Between them, these eight players collectively won 25 Gold Glove awards and made 63 All-Star Game appearances. The starting lineup of Rose, Morgan, Pérez, Bench, Concepción, Foster, Griffey, and Gerónimo (collectively referred to as the &quot;Great Eight&quot;) played 88 games together during the 1975 and 1976 seasons, losing only 19.

==Later years==
Dan Driessen took over at first base for Tony Perez in 1977. Although some of the original players departed the team, some extended the Big Red Machine nickname for two more years until the departures of Anderson and Rose following the 1978 season. The Reds turned around to finish in second place in 1977 and 1978. Ray Knight replaced Pete Rose at third base for Cincinnati in 1979 and the rest of the Reds starting lineup still included six of the great eight: Bench, Morgan, Foster, Concepcion, Griffey and Geronimo. The Cincinnati Reds won another division title in 1979, but lost to the Pittsburgh Pirates in the NLCS.

The Big Red Machine had one last great run in 1981 when they finished the strike season with the best record in baseball. Only three of the great eight remained in the starting lineup: Foster, Griffey and Concepcion. Bench had an injury plagued season and was moved from catcher to third base. Tom Seaver had a win–loss record of 14–2 and an ERA of 2.54 while starting only 23 games in the Reds&#x27; strike-shortened 108-game regular season. Despite that, the Reds finished second in the National League West in both halves of the season, making them ineligible to compete in the postseason despite having the best overall record in baseball.

==Rivalries==
The Big Red Machine&#x27;s archrival were the Los Angeles Dodgers. The two teams often competed for the NL West division title and finished either first or second in every year from 1970 through 1979 with the one exception being 1971. Reds manager Sparky Anderson once said, &quot;I don&#x27;t think there&#x27;s a rivalry like ours in either league. The Giants are supposed to be the Dodgers&#x27; natural rivals, but I don&#x27;t think the feeling is there anymore. It&#x27;s not there the way it is with us and the Dodgers.&quot; The rivalry ended when division realignment moved the Reds to the NL Central. They met again in the 1995 NLDS, with the Reds sweeping the Dodgers in three games.

The Big Red Machine was also part of the rivalry with the two Pennsylvania teams. All of the Reds&#x27; four pennants in the 1970s came against these teams (Pittsburgh Pirates in 1970, 1972, and 1975, and Philadelphia Phillies in 1976). In 1979, Pete Rose added to the notion of the Big Red Machine being part of the rivalry when he signed with the Phillies and helped them win their first World Series championship in .

==Statistics==
==Sons of the Big Red Machine==
The clubhouse of the Big Red Machine was full of young kids who would go on to play in the Major Leagues. The most successful was Ken Griffey Sr.&#x27;s son Ken Griffey Jr., who went on to have a Hall of Fame career. Furthermore, Ed Sprague Sr.&#x27;s son Ed Sprague Jr., Charlie Leibrandt&#x27;s son Brandon Leibrandt, Pedro Borbon&#x27;s son Pedro Borbón Jr., Ed Crosby&#x27;s son Bobby Crosby, Pete Rose&#x27;s son Pete Rose Jr., Clyde Mashore&#x27;s sons Damon Mashore and Justin Mashore, Hal McRae&#x27;s son Brian McRae, Julian Javier&#x27;s son Stan Javier, and Tony Perez&#x27;s son Eduardo Perez as well as Bill Plummer&#x27;s grandson Conner Menez, and Lee May&#x27;s grandson Jacob May, all played in MLB. Additionally, Paul Blair&#x27;s son Paul Blair III, Bobby Tolan&#x27;s son Robbie Tolan, Lee May&#x27;s son Lee May Jr., Tommy Helms&#x27; son Tommy Helms Jr., Rich Hinton&#x27;s son Robert Hinton, Darrel Chaney&#x27;s son Keith Chaney and grandson Chase Chaney, Andy Kosco&#x27;s son Bryn Kosco, Ken Griffey Sr.&#x27;s son Craig Griffey, and Tony Perez&#x27;s son Victor Perez, all played minor league baseball.

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7717762" start="4" end="19" title="Big Red Machine" label="Big Red Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="42" end="57" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="58" end="66" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="91" end="106" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273470" start="112" end="116" title="1970 in baseball" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578984" start="120" end="124" title="1979 in baseball" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209761" start="213" end="242" title="National League West Division" label="National League West Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="290" end="302" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740420" start="538" end="548" title="Bowie Kuhn" label="Bowie Kuhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932878" start="688" end="698" title="Bob Hunter (Los Angeles sportswriter)" label="Bob Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573969" start="789" end="793" title="1970 Cincinnati Reds season" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="990" end="1002" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133919" start="1011" end="1026" title="Sparky Anderson" label="Sparky Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q739866" start="1082" end="1091" title="Pete Rose" label="Pete Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155003" start="1093" end="1105" title="Johnny Bench" label="Johnny Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176269" start="1107" end="1117" title="Joe Morgan" label="Joe Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q608854" start="1122" end="1132" title="Tony Pérez" label="Tony Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228579" start="1155" end="1170" title="Dave Concepción" label="Dave Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539381" start="1172" end="1185" title="George Foster (baseball)" label="George Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5202557" start="1187" end="1201" title="César Gerónimo" label="César Gerónimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365718" start="1206" end="1222" title="Ken Griffey, Sr." label="Ken Griffey, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5170163" start="1737" end="1746" title="Core Four" label="Core Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q120649" start="2401" end="2411" title="Gold Glove" label="Gold Glove"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273477" start="2645" end="2649" title="1975 in baseball" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577404" start="2654" end="2658" title="1976 in baseball" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213407" start="2701" end="2713" title="Dan Driessen" label="Dan Driessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273478" start="3002" end="3006" title="1977 in baseball" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578427" start="3011" end="3015" title="1978 in baseball" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287084" start="3620" end="3630" title="Tom Seaver" label="Tom Seaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209761" start="3815" end="3835" title="National League West" label="National League West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118368" start="3839" end="3864" title="1981 Major League Baseball strike" label="both halves of the season"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="4031" end="4050" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209761" start="4089" end="4096" title="NL West" label="NL West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977743" start="4618" end="4627" title="1995 NLDS" label="1995 NLDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185592" start="4743" end="4761" title="Phillies–Pirates rivalry" label="Pennsylvania teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q739866" start="4927" end="4936" title="Pete Rose" label="Pete Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="5030" end="5038" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365718" start="5280" end="5295" title="Ken Griffey Sr." label="Ken Griffey Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q536900" start="5307" end="5322" title="Ken Griffey Jr." label="Ken Griffey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="5346" end="5358" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335437" start="5380" end="5394" title="Ed Sprague Sr." label="Ed Sprague Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5335438" start="5406" end="5420" title="Ed Sprague Jr." label="Ed Sprague Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5085145" start="5422" end="5439" title="Charlie Leibrandt" label="Charlie Leibrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q98522613" start="5451" end="5468" title="Brandon Leibrandt" label="Brandon Leibrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9057377" start="5470" end="5482" title="Pedro Borbon" label="Pedro Borbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159487" start="5494" end="5510" title="Pedro Borbón Jr." label="Pedro Borbón Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5334712" start="5512" end="5521" title="Ed Crosby" label="Ed Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907944" start="5533" end="5545" title="Bobby Crosby" label="Bobby Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q739866" start="5547" end="5556" title="Pete Rose" label="Pete Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172225" start="5568" end="5581" title="Pete Rose Jr." label="Pete Rose Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5136980" start="5583" end="5596" title="Clyde Mashore" label="Clyde Mashore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212854" start="5609" end="5622" title="Damon Mashore" label="Damon Mashore"/>
<link wikidata="Q21663268" start="5627" end="5641" title="Justin Mashore" label="Justin Mashore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640861" start="5643" end="5652" title="Hal McRae" label="Hal McRae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964749" start="5664" end="5675" title="Brian McRae" label="Brian McRae"/>
<link wikidata="Q593790" start="5677" end="5690" title="Julian Javier" label="Julian Javier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597705" start="5702" end="5713" title="Stan Javier" label="Stan Javier"/>
<link wikidata="Q608854" start="5719" end="5729" title="Tony Perez" label="Tony Perez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340737" start="5741" end="5754" title="Eduardo Perez" label="Eduardo Perez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910513" start="5766" end="5778" title="Bill Plummer" label="Bill Plummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q65748000" start="5795" end="5807" title="Conner Menez" label="Conner Menez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514493" start="5813" end="5820" title="Lee May" label="Lee May"/>
<link wikidata="Q26736170" start="5837" end="5846" title="Jacob May" label="Jacob May"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149400" start="5881" end="5891" title="Paul Blair (baseball)" label="Paul Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935644" start="5919" end="5930" title="Bobby Tolan" label="Bobby Tolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819512" start="5988" end="5999" title="Tommy Helms" label="Tommy Helms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323298" start="6027" end="6038" title="Rich Hinton" label="Rich Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224560" start="6065" end="6078" title="Darrel Chaney" label="Darrel Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760911" start="6130" end="6140" title="Andy Kosco" label="Andy Kosco"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423364" wikidata="Q233167" url="?curid=423364" title="DOI">
<text>DOI or Doi most commonly refers to:
* Declaration of Independence, a document to be independent from another country
* Digital object identifier, an international standard for document identification
* United States Department of the Interior, an executive department of the U.S. government
It may also refer to:

==Science and technology==
* Distinctness of image, a quantification of vision used in optics
* 2,5-Dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine, a hallucinogenic drug

==Organizations==
* Department of Information (Australia), Australian government department, 1939–1950
* Division of Investigation, a precursor to the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation
* New York City Department of Investigation, law enforcement agency

==Other uses==
* &quot;Dancing on Ice&quot;, a British television series
* Doi (surname), a Japanese surname
* Doi (retailer), a Japanese company
* Doi (clan), a clan of the Gurjar ethnic group
* Dogri language (ISO 639 code), spoken in India and Pakistan

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233167" start="0" end="3" title="DOI" label="DOI"/>
<link wikidata="Q233167" start="7" end="10" title="DOI" label="Doi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464916" start="38" end="65" title="Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q25670" start="119" end="144" title="Digital object identifier" label="Digital object identifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="202" end="242" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="United States Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282972" start="343" end="364" title="Distinctness of image" label="Distinctness of image"/>
<link wikidata="Q209251" start="410" end="441" title="2,5-Dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine" label="2,5-Dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294411" start="486" end="523" title="Department of Information (Australia)" label="Department of Information (Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="571" end="596" title="Division of Investigation" label="Division of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013181" start="656" end="697" title="New York City Department of Investigation" label="New York City Department of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11274015" start="746" end="760" title="Dancing on Ice" label="Dancing on Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288585" start="798" end="811" title="Doi (surname)" label="Doi (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288583" start="834" end="848" title="Doi (retailer)" label="Doi (retailer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123857902" start="871" end="881" title="Doi (clan)" label="Doi (clan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q32730" start="919" end="933" title="Dogri language" label="Dogri language"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423365" wikidata="Q4038411" url="?curid=423365" title="Evolution (journal)">
<text>Evolution: International Journal of Organic Evolution, is a monthly scientific journal that publishes significant new results of empirical or theoretical investigations concerning facts, processes, mechanics, or concepts of evolutionary phenomena and events. &quot;Evolution&quot; is published by Oxford Academic (formerly by Wiley) for the Society for the Study of Evolution. Its current editor-in-chief is Jason Wolf of the University of Bath, United Kingdom.

==Former editors-in-chief==
The journal was founded soon after the Second World War. Its first editor was the systematic ornithologist Ernst Mayr.

* Ruth Geyer Shaw, July 2013 – 2017
* Daphne Fairbairn, 2010 – June 2013

==References==
==External links==
* at Oxford Academic
*Former official website at Wiley</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5633421" start="68" end="86" title="scientific journal" label="scientific journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="297" end="312" title="Oxford Academic" label="Oxford Academic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479654" start="326" end="331" title="John Wiley &amp;amp; Sons" label="Wiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552331" start="341" end="375" title="Society for the Study of Evolution" label="Society for the Study of Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422458" start="426" end="444" title="University of Bath" label="University of Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354" start="598" end="608" title="Ernst Mayr" label="Ernst Mayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q29107335" start="613" end="628" title="Ruth Geyer Shaw" label="Ruth Geyer Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="649" end="665" title="Daphne Fairbairn" label="Daphne Fairbairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="724" end="739" title="Oxford Academic" label="Oxford Academic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479654" start="768" end="773" title="John Wiley &amp;amp; Sons" label="Wiley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423366" wikidata="Q960919" url="?curid=423366" title="Jacob Viner">
<text>Jacob Viner (3 May 1892 – 12 September 1970) was a Canadian economist and is considered with Frank Knight and Henry Simons to be one of the &quot;inspiring&quot; mentors of the early Chicago school of economics in the 1930s: he was one of the leading figures of the Chicago faculty. Paul Samuelson named Viner (along with Harry Gunnison Brown, Allyn Abbott Young, Henry Ludwell Moore, Frank Knight, Wesley Clair Mitchell, and Henry Schultz) as one of the several &quot;American saints in economics&quot; born after 1860. He was an important figure in the field of political economy.

==Early life==
Viner was born to a Jewish family on May 3, 1892, in Montreal, Quebec, to Romanian immigrant parents. He earned his undergraduate degree at McGill University in 1914. He received a PhD at Harvard University, where he wrote his dissertation, under the trade economist F. W. Taussig.

==Academic career==

Viner was a professor at the University of Chicago from 1916 to 1917 and from 1919 to 1946. At various times, Viner also taught at Stanford and Yale Universities and twice went to the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies in Geneva, Switzerland. In 1946 he left for Princeton University, where he remained until his retirement, in 1960. He was also a member of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton from 1947 to 1948 and a permanent member there from 1950 to 1970.
Viner was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1934. In 1942, he was elected to the American Philosophical Society.

Nobel laureate Milton Friedman studied under Viner while he was at the University of Chicago. 

Viner died on September 12, 1970, in Princeton, New Jersey.

==Public service==
Viner played a role in government, most notably as an advisor to Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau Jr. during the administration of Franklin Roosevelt. During World War II, he served as co-rapporteur to the economic and financial group of the Council on Foreign Relations&#x27; &quot;War and Peace Studies&quot; project, along with Harvard economist Alvin Hansen.

== Work ==
===Economics===
Viner was a noted opponent of John Maynard Keynes during the Great Depression. While he agreed with the policies of government spending pushed by Keynes, Viner argued that Keynes&#x27;s analysis was flawed and would not stand in the long run.

Known for his economic modeling of the , including the long- and the short-run cost curves, his work is still used today.

Viner is further known for having added the terms &quot;trade creation&quot; and &quot;trade diversion&quot; to the canon of economics in 1950. He also made important contributions to the theory of international trade and to the history of economic thought. While he was at Chicago, Viner co-edited the &quot;Journal of Political Economy&quot; with Frank Knight.

His work, &quot;Studies in the Theory of International Trade&quot; (1937), discusses the history of economic thought and is a historical source for the Bullionist controversy in 19th-century Britain.

===Atomic bomb===
Viner spoke at the Conference on Atomic Energy Control in 1945, stating &quot;that the atomic bomb was the cheapest way yet devised of killing human beings&quot; and that atomic bombs &quot;will be peacemaking in effect,&quot; perhaps making him the founder of nuclear deterrence.

== Major publications ==
* &quot;Some Problems of Logical Method in Political Economy&quot;, 1917, &quot;JPE&quot;
* &quot;Price Policies: the determination of market price&quot;, 1921.
* &quot;Dumping: A problem in international trade&quot;, 1923.
* &quot;Canada&#x27;s Balance of International Indebtedness: 1900–1913&quot;, 1924.
* &quot;The Utility Concept in Value Theory and its Critics&quot;, 1925, &quot;JPE&quot;.
* 
* &quot;Mills&#x27; Behavior of Prices&quot;, 1929, &quot;QJE&quot;
* &quot;Costs Curves and Supply Curves,&quot; &quot;Zeitschrift für Nationalökonomie&quot;, 3, pp. 23–46. Reprinted in R. B. Emmett, ed. 2002, &quot;The Chicago Tradition in Economics, 1892–1945&quot;, Routledge, v. 6, pp. 192–215.
* &quot;The Doctrine of Comparative Costs&quot;, 1932, &quot;WWA&quot;
* &quot;Inflation as a Possible Remedy for the Depression&quot;, 1933, &quot;Proceedings of Institute of Public Affairs, Univ. of Georgia&quot;
* &quot;Mr. Keynes on the Causes of Unemployment&quot;, 1936, &quot;QJE&quot;.
* via Mises Institute
* &quot;The Short View and the Long in Economic Policy,&quot; &quot;American Economic Review&quot;, 30(1), Part 1 1940, pp. 1–15.
* &quot;Marshall&#x27;s Economics, in Relation to the Man and to his Times&quot;, 1941, &quot;AER&quot;
* &quot;Trade Relations Between Free-Market and Controlled Economies&quot;, 1943.
* &quot;International Relations between State-Controlled National Economies&quot;, 1944, &quot;AER&quot;.
* &quot;Prospects for Foreign Trade in the Post-War World&quot;, 1946, &quot;Manchester Statistical Society&quot;.
* &quot;Power Versus Plenty as Objectives of Foreign Policy in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries&quot;, 1948, &quot;World Politics&quot;
* &quot;Bentham and J.S. Mill: the Utilitarian Background&quot;, 1949, &quot;AER&quot;
* &quot;The Customs Union Issue&quot;, 1950.
* &quot;A Modest Proposal for Some Stress on Scholarship in Graduate Training&quot;, 1950 (reprinted in 1991)
* &quot;International Economics&quot;, 1951.
* &quot;International Trade and Economic Development&quot;, 1952.
* &quot;Schumpeter&#x27;s History of Economic Analysis,&quot; &quot;American Economic Review&quot;, 44(5), 1954, pp. 894–910.
* &quot;&#x27;Fashion&#x27; in Economic Thought&quot;, 1957, &quot;Report of 6th Conference of Princeton Graduate Alumni&quot;
* &quot;International Trade Theory and its Present-Day Relevance&quot;, 1955, &quot;Economics and Public Policy&quot;
* &quot;The Long View and the Short: Studies in Economic Theory&quot;, 1958.
* &quot;Stability and Progress: the poorer countries&#x27; problem&quot;, 1958, in Hague, editor, &quot;Stability and Progress in the World Economy&quot;
* &quot;Five Lectures on Economics and Freedom&quot;, 1959 (Wabash Lectures, publ. 1991)
* &quot;The Intellectual History of Laissez-Faire&quot;, 1960, &quot;J Law Econ&quot;
* &quot;Hayek on Freedom and Coercion&quot;, 1960, &quot;Southern Econ J&quot;
* &quot;Relative Abundance of the Factors and International Trade&quot;, 1962, &quot;Indian EJ&quot;
* &quot;The Necessary and Desirable Range of Discretion to be Allowed to a Monetary Authority&quot;, 1962, in Yeager, editor, &quot;In Search of a Monetary Constitution&quot;
* &quot;&#x27;Possessive Individualism&#x27; as Original Sin&quot;, 1963, &quot;Canadian J of Econ &amp; Poli Sci&quot; 
* &quot;The Earlier Letters of John Stuart Mill&quot;, 1963, &quot;Univ of Toronto Quarterly&quot;
* &quot;The Economist in History&quot;, 1963, &quot;American Economic Review&quot;, 53(2), pp. 1–22
* &quot;The United States as a Welfare State&quot;, 1963, in Higgenbotham, editor, &quot;Man, Science, Learning and Education&quot;
* &quot;Problems of Monetary Control&quot;, 1964.
* &quot;Comment on my 1936 Review of Keynes&quot;, 1964, in Lekachman, editor, &quot;Keynes&#x27;s General Theory&quot;
* &quot;Introduction&quot;, in J. Rae, &quot;Life of Adam Smith&quot;, 1965.
* &quot;Adam Smith&quot;, 1968, in Sills, editor, &quot;International Encyclopedia of Social Sciences&quot;
* &quot;Mercantilist Thought&quot;, 1968, in Sills, editor, &quot;International Encyclopedia of Social Sciences&quot;
* &quot;Man&#x27;s Economic Status&quot;, 1968, in Clifford, editor, &quot;Man Versus Society in Eighteenth-Century Britain&quot;.
* &quot;Satire and Economics in the Augustan Age of Satire&quot;, 1970, in Miller et al., editors, &quot;The Augustan Milieu&quot;
* &quot;The Role of Providence in the Social Order&quot;, 1972.
* &quot;Religious Thought and Economic Society: Four Chapters of an Unfinished Work by Jacob Viner&quot;, ed. by J. Melitz and D. Winch, History of Poli Econ., 1978.

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* Jacob Viner Papers at the Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library, Princeton University
* Profile of Jacob Viner at the History of Economic Thought website.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q960919" start="0" end="11" title="Jacob Viner" label="Jacob Viner"/>
<link wikidata="Q188094" start="60" end="69" title="economist" label="economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q355223" start="93" end="105" title="Frank Knight" label="Frank Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606589" start="110" end="122" title="Henry Calvert Simons" label="Henry Simons"/>
<link wikidata="Q847001" start="183" end="210" title="Chicago school of economics" label="Chicago school of economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="266" end="273" title="University of Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q102454" start="283" end="297" title="Paul Samuelson" label="Paul Samuelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669333" start="322" end="342" title="Harry Gunnison Brown" label="Harry Gunnison Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4537881" start="344" end="362" title="Allyn Abbott Young" label="Allyn Abbott Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784968" start="364" end="383" title="Henry Ludwell Moore" label="Henry Ludwell Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q355223" start="385" end="397" title="Frank Knight" label="Frank Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q510417" start="399" end="420" title="Wesley Clair Mitchell" label="Wesley Clair Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971751" start="426" end="439" title="Henry Schultz" label="Henry Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="488" end="497" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="619" end="625" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="652" end="660" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="662" end="668" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="673" end="680" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="739" end="756" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="780" end="783" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="787" end="805" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="866" end="879" title="F. W. Taussig" label="F. W. Taussig"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="932" end="953" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="1034" end="1042" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="1047" end="1051" title="Yale University" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q691686" start="1087" end="1146" title="Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies" label="Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="1150" end="1156" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="1158" end="1169" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="1191" end="1211" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="1290" end="1318" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute for Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="1423" end="1460" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="1501" end="1531" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="1549" end="1564" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="1605" end="1626" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="1667" end="1676" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="1678" end="1688" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="1775" end="1800" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q450751" start="1801" end="1821" title="Henry Morgenthau Jr." label="Henry Morgenthau Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="1851" end="1869" title="Franklin Roosevelt" label="Franklin Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1878" end="1890" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="1962" end="1990" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968575" start="2003" end="2024" title="War and Peace Studies" label="War and Peace Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q449105" start="2069" end="2081" title="Alvin Hansen" label="Alvin Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="2141" end="2160" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2172" end="2188" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519415" start="2410" end="2433" title="long run and short run" label="long- and the short-run"/>
<link wikidata="Q380262" start="2434" end="2444" title="cost curve" label="cost curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832035" start="2534" end="2548" title="trade creation" label="trade creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832039" start="2565" end="2580" title="trade diversion" label="trade diversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q355223" start="2827" end="2839" title="Frank Knight" label="Frank Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q268194" start="2931" end="2958" title="history of economic thought" label="history of economic thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004533" start="2994" end="3004" title="Bullionism" label="Bullionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="3148" end="3159" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949683" start="3322" end="3340" title="nuclear deterrence" label="nuclear deterrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="8100" end="8120" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423369" wikidata="Q6601157" url="?curid=423369" title="List of UK government scientific research institutes">
<text>This article contains a list of scientific research institutes in the United Kingdom that are owned by the government. 

==Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council==

*Babraham Institute
*Pirbright Institute
*Institute of Food Research
*Institute of Grassland and Environmental Research
*John Innes Centre
*Earlham Institute
*Roslin Institute
*Rothamsted Research
*Silsoe Research Institute (ceased operations in 2006)

==Science and Technology Facilities Council==

:&quot;Formerly Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council&quot;
*Chilbolton Observatory
*Daresbury Laboratory
*Rutherford Appleton Laboratory
**HM Nautical Almanac Office
*Diamond Light Source (86% stake, with the other 14% owned by the Wellcome Trust)
*UK Astronomy Technology Centre

==Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs==

*Central Science Laboratory (defunct)
*Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science
*Veterinary Laboratories Agency

==Department of Health==

*National Radiological Protection Board

==Department for Business, Innovation and Skills==

*National Physical Laboratory
*National Nuclear Laboratory
*Meteorological Office

==Ministry of Defence==

*Atomic Weapons Establishment
*Defence Science and Technology Laboratory
**Alverstoke
**Bedford
**Farnborough
**Fort Halstead
**Malvern
**Pershore
**Porton Down
**Portsdown West
**Winfrith

==Medical Research Council==

*Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit
*Laboratory of Molecular Biology
*Clinical Sciences Centre
*Francis Crick Institute
*National Institute for Medical Research (now defunct)
*Sorby Research Institute (now defunct)

==Natural Environment Research Council==

*British Antarctic Survey
*British Geological Survey
*Centre for Ecology and Hydrology
*National Oceanography Centre
* Plymouth Marine Laboratory
*National Centre for Atmospheric Science

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6601157" start="24" end="84" title="List of UK government scientific research institutes" label="list of scientific research institutes in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838012" start="182" end="200" title="Babraham Institute" label="Babraham Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039151" start="202" end="221" title="Pirbright Institute" label="Pirbright Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623133" start="223" end="249" title="Institute of Food Research" label="Institute of Food Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039940" start="251" end="300" title="Institute of Grassland and Environmental Research" label="Institute of Grassland and Environmental Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q365105" start="302" end="319" title="John Innes Centre" label="John Innes Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736112" start="321" end="338" title="Earlham Institute" label="Earlham Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633976" start="340" end="356" title="Roslin Institute" label="Roslin Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326711" start="358" end="377" title="Rothamsted Experimental Station" label="Rothamsted Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054530" start="497" end="544" title="Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council" label="Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097620" start="552" end="574" title="Chilbolton Observatory" label="Chilbolton Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222556" start="576" end="596" title="Daresbury Laboratory" label="Daresbury Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q45820" start="598" end="628" title="Rutherford Appleton Laboratory" label="Rutherford Appleton Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369664" start="631" end="657" title="HM Nautical Almanac Office" label="HM Nautical Almanac Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q652731" start="659" end="679" title="Diamond Light Source" label="Diamond Light Source"/>
<link wikidata="Q326276" start="724" end="738" title="Wellcome Trust" label="Wellcome Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864813" start="741" end="771" title="UK Astronomy Technology Centre" label="UK Astronomy Technology Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061800" start="830" end="856" title="Central Science Laboratory" label="Central Science Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062430" start="868" end="925" title="Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science" label="Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923705" start="927" end="957" title="Veterinary Laboratories Agency" label="Veterinary Laboratories Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975171" start="986" end="1024" title="National Radiological Protection Board" label="National Radiological Protection Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967606" start="1079" end="1107" title="National Physical Laboratory, UK" label="National Physical Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974595" start="1109" end="1136" title="National Nuclear Laboratory" label="National Nuclear Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851405" start="1138" end="1159" title="Met Office" label="Meteorological Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q757609" start="1187" end="1215" title="Atomic Weapons Establishment" label="Atomic Weapons Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251253" start="1217" end="1258" title="DSTL" label="Defence Science and Technology Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232208" start="1335" end="1346" title="Porton Down" label="Porton Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141152" start="1407" end="1440" title="Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit" label="Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q185800" start="1442" end="1473" title="Laboratory of Molecular Biology" label="Laboratory of Molecular Biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q326044" start="1501" end="1524" title="Francis Crick Institute" label="Francis Crick Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1732774" start="1526" end="1565" title="National Institute for Medical Research" label="National Institute for Medical Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q20981953" start="1581" end="1605" title="Sorby Research Institute" label="Sorby Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q918757" start="1664" end="1688" title="British Antarctic Survey" label="British Antarctic Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q919304" start="1690" end="1715" title="British Geological Survey" label="British Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062417" start="1717" end="1749" title="Centre for Ecology and Hydrology" label="Centre for Ecology and Hydrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12812368" start="1751" end="1779" title="National Oceanography Centre" label="National Oceanography Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205824" start="1782" end="1808" title="Plymouth Marine Laboratory" label="Plymouth Marine Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971398" start="1810" end="1849" title="National Centre for Atmospheric Science" label="National Centre for Atmospheric Science"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423372" wikidata="Q1133610" url="?curid=423372" title="Wild Things (film)">
<text>Wild Things is a 1998 American neo-noir erotic thriller film directed by John McNaughton and starring Matt Dillon, Kevin Bacon, Neve Campbell, Denise Richards, Theresa Russell, Robert Wagner, and Bill Murray. It follows a high school guidance counselor in South Florida who is accused of rape by two female students and a series of subsequent revelations after a police officer begins investigating the alleged crimes.

&quot;Wild Things&quot; was followed by three direct-to-DVD sequels: &quot;Wild Things 2&quot; (2004), &quot;Wild Things: Diamonds in the Rough&quot; (2005), and &quot;Wild Things: Foursome&quot; (2010). Since its release, the original film has been regarded as a cult classic.

==Plot==
In the upscale Miami suburb of Blue Bay, wealthy student Kelly Van Ryan accuses her high school guidance counselor, Sam Lombardo, of raping her. Following the accusation, her outcast classmate Suzie Toller, who comes from a poor family in the Everglades, makes a similar accusation. Sam hires attorney Kenneth Bowden to defend him. At trial, Suzie succumbs to pressure during cross-examination and admits that she and Kelly concocted the false allegations to get revenge on Sam: Suzie for his failure to bail her out of jail on a minor drug charge and Kelly for his affair with her mother, real estate heiress Sandra Van Ryan. Sam and Kenneth negotiate an $8.5 million settlement for defamation, which Sandra pays out using funds from a trust Kelly would receive only upon Sandra&#x27;s death. After the payout, it is revealed that Sam and the two girls were accomplices, using the trial to extort money from Sandra.

Police detective Ray Duquette suspects the trio is working on a scam. Against the wishes of the district attorney&#x27;s office, he continues investigating Sam. He tells Kelly and Suzie that Sam has already transferred the money to an off-shore account. Suzie panics and goes to Kelly, who comforts her. Kelly, however, calls Sam and tells him they may have to get rid of Suzie. In the pool, Suzie attacks Kelly. They fight but eventually end up kissing while watched by Ray, unbeknownst to them. A few nights later, at the beach, Sam bludgeons Suzie to death while Kelly waits nearby. The two then drive to the swamp, where Sam disposes of the plastic-wrapped body.

Ray and his partner, Detective Gloria Perez, investigate Suzie&#x27;s disappearance. Her blood and teeth are found at the beach, while her car is located abandoned at a bus terminal. The D.A.&#x27;s office again insists that Ray drop the case, but he asks Gloria to watch Sam. Sam shows Gloria his files from the school on Kelly, which suggests she is troubled and violent. Meanwhile, Ray goes to the Van Ryans&#x27; guest house to confront the scared and upset Kelly, but they end up shooting each other. Sandra rushes over as Ray stumbles out of the house; he has sustained a gunshot wound to the shoulder, while Sandra discovers Kelly dead from two shots to the chest. Ray claims he was forced to shoot Kelly in self-defense. No charges are filed against him, but he is dismissed from the force for disobeying orders.

It is revealed that Sam is in cahoots with Ray. Although Sam is displeased that Ray killed Kelly instead of simply framing her for Suzie&#x27;s murder, he agrees that they now have fewer loose ends to deal with. The two go sailing on Sam&#x27;s boat, where Sam attempts to kill Ray. When Ray fights back, he is shot and killed with a speargun by Suzie, who staged her murder with Sam. Suzie reveals she was motivated to kill Ray to avenge the murder of her best friend, Davey, whom Ray wrongly shot to death and framed as a self-defense killing. Sam reluctantly accepts a drink from Suzie, who assures him she will not double-cross him; however, upon drinking it, he realizes she has poisoned it before Suzie knocks him overboard and sails into the sunset.

Suzie was the ultimate mastermind of the plot: Upon finding that Sam and Kelly were in a sexual relationship, Suzie blackmailed Sam with photographs of the two using drugs during sex, convincing him to help with her scheme. Suzie subsequently orchestrated the meeting between Sam and Ray at a local bar. During her staged murder on the beach, Suzie pulled out her own teeth with pliers to make her death appear legitimate. Ray shot Kelly first before shooting himself in the shoulder to pretend he killed her in self-defense. Finally, with Kelly, Ray, and Sam all dead, Suzie is met by Kenneth, who gives her a briefcase full of cash that he describes as &quot;just walking around money&quot; and a check for millions of dollars. As she leaves, he tells her to &quot;be good&quot; before taking her drink.

==Cast==
==Analysis and themes==
Literary scholar John Thorburn notes that &quot;Wild Things&quot; is loosely based on several figures in Greek tragedies, namely Medea, whom he describes the character of Suzie as a &quot;modern-day version of.&quot; He also notes that Kelly functions as a Phaedra-like figure, while Sam exemplifies both Jason and Hippolytus. Thorburn suggests that the film&#x27;s &quot;most under-appreciated element is screenwriter Stephen Peters’s obvious debt to classical mythology, tragedy and, especially, two Euripidean plays, &quot;Medea&quot; (431 BC) and &quot;Hippolytus&quot; (428 BC). Suzie is met by police, Duquette and Perez, while reading &quot;Death on the Installment Plan&quot;.

==Production==
===Development===
The film&#x27;s screenplay was written by screenwriter Stephen Peters, who had previously written the independent film &quot;Dead Center&quot; (1993). John McNaughton, who had garnered acclaim for the horror film &quot;&quot; (1986), became involved with the project as he was seeking to make a more mainstream feature.

Kem Nunn was appointed to perform some rewrites of Peters&#x27;s original version. McNaughton commented that Peters&#x27;s original draft &quot;is brilliant on plot and we didn&#x27;t change any of it, but I felt Kem Nunn was stronger on texture and character and place. The producer, Peter Guber, sent us off to Florida, where none of us had spent much time and we spent ten days there getting shepherded around to places and meeting people who were like people in the story. When I read the script I thought &quot;As crazy as it is, I do believe it could happen in the world that we live in.&quot; Once I believe that a story can happen in the real world, then I know how to direct it.&quot; Kevin Bacon described the script as &quot;the trashiest thing he had ever read&quot; but &quot;Every few pages, there was another surprise.&quot; Bacon also executive produced.

The original screenplay featured a gay scene between Sergeant Duquette and Sam Lombardo near the end of the film, in which the men kiss in the shower, revealing that—similarly to Suzie and Kelly—the two had a homosexual relationship that allowed Lombardo to prey on Duquette in order to manipulate him and ultimately con him out of the money. According to Kevin Bacon, the scene was modified to eliminate any suggestion of a sexual relationship between the men, as the film&#x27;s financiers &quot;didn&#x27;t like the idea of men making out. They felt it went too far.&quot;

===Casting===

Robert Downey Jr. was the first choice for the role of Sam Lombardo, which ultimately went to Matt Dillon. Downey was considered because of his highly publicized drug problems, and although he was in recovery he was seen as too great an insurance risk. Producer Rodney Liber said &quot;we couldn&#x27;t make it work,&quot; and the production company even offered to put up some of the money but &quot;There were just too many lawyers and insurance people and bond-company people involved.&quot;

John McNaughton said Denise Richards&#x27; first audition was good but her much improved second audition convinced them to cast her. Richards&#x27; lawyer negotiated a detailed contract about how much nudity would be filmed, including the option to use a body double. Richards did not use a double and filmed the scene herself after drinking a pitcher of margaritas with Neve Campbell. Campbell&#x27;s contract had a strict no-nudity clause. Campbell took on the role wanting to challenge herself, to do something different from her &quot;Party of Five&quot; character, and to avoid being typecast. Natasha Lyonne also auditioned for Suzie.

Bacon also had a no nudity clause in his contract but without giving it much thought allowed McNaughton to use the shot that he thought looked best, and a moment of frontal nudity was included in the film. He was surprised by how many questions he got about it at the American press showing, and noted that the European press did not ask about it at all.

===Filming===
The film was shot in the spring and summer of 1997, between April 21 and July 16. It is unclear whether or not Neve Campbell was still working on the film in the latter stages of shooting, since her film &quot;Scream 2&quot; began shooting in the middle of June 1997, whilst &quot;Wild Things&quot; was also still shooting.

Filming in the Everglades proved difficult due to severe weather conditions. A tornado almost crushed a couple of trailers. McNaughton said production had to be halted and the police called when a real dead body floated into view.

==Music==
The background score by George S. Clinton was released on April, 7 1998 by soundtrack label Varèse Sarabande. Some of his score was a collaboration with the jazz rock band Morphine. Throughout the film, songs by various different artists are also briefly used, including songs by Barry White, Iggy Pop, K&#x27;s Choice, Lauren Christy, Smash Mouth, Sugar Ray, Third Eye Blind, Tito Puente and Transister. However, no accompanying soundtrack album with these songs would be released for the film.

==Release==
===Box office===
The film grossed $30.1 million in the United States and Canada and $37.1 million internationally for a worldwide total of $67.2 million.

===Critical response===
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 64% based on reviews from 121 critics, with an average rating of 5.80/10. The site&#x27;s consensus states: &quot;&quot;Wild Things&quot; is a delightfully salacious, flesh-exposed romp that also requires a high degree of love for trash cinema.&quot; On Metacritic, it has a score of 52/100 based on reviews from 20 critics, indicating &quot;mixed or average reviews&quot;. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a grade &quot;C+&quot; on scale of A to F.

Roger Ebert gave the film three stars out of four, praising McNaughton&#x27;s directing and the plot twists. He described it as &quot;lurid trash, with a plot so twisted they&#x27;re still explaining it during the closing titles. It&#x27;s like a three-way collision between a softcore sex film, a soap opera and a B-grade noir. I liked it.&quot; Gene Siskel gave the film a marginal recommendation.

Janet Maslin of &quot;The New York Times&quot; praised Campbell and Richard&#x27;s performances, and also McNaughton&#x27;s direction for adding &quot;a decadent gloss to this far-fetched, quintuple-crossing tale&quot;, although she criticized the plot as being &quot;loony&quot;.

In &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, Desson Howe described the film as &quot;clearly a crock&quot;, and although it &quot;may not have a single redeeming feature, but it doesn&#x27;t have a dull moment, either.&quot; In the same newspaper, Stephen Hunter described the film as being &quot;as tawdry as someone else&#x27;s lingerie, yet not without a certain prurient watchability&quot;. &quot;The Orlando Sentinel&quot; said that the film, overall, missed the mark, but that Murray in his small role manages to steal the show.

&quot;Variety&quot; praised the casting of Dillon, Bacon, Campbell, Richards, Russell, Murray and Snodgress: &quot;[Y]ou have an ensemble that appears to be enjoying the challenge of offbeat roles and unusual material. There&#x27;s not a wrong note struck by the game group of players.&quot; The magazine also praised the film as &quot;original&quot; with a &quot;glossy, unreal quality that nicely dovetails with the pulse of the drama&quot;.

===Awards===

George S. Clinton was nominated for Best Music at 25th Saturn Awards, but lost to John Carpenter for &quot;Vampires&quot;, another film from Columbia Pictures. The film was nominated for Best Kiss at the MTV Movie Awards. At the 1998 Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards, Bill Murray won the Best Supporting Actor for &quot;Rushmore&quot; and &quot;Wild Things&quot;.
The film won a Blockbuster Entertainment Awards for Daphne Rubin-Vega in the category &quot;Favorite Supporting Actress - Suspense&quot;.

===Home media===
Sony Pictures Home Entertainment released the film in a standard DVD edition, followed by an extended edition featuring the unrated cut of the film in 2004. The unrated cut was subsequently released by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment on Blu-ray in 2007. In May 2022, Arrow Films released &quot;Wild Things&quot; in a limited 4K UHD Blu-ray edition featuring both the theatrical and extended unrated cuts of the film.

==Legacy==
In a retrospective on the film celebrating its twentieth anniversary, &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; writer Chris Nashawaty noted that &quot;Wild Things&quot; marked a peak in lurid sex-themed thriller films in the late-1990s, summarizing: &quot;As a rule, movies like &quot;Wild Things&quot; fight an uphill battle with critics who would want to seem above titillation. But this was one of those rare films whose underlying smarts couldn&#x27;t be denied.&quot;

McNaughton commented in 2018 that he considered &quot;Wild Things&quot; his &quot;most political film&quot; due to its focus on social class, concluding: &quot;Who wins? The girl from the trailer park! She’s all alone on the ninety foot sail boat, out on the Caribbean. Pretty much everyone else is dead. That was the nineties, with the concentration of wealth. But the girl from the trailer park takes ‘em all down. You know, I’m from the striving working class. A lot of the kids I grew up with, the parents didn’t care if their kid dropped out of school. But some of us had parents who insisted their children have an education, go to college, escape all that. So that’s where my heart always lies.&quot;

===Related works===
Three sequels were released direct-to-video: &quot;Wild Things 2&quot; (2004), &quot;Wild Things: Diamonds in the Rough&quot; (2005) and &quot;Wild Things: Foursome&quot; (2010). The sequels recycled much of the plot, dialogue, and direction of the first film, albeit with different actors. All three films take place in Blue Bay and its high school, and include the Blue Bay Police Department (BBPD). In 2006, the producers tried to develop a spiritual successor and John McNaughton was in talks to again direct a script by Stephen Peters titled &quot;Backstabbers&quot;. Richards and Campbell were also in talks to star.

==References==
==Sources==

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2421031" start="31" end="39" title="neo-noir" label="neo-noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439025" start="40" end="55" title="erotic thriller" label="erotic thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q522382" start="73" end="88" title="John McNaughton" label="John McNaughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q193070" start="102" end="113" title="Matt Dillon" label="Matt Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454165" start="115" end="126" title="Kevin Bacon" label="Kevin Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193482" start="128" end="141" title="Neve Campbell" label="Neve Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q206833" start="143" end="158" title="Denise Richards" label="Denise Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q253467" start="160" end="175" title="Theresa Russell" label="Theresa Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q310493" start="177" end="190" title="Robert Wagner" label="Robert Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q29250" start="196" end="207" title="Bill Murray" label="Bill Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567226" start="256" end="269" title="South Florida" label="South Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q844580" start="466" end="479" title="Direct-to-video" label="direct-to-DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302071" start="495" end="508" title="Wild Things 2" label="Wild Things 2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="529" end="563" title="Wild Things: Diamonds in the Rough" label="Wild Things: Diamonds in the Rough"/>
<link wikidata="" start="588" end="609" title="Wild Things: Foursome" label="Wild Things: Foursome"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="684" end="696" title="cult classic" label="cult classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="723" end="728" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="841" end="847" title="rape" label="raping"/>
<link wikidata="Q597281" start="951" end="961" title="Everglades" label="Everglades"/>
<link wikidata="Q195414" start="1084" end="1101" title="cross-examination" label="cross-examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="1392" end="1402" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q854022" start="1445" end="1450" title="Trust law" label="trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682006" start="3450" end="3458" title="speargun" label="speargun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34284" start="3990" end="3999" title="blackmail" label="blackmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q174278" start="4843" end="4848" title="Medea" label="Medea"/>
<link wikidata="Q212818" start="4971" end="4978" title="Phaedra (mythology)" label="Phaedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q176758" start="5019" end="5024" title="Jason" label="Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q338201" start="5029" end="5039" title="Hippolytus of Athens" label="Hippolytus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="5216" end="5226" title="Euripides" label="Euripidean"/>
<link wikidata="Q286381" start="5240" end="5245" title="Medea (play)" label="Medea"/>
<link wikidata="Q375786" start="5271" end="5281" title="Hippolytus (play)" label="Hippolytus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193482" start="5298" end="5303" title="Neve Campbell" label="Suzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779187" start="5362" end="5391" title="Death on Credit" label="Death on the Installment Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q522382" start="5584" end="5599" title="John McNaughton" label="John McNaughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q104969456" start="6661" end="6664" title="gay men" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q165219" start="7218" end="7235" title="Robert Downey Jr." label="Robert Downey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1048363" start="8253" end="8266" title="Party of Five" label="Party of Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="8303" end="8311" title="Typecasting" label="typecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q234207" start="8313" end="8327" title="Natasha Lyonne" label="Natasha Lyonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q270599" start="8936" end="8944" title="Scream 2" label="Scream 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q597281" start="9066" end="9076" title="Everglades" label="Everglades"/>
<link wikidata="Q364631" start="9317" end="9334" title="George S. Clinton" label="George S. Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186369" start="9385" end="9401" title="Varèse Sarabande" label="Varèse Sarabande"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="9450" end="9459" title="jazz rock" label="jazz rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164913" start="9465" end="9473" title="Morphine (band)" label="Morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q213647" start="9573" end="9584" title="Barry White" label="Barry White"/>
<link wikidata="Q182665" start="9586" end="9594" title="Iggy Pop" label="Iggy Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595961" start="9596" end="9611" title="K&amp;#x27;s Choice" label="K&amp;#x27;s Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094097" start="9613" end="9627" title="Lauren Christy" label="Lauren Christy"/>
<link wikidata="Q740434" start="9629" end="9640" title="Smash Mouth" label="Smash Mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q575400" start="9642" end="9651" title="Sugar Ray" label="Sugar Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155385" start="9653" end="9668" title="Third Eye Blind" label="Third Eye Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q317122" start="9670" end="9681" title="Tito Puente" label="Tito Puente"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834306" start="9686" end="9696" title="Transister" label="Transister"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="9984" end="9999" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="10289" end="10299" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="10429" end="10440" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="10499" end="10510" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q969105" start="10846" end="10857" title="Gene Siskel" label="Gene Siskel"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="10900" end="10912" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="10922" end="10940" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="11191" end="11210" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024639" start="11218" end="11229" title="Desson Howe" label="Desson Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q983243" start="11421" end="11435" title="Stephen Hunter" label="Stephen Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q746424" start="11574" end="11594" title="The Orlando Sentinel" label="The Orlando Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="11715" end="11722" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q364631" start="12168" end="12185" title="George S. Clinton" label="George S. Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757366" start="12204" end="12214" title="Saturn Award for Best Music" label="Best Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226441" start="12218" end="12236" title="25th Saturn Awards" label="25th Saturn Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q95008" start="12250" end="12264" title="John Carpenter" label="John Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q669231" start="12275" end="12283" title="Vampires (1998 film)" label="Vampires"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="12309" end="12326" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682203" start="12397" end="12445" title="1998 Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards" label="1998 Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q506565" start="12467" end="12488" title="Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347393" start="12499" end="12507" title="Rushmore (film)" label="Rushmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906822" start="12558" end="12590" title="Blockbuster Entertainment Awards" label="Blockbuster Entertainment Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015861" start="12595" end="12612" title="Daphne Rubin-Vega" label="Daphne Rubin-Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q734401" start="12699" end="12731" title="Sony Pictures Home Entertainment" label="Sony Pictures Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="12764" end="12767" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="12937" end="12944" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796124" start="12967" end="12978" title="Arrow Films" label="Arrow Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953724" start="13025" end="13039" title="Ultra HD Blu-ray" label="4K UHD Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="13205" end="13225" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="13723" end="13735" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426493" start="13783" end="13795" title="trailer park" label="trailer park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302071" start="14375" end="14388" title="Wild Things 2" label="Wild Things 2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14409" end="14443" title="Wild Things: Diamonds in the Rough" label="Wild Things: Diamonds in the Rough"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14467" end="14488" title="Wild Things: Foursome" label="Wild Things: Foursome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155016" start="14768" end="14787" title="spiritual successor" label="spiritual successor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423373" wikidata="Q225683" url="?curid=423373" title="WTF">
<text>WTF most often refers to:
*WTF (Internet slang), an expression of disbelief

WTF may also refer to:

==Arts and entertainment==

===Books and online publications===
*&quot;The Daily WTF&quot;, a blog about information technology &quot;perversions&quot;
*&quot;WTF? What&#x27;s the Future and Why It&#x27;s Up to Us&quot;, a book by Tim O&#x27;Reilly, 2017
*&quot;WTF?&quot; (book), a book by the British journalist Robert Peston, 2017

===Film, radio, TV and videogames===
*&quot;Weird, True &amp; Freaky&quot;, a documentary series on Animal Planet
*&quot;Work Time Fun&quot;, a video game for the PlayStation Portable
*&quot;WTF&quot;, a segment on sexual fetishes on G4TV&#x27;s &quot;Attack of the Show&quot;
*WTF, the former name of the British music television channel Now Rock
*&quot;WTF!&quot; (2017 film), a 2017 US horror film
*&quot;W.T.F.&quot; (&quot;South Park&quot;), (Wrestling Takedown Federation), the 191st episode of &quot;South Park&quot;
*&quot;WTF with Marc Maron&quot;, a podcast hosted by comedian Marc Maron
*WXTF-LP (WTF Radio), an American low-power non-profit community radio station in Harrisville, Michigan
* &quot;WTF!: Wrestling&#x27;s Trashiest Fighters&quot;, episode of &quot;RuPaul&#x27;s Drag Race&quot;

=== Music ===
*&quot;WTF?&quot;, an electronic music supergroup comprising deadmau5, Tommy Lee, Steve Duda, and DJ Aero

====Albums====
*&quot;WTF?!&quot;, by industrial band KMFDM, 2011
*&quot;W.T.F. (Wisdom, Tenacity and Focus)&quot;, by rapper Vanilla Ice, 2011

====Songs====
*&quot;WTF&quot;, by Heart from Red Velvet Car, 2010
*&quot;WTF&quot;, by Wiz Khalifa from &quot;Cabin Fever&quot;, 2011
*&quot;WTF?&quot; (song), by OK GO, 2010
*&quot;WTF (Where They From)&quot;, by Missy Elliott and Pharrell, 2015
*&quot;WTF&quot;, by Sasha Alex Sloan from I Blame the World, 2022
*&quot;WTF&quot; (YoungBoy Never Broke Again and Nicki Minaj song), 2023

===Theatre===
* Williamstown Theatre Festival, Massachusetts, US
* World Theatre Festival (disambiguation), various festivals

==Organisations==
* Western Task Force, in World War II&#x27;s Operation Torch
* Wikileaks Task Force, of the US CIA
* World Taekwondo, previously known as the World Taekwondo Federation (WTF)

==Other initialisms and codes==
* ATP World Tour Finals (ATP WTF)
* Wobbly Transformation Format – 8-bit, an extension of UTF-8
* .wtf, an Internet top-level domain
* wtf, language code for the Watiwa language, a Trans–New Guinean language
* &quot;WTF star&quot; (&quot;Where&#x27;s The Flux&quot;), or KIC 8462852, an unusual star

== See also ==
* 
* What the fuck (disambiguation)
* Whiskey Tango Foxtrot (disambiguation)
* WT1190F, a large piece of space debris that came down to Earth on November 13, 2015
* WTFPL, Do What the Fuck You Want To Public License, a permissive software license</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225683" start="0" end="3" title="WTF" label="WTF"/>
<link wikidata="Q31928" start="27" end="47" title="WTF (Internet slang)" label="WTF (Internet slang)"/>
<link wikidata="Q225683" start="77" end="80" title="WTF" label="WTF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728737" start="172" end="185" title="The Daily WTF" label="The Daily WTF"/>
<link wikidata="Q347691" start="332" end="349" title="Tim O&amp;#x27;Reilly" label="Tim O&amp;#x27;Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053422" start="357" end="380" title="WTF? (book)" label="&amp;quot;WTF?&amp;quot; (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980307" start="480" end="504" title="Weird, True &amp;amp; Freaky" label="Weird, True &amp;amp; Freaky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728552" start="557" end="570" title="Work Time Fun" label="Work Time Fun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817981" start="688" end="706" title="Attack of the Show" label="Attack of the Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784800" start="775" end="783" title="Now Rock" label="Now Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q39073496" start="785" end="813" title="WTF! (2017 film)" label="&amp;quot;WTF!&amp;quot; (2017 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q787009" start="838" end="881" title="W.T.F. (South Park)" label="&amp;quot;W.T.F.&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;South Park&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956150" start="967" end="986" title="WTF with Marc Maron" label="WTF with Marc Maron"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189926" start="1035" end="1042" title="WXTF-LP" label="WXTF-LP"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1146" end="1187" title="WTF!: Wrestling&amp;#x27;s Trashiest Fighters" label="WTF!: Wrestling&amp;#x27;s Trashiest Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q49009" start="1318" end="1326" title="deadmau5" label="deadmau5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956146" start="1386" end="1391" title="WTF?!" label="WTF?!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945247" start="1437" end="1472" title="W.T.F. (Wisdom, Tenacity and Focus)" label="W.T.F. (Wisdom, Tenacity and Focus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305190" start="1555" end="1569" title="Red Velvet Car" label="Red Velvet Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015423" start="1614" end="1637" title="Cabin Fever (mixtape)" label="&amp;quot;Cabin Fever&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956147" start="1645" end="1668" title="WTF? (song)" label="&amp;quot;WTF?&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21480378" start="1692" end="1713" title="WTF (Where They From)" label="WTF (Where They From)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111730437" start="1800" end="1817" title="I Blame the World" label="I Blame the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q118904642" start="1825" end="1890" title="WTF (YoungBoy Never Broke Again and Nicki Minaj song)" label="&amp;quot;WTF&amp;quot; (YoungBoy Never Broke Again and Nicki Minaj song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021310" start="1914" end="1943" title="Williamstown Theatre Festival" label="Williamstown Theatre Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q110084047" start="1965" end="2004" title="World Theatre Festival (disambiguation)" label="World Theatre Festival (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="2045" end="2063" title="Western Task Force" label="Western Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584566" start="2106" end="2126" title="Wikileaks Task Force" label="Wikileaks Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q696406" start="2144" end="2159" title="World Taekwondo" label="World Taekwondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q270907" start="2253" end="2274" title="ATP World Tour Finals" label="ATP World Tour Finals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2341" end="2346" title="UTF-8#WTF-8" label="UTF-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q20577917" start="2349" end="2353" title=".wtf" label=".wtf"/>
<link wikidata="Q35316" start="2413" end="2428" title="Watiwa language" label="Watiwa language"/>
<link wikidata="Q21104086" start="2467" end="2475" title="WTF star" label="WTF star"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130703" start="2572" end="2602" title="What the fuck (disambiguation)" label="What the fuck (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993900" start="2605" end="2643" title="Whiskey Tango Foxtrot (disambiguation)" label="Whiskey Tango Foxtrot (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21210774" start="2646" end="2653" title="WT1190F" label="WT1190F"/>
<link wikidata="Q152481" start="2732" end="2737" title="WTFPL" label="WTFPL"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423379" wikidata="Q2665934" url="?curid=423379" title="Interval class">
<text>In musical set theory, an interval class (often abbreviated: ic), also known as unordered pitch-class interval, interval distance, undirected interval, or &quot;(even completely incorrectly) as &#x27;interval mod 6&#x27;&quot; (; ), is the shortest distance in pitch class space between two unordered pitch classes. For example, the interval class between pitch classes 4 and 9 is 5 because 9 − 4 = 5 is less than 4 − 9 = −5 ≡ 7 (mod 12). See modular arithmetic for more on modulo 12. The largest interval class is 6 since any greater interval &quot;n&quot; may be reduced to 12 − &quot;n&quot;.

== Use of interval classes ==

The concept of interval class accounts for octave, enharmonic, and inversional equivalency. Consider, for instance, the following passage:

(To hear a MIDI realization, click the following: 

In the example above, all four labeled pitch-pairs, or dyads, share a common &quot;intervallic color.&quot; In atonal theory, this similarity is denoted by interval class—ic 5, in this case. Tonal theory, however, classifies the four intervals differently: interval 1 as perfect fifth; 2, perfect twelfth; 3, diminished sixth; and 4, perfect fourth.

== Notation of interval classes==

The unordered pitch class interval &quot;i&quot;(&quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;) may be defined as

:formula_1

where &quot;i&quot; is an ordered pitch-class interval .

While notating unordered intervals with parentheses, as in the example directly above, is perhaps the standard, some theorists, including Robert Morris, prefer to use braces, as in &quot;i&quot;{&quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;}. Both notations are considered acceptable.

== Table of interval class equivalencies ==

==See also==
*Pitch interval
*Similarity relation

==References==
==Sources==
*

==Further reading==
*Friedmann, Michael (1990). &quot;Ear Training for Twentieth-Century Music&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press. (cloth) (pbk)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7456314" start="3" end="21" title="set theory (music)" label="musical set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665934" start="26" end="40" title="Interval class" label="interval class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665934" start="61" end="63" title="Interval class" label="ic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665934" start="80" end="110" title="Interval class" label="unordered pitch-class interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665934" start="112" end="129" title="Interval class" label="interval distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665934" start="131" end="150" title="Interval class" label="undirected interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198846" start="261" end="278" title="pitch class space" label="pitch class space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760309" start="301" end="312" title="pitch class" label="pitch class"/>
<link wikidata="Q319400" start="443" end="461" title="modular arithmetic" label="modular arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799665" start="474" end="480" title="modulo operation" label="modulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="671" end="677" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q837294" start="679" end="689" title="enharmonic" label="enharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q137685" start="695" end="718" title="inversional equivalency" label="inversional equivalency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318389" start="875" end="880" title="Dyad (music)" label="dyads"/>
<link wikidata="Q211745" start="931" end="937" title="atonal" label="atonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192822" start="1011" end="1016" title="tonality" label="Tonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990647" start="1512" end="1525" title="Robert Morris (composer)" label="Robert Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198856" start="1702" end="1716" title="Pitch interval" label="Pitch interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517809" start="1718" end="1737" title="Similarity relation" label="Similarity relation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423381" wikidata="Q3742333" url="?curid=423381" title="Etta Moten Barnett">
<text>Etta Moten Barnett (November 5, 1901 – January 2, 2004) was an American actress and contralto vocalist, who was identified with her signature role of &quot;Bess&quot; in &quot;Porgy and Bess&quot;. She created new roles for African-American women on stage and screen. After her performing career, Barnett was active in Chicago as a major philanthropist and civic activist, raising funds for and supporting cultural, social and church institutions. She also hosted a radio program in Chicago and represented the United States in several official delegations to nations in Africa.

==Biography==

===Early years===
Etta Moten was born in Weimar, Texas, the only child of a Methodist minister, Rev. Freeman F. Moten, and a teacher, his wife, Ida Norman Moten. She started singing as a child in the church choir.

Moten&#x27;s family put great importance on education, as her parents made sure she was enrolled in good schools no matter where they moved. Moten attended Paul Quinn College&#x27;s secondary school in Waco, Texas. She then attended Western University, a historically black college (HBCU) in Quindaro, Kansas, where she studied music. To pay her tuition, she joined a quartet on Topeka&#x27;s WREN radio, performed on the Chautauqua circuit, and spent summers with the Jackson Jubilee Singers. She completed her education at the University of Kansas, where she earned a B.A. in voice and drama in 1931. She became the first student to present a recital in the campus&#x27;s newly constructed Hoch Auditorium. Moten became a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority.

===Career===
Moten Barnett&#x27;s first job began at Lincoln University. She received a teaching contract, which was short-lived when her father informed her that she would be moving to New York. Moten moved to New York City, where she first performed as a soloist with the Eva Jessye Choir. Jessye was a groundbreaking collaborator with Virgil Thomson and George Gershwin. In 1931, she performed in &quot;Fast and Furious&quot;, a musical revue written by Zora Neale Hurston. Moten was cast in the Broadway show &quot;Zombie&quot;.

She performed in two musical films released in 1933: &quot;Flying Down to Rio&quot; (singing &quot;The Carioca&quot;) and a more substantial role as a war widow in the Busby Berkeley musical &quot;Gold Diggers of 1933&quot; (singing the emotive &quot;My Forgotten Man&quot; with Joan Blondell). Also in 1933, she dubbed the singing of Theresa Harris in &quot;Professional Sweetheart&quot;.

Up until this point, the representation of black women in movies was limited to maids or nannies (the Mammy archetype). Moten made a breakthrough with her roles in these movies and is generally recognized as the first black woman to do so.

On January 31, 1934, Moten became the first African American to perform at the White House in the 20th century, the first in over 50 years since Marie Selika Williams performed for President Rutherford B. Hayes and First Lady Lucy Webb Hayes in 1878. Moten performed &quot;The Forgotten Man&quot; from her movie &quot;Gold Diggers of 1933&quot; for President Franklin Delano Roosevelt at his birthday celebration. The song echoed Roosevelt&#x27;s campaign promise that he would remember the &quot;forgotten man&quot;.

Moten Barnett crossed over decades before that music-industry phrase existed. Disturbed by subtle but persistent racial discrimination, she persevered, believing she had to be &quot;twice as good to get anywhere at all&quot;.

Gershwin discussed her singing the part of Bess in his new work &quot;Porgy and Bess&quot;, which he had written with her in mind. She was concerned about trying a role above her natural range of contralto. In the 1942 revival, the part of Bess was rewritten. She did accept the role of Bess, but she would not sing the word &quot;nigger&quot;, which Ira Gershwin subsequently removed from the libretto. Through her performances on Broadway and with the national touring company until 1945, she captured Bess as her signature role.

She stopped performing in 1952 owing to vocal problems after doctors found a cyst on her vocal cords that required surgery. After her husband, Claude Barnett, died in 1967, she lived in Chicago, where she became active in the National Council of Negro Women, the Chicago Lyric Opera, and the Field Museum. She was also active in the DuSable Museum and the South Side Community Art Center.

In addition to activities with civic organizations, Moten Barnett served as a board member of both The Links, a service organization for African-American women, and her sorority, Alpha Kappa Alpha. She was also active in International Women&#x27;s Year activities and events in the 1980s.

==Cultural missions==
In the 50s and 60s Moten Barnett hosted a radio show in Chicago called &quot;I Remember When&quot;. Dozens of recordings of &quot;I Remember When&quot; are available at the Library of Congress and at the Schomburg Library in New York City. According to historian Angela Tate, Moten Barnett&#x27;s program, which covered a wide range of cultural issues, was perhaps the first &quot;Black woman’s radio broadcast created for Black listeners that also had a broader audience.&quot;

The United States government appointed her to be a representative on cultural missions to ten African nations. Etta&#x27;s marriage to Claude Barnett gave her the opportunity to travel to Africa. Claude, as the head of the Associated Negro Press, along with Etta and other members of the organization visited the continent frequently to gain African news information for the ANP to include in their issues. On March 6, 1957, Moten Barnett interviewed Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in Accra, Ghana] where they were both attending the celebration of Ghana&#x27;s independence from Great Britain—she as the wife of Claude Barnett, a prominent member of the official U.S. delegation headed by Vice President Richard Nixon, and King, fresh from the Montgomery Bus Boycott, as a man interested in the liberation of oppressed people globally, but with no official place in Ghana&#x27;s Independence Day festivities. The recording of this conversation, conducted in a Ghanaian radio studio where Moten Barnett was gathering recordings for her Chicago broadcasts, is also available at the Library of Congress and the Schomburg Library.

==Personal life==
About 1918 she married Curtis Brooks, who had been a teacher of hers in high school. They had three daughters: Sue, Gladys and Etta Vee, but divorced after six years of marriage.

In 1934, while living and working in New York, Moten married a second time, to Claude Albert Barnett, the head of the Associated Negro Press in Chicago. The two were happily married for 33 years, until his death in 1967.

Etta Moten Barnett died of pancreatic cancer at Chicago&#x27;s Mercy Hospital in 2004, aged 102.

==Legacy and honors==
* 1943 – University of Kansas, citation of merit
* 1958 – National Association of Business and Professional Women, citation for service
* 1973 – African Center of Atlanta University, citation for contributions to Afro-American music
* 1974 – WAIT, citation for contributions to City of Chicago
* 1979 – Inducted into Black Filmmakers Hall of Fame, noted as: Actress, Concert Artist
* 1983 – Candace Award from the National Coalition of 100 Black Women
* 1988 – African American Institute citation for service to Africa
* 1993 – Order of Lincoln from the State of Illinois
* 2001 – Inducted into the Emily Taylor Center for Women and Gender Equity, University of Kansas

===&quot;Honoris causa&quot; degrees===
* 1976 – Atlanta University
* 1983 – Spelman College
* 1987 – University of Illinois
* 1989 – Lincoln University (Pennsylvania)
* 1989 – North Carolina Central University

==Work==

===Stage===
* &quot;Fast and Furious&quot;, musical revue (1931)
* &quot;Zombie&quot;, a play (1932)
* &quot;Porgy and Bess&quot;, musical revival (1943)
* &quot;Lysistrata&quot;, Aristophanes&#x27; comedy, with an all-black cast (1946)

===Filmography===
* &quot;Ladies They Talk About&quot; (1933) as Singing Inmate (voice, uncredited)
* &quot;Gold Diggers of 1933&quot; (1933) as &quot;Remember My Forgotten Man&quot; Singer (uncredited)
* &quot;Bombshell&quot; (1933) as Singer (scenes deleted)
* &quot;Flying Down to Rio&quot; (1933) as The Colored Singer
* &quot;Professional Sweetheart&quot; (1933) (dubbed singing voice for Theresa Harris)
* &quot;Operator 13&quot; (1934) as Slave at Medicine Show (uncredited)
* &quot;The Green Pastures&quot; (1936) as Angel (uncredited)
* &quot;A Day at the Races&quot; (1937) as Black Singer (uncredited)
* &quot;Born to Sing&quot; (1942) as Soloist – &quot;Ballad for Americans&quot; (uncredited) (final film role)

==References==
==Further reading==
*Vernon, Ann (1997). &quot;Etta Moten Barnett: A Kansas City Tribute&quot; (29 pages) Goodreads

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3742333" start="0" end="18" title="Etta Moten Barnett" label="Etta Moten Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q37137" start="84" end="93" title="contralto" label="contralto"/>
<link wikidata="Q740920" start="176" end="190" title="Porgy and Bess" label="Porgy and Bess"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="224" end="240" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q677437" start="636" end="649" title="Weimar, Texas" label="Weimar, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="671" end="680" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529883" start="1043" end="1061" title="Western University (Kansas)" label="Western University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="1065" end="1091" title="historically black college" label="historically black college"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272207" start="1102" end="1118" title="Quindaro Townsite" label="Quindaro, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="1339" end="1359" title="University of Kansas" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308284" start="1544" end="1561" title="Alpha Kappa Alpha" label="Alpha Kappa Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379244" start="1847" end="1857" title="Eva Jessye" label="Eva Jessye"/>
<link wikidata="Q544485" start="1911" end="1925" title="Virgil Thomson" label="Virgil Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q123829" start="1930" end="1945" title="George Gershwin" label="George Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q220480" start="2030" end="2048" title="Zora Neale Hurston" label="Zora Neale Hurston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434597" start="2166" end="2184" title="Flying Down to Rio" label="Flying Down to Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938825" start="2206" end="2217" title="Carioca (1933 song)" label="The Carioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q503258" start="2275" end="2289" title="Busby Berkeley" label="Busby Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519422" start="2304" end="2324" title="Gold Diggers of 1933" label="Gold Diggers of 1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q242729" start="2386" end="2399" title="Joan Blondell" label="Joan Blondell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523796" start="2442" end="2456" title="Theresa Harris" label="Theresa Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153337" start="2466" end="2489" title="Professional Sweetheart" label="Professional Sweetheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844185" start="2600" end="2605" title="Mammy stereotype" label="Mammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="2818" end="2829" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763017" start="2884" end="2905" title="Marie Selika Williams" label="Marie Selika Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q35686" start="2930" end="2949" title="Rutherford B. Hayes" label="Rutherford B. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q234275" start="2965" end="2980" title="Lucy Webb Hayes" label="Lucy Webb Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="3098" end="3123" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin Delano Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469776" start="3236" end="3249" title="forgotten man" label="forgotten man"/>
<link wikidata="Q504635" start="3272" end="3284" title="Crossover music" label="crossed over"/>
<link wikidata="Q740920" start="3555" end="3569" title="Porgy and Bess" label="Porgy and Bess"/>
<link wikidata="Q61059" start="3836" end="3848" title="Ira Gershwin" label="Ira Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="3879" end="3887" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720980" start="4161" end="4175" title="Claude Albert Barnett" label="Claude Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971923" start="4244" end="4275" title="National Council of Negro Women" label="National Council of Negro Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q653885" start="4281" end="4300" title="Chicago Lyric Opera" label="Chicago Lyric Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122595" start="4310" end="4322" title="Field Museum" label="Field Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040299" start="4351" end="4365" title="DuSable Museum" label="DuSable Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568471" start="4374" end="4405" title="South Side Community Art Center" label="South Side Community Art Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747439" start="4507" end="4516" title="The Links" label="The Links"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308284" start="4587" end="4604" title="Alpha Kappa Alpha" label="Alpha Kappa Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q14626962" start="4629" end="4660" title="International Women&amp;#x27;s Year" label="International Women&amp;#x27;s Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q60762133" start="5423" end="5445" title="Associated Negro Press" label="Associated Negro Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="5655" end="5677" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="5681" end="5686" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379430" start="5745" end="5789" title="Ghana Independence Act 1957" label="Ghana&amp;#x27;s independence from Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="5901" end="5914" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q249367" start="5941" end="5963" title="Montgomery bus boycott" label="Montgomery Bus Boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640009" start="6063" end="6092" title="Independence Day (Ghana)" label="Ghana&amp;#x27;s Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060566" start="6305" end="6322" title="Schomburg Library" label="Schomburg Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720980" start="6602" end="6623" title="Claude Albert Barnett" label="Claude Albert Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q60762133" start="6641" end="6663" title="Associated Negro Press" label="Associated Negro Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q212961" start="6772" end="6789" title="pancreatic cancer" label="pancreatic cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951587" start="6793" end="6822" title="Mercy Hospital Medical Center" label="Chicago&amp;#x27;s Mercy Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q880233" start="7182" end="7211" title="Black Filmmakers Hall of Fame" label="Black Filmmakers Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q27851929" start="7256" end="7269" title="Candace Award" label="Candace Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971560" start="7279" end="7316" title="National Coalition of 100 Black Women" label="National Coalition of 100 Black Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098446" start="7393" end="7409" title="Order of Lincoln" label="Order of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572296" start="7584" end="7602" title="Atlanta University" label="Atlanta University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575916" start="7612" end="7627" title="Spelman College" label="Spelman College"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="7637" end="7659" title="University of Illinois" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570781" start="7669" end="7702" title="Lincoln University (Pennsylvania)" label="Lincoln University (Pennsylvania)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518804" start="7712" end="7745" title="North Carolina Central University" label="North Carolina Central University"/>
<link wikidata="Q740920" start="7866" end="7880" title="Porgy and Bess" label="Porgy and Bess"/>
<link wikidata="Q753907" start="7919" end="7929" title="Lysistrata" label="Lysistrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="7937" end="7949" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215933" start="8021" end="8043" title="Ladies They Talk About" label="Ladies They Talk About"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519422" start="8103" end="8123" title="Gold Diggers of 1933" label="Gold Diggers of 1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758675" start="8206" end="8215" title="Bombshell (1933 film)" label="Bombshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434597" start="8264" end="8282" title="Flying Down to Rio" label="Flying Down to Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153337" start="8326" end="8349" title="Professional Sweetheart" label="Professional Sweetheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523796" start="8389" end="8403" title="Theresa Harris" label="Theresa Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026605" start="8413" end="8424" title="Operator 13" label="Operator 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236049" start="8485" end="8503" title="The Green Pastures (film)" label="The Green Pastures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214749" start="8547" end="8565" title="A Day at the Races (film)" label="A Day at the Races"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952878" start="8616" end="8628" title="Born to Sing (1942 film)" label="Born to Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851327" start="8661" end="8681" title="Ballad for Americans" label="Ballad for Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359213" start="8841" end="8850" title="Goodreads" label="Goodreads"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423383" wikidata="Q256286" url="?curid=423383" title="Subramania Bharati">
<text>C. Subramania Bharati (born C. Subramaniyan 11 December 1882 – 12 September 1921) was an Indian writer, poet, journalist, teacher, Indian independence activist, social reformer and polyglot. He was bestowed the title &quot;Bharati&quot; for his poetry and was a pioneer of modern Tamil poetry. He is popularly known by his title &quot;Bharati&quot; or &quot;Bharathiyaar&quot; and also by the other title &quot;Mahakavi Bharati&quot; (&quot;the great poet Bharati&quot;). His works included patriotic songs composed during the Indian Independence movement. He fought for the emancipation of women, against child marriage, opposed the caste system, and advocated reforms of the society and religion.

Born in Ettayapuram of Tirunelveli district (present-day Thoothukudi) in 1882, Bharati had his early education in Tirunelveli. He later lived in Varanasi for sometime where he was exposed to Hindu theology and new languages. He worked as a journalist with many newspapers, including &quot;Swadesamitran&quot;, &quot;The Hindu&quot;, &quot;Bala Bharata&quot;, &quot;Vijaya&quot;, &quot;Chakravarthini&quot; and &quot;India&quot;. He considered Sister Nivedita, a disciple of Swami Vivekananda, as his guru.

In 1908, the British Government issued an arrest warrant for Bharathi which pushed him to live in exile in the French-controlled Pondicherry for about ten years until 1918. He was attacked by an Indian elephant at Thiruvallikeni Parthasarathy Temple whom he fed daily and died a few months later on 11 September 1921.

Bharthi was well-versed in several languages and had a passion for Tamil. His works covered political, social and spiritual themes. Songs and poems composed by Bharthi are used in Tamil literature, music and daily life. His works include &quot;Panjali Sabatham&quot;, &quot;Kannan Paatu&quot;, &quot;Kuyil Paatu&quot;, &quot;Paapa Paatu&quot;, &quot;Chinnanchriu Kiliye&quot;, &quot;Vinayagar Nanmanimalai&quot; and Tamil translations of Patanjali&#x27;s &quot;Yoga Sutra&quot; and &quot;Bhagavat Gita&quot;. Bharathi was the first poet whose literature was nationalized in 1949.

== Early life ==
Subramaniyan was born on 11 December 1882 in a Tamil Brahmin family in the town of Ettayapuram in Tirunelveli district, Madras Presidency (present day Thoothukudi district, Tamil Nadu) to Chinnaswami Iyer and Lakshmi Ammal. He was called as Subbaih by his parents. His mother died in 1887 when he was five years old and he was brought up by his father and his grandmother. 

Subramaniyan&#x27;s father wanted him to learn English and Maths and become an engineer. From a young age, Subramaniyan was inclined towards music and poetry. At the age of 11, he was given the title of &quot;Bharathi&quot; (meaning blessed by the goddess of learning Saraswati) for his excellence in poetry. In 1897, at the age of 15, he married Chellamma, who was then seven years old. His father died when he was sixteen. After the death of his father, he wrote a letter to the Raja of Ettayapuram, requesting for financial assistance. He was granted a job in the court of Ettayapuram, which he left after a while and went to Varanasi. During his stay in Varanasi, he was exposed to Hindu spirituality and nationalism and learned new languages such as Sanskrit, Hindi and English. He also changed his outward appearance, growing a beard and started wearing a turban.

== Literary life and independence activism ==

Bharathi returned to Ettayapuram during 1901 and served as the chief court poet of the Raja of Ettayapuram. He served as a Tamil teacher from August to November 1904 in Sethupathy High School in Madurai. During this period, Bharathi understood the need to be well-informed of the world outside and took interest in the world of journalism and the print media. In the same year, Bharathi joined as an assistant editor at &quot;Swadesamitran&quot;, a Tamil daily. In December 1905, he attended a session of Indian National Congress in Varanasi. On his journey back home, he met Sister Nivedita, who was Swami Vivekananda&#x27;s spiritual heir. She inspired Bharathi to recognize the rights and privilege of women. Bharathi considered her as a embodiment of Hindu goddess Shakti and considered Nivedita as his Guru. He later attended the Indian National Congress session in Calcutta held under Dadabhai Naoroji, which demanded Swaraj and boycott of British goods.

By April 1907, he started editing the Tamil weekly &quot;India&quot; and the English newspaper &quot;Bala Bharatham&quot; along with M.P.T. Acharya. These newspapers served as a means of expressing Bharathi&#x27;s creativity and he continued to write poems in these editions. His writings included diverse topics ranging from nationalism to contemplations on the relationship between God and Man. He also wrote on the Russian and French Revolutions.

Bharathi participated in the Indian National Congress meeting held in Surat in 1907 along with V.O. Chidambaram Pillai and Mandayam Srinivachariar. The meeting deepened the divisions within the Congress with a section preferring armed resistance. This section was primarily led by Bal Gangadhar Tilak, which was supported by Bharathi, Chidambaram Pillai and Varathachariyar. In 1908, the British instituted a case against Chidambaram Pillai. In the same year, the proprietor of the journal &quot;India&quot; in which Bharathi was writing, was arrested in Madras. Faced with the prospect of an imminent arrest, Bharathi escaped to Pondicherry, which was under the French rule. 

In Pondicherry, Bharathi edited and published the weekly journal &quot;India&quot;, a Tamil daily &quot;Vijaya&quot;, an English monthly &quot;Bala Bharatham&quot; and a local weekly &quot;Suryodayam&quot;. The British tried to ban Bharathi&#x27;s publications and the newspapers &quot;India&quot; and &quot;Vijaya&quot; were banned in British India in 1909. During his exile, Bharathi had the opportunity to meet other revolutionary leaders of the Indian Independence movement like Aurobindo, Lajpat Rai and V. V. Subrahmanya Iyer, who had also sought asylum under the French. Bharathi assisted Aurobindo in publishing the journals &quot;Arya&quot; and &quot;Karma Yogi&quot;. He also started learning Vedic literature. Three of his greatest works namely, &quot;Kuyil Pattu&quot;, &quot;Panjali Sabatham&quot; and &quot;Kannan Pattu&quot; were composed during 1912. He also translated Vedic hymns, Patanjali&#x27;s &quot;Yoga Sutra&quot; and &quot;Bhagavat Gita&quot; to Tamil language. 

When Bharathi entered the British India near Cuddalore in November 1918, he was arrested. He was imprisoned in the Central prison in Cuddalore for three weeks from 20 November to 14 December. He was released after the intervention of Annie Besant and C.P. Ramaswamy Aiyar. He was stricken by poverty and ill health during this period. In the following year, Bharathi met Gandhi for the first time. He resumed editing &quot;Swadesamitran&quot; in 1920 from Madras.

== Death ==
Bharathi was badly affected by the imprisonments and struggled from ill health. In 1920, a general amnesty was issued which finally removed restrictions on his movements. He delivered his last speech at Karungalpalayam Library in Erode on the topic &quot;Man is Immortal&quot;. He was struck by an Indian elephant named Lavanya at the Thiruvallikeni Parthasarathy Temple whom he used to feed often. When he fed a coconut to the elephant, the elephant attacked him and although he survived the incident, his health deteriorated. A few months later, he died in the early morning on 11 September 1921. Though Bharathi was considered a great poet and nationalist, it was recorded that only 14 people attended his funeral. 

== Literary work ==

Bharathi was one of the pioneers of modern Tamil literature. He is known by the nickname &quot;Mahakavi&quot; (&quot;The Great Poet&quot;). Bharathi used simple words and rhythms, unlike the previous century works in Tamil, which had complex vocabulary. He also proposed novel ideas and techniques in his poems. He used a metre called &quot;Nondi Chindu&quot; in most of his works, which was earlier used by Gopalakrisnha Bharathiar.

Bharathi&#x27;s poetry expressed progressive and reformist ideals. His poetry was a forerunner to modern Tamil poetry in different aspects and combined classical and contemporary elements. He penned thousands of verses on diverse topics like Indian Nationalism, love, children, nature, glory of the Tamil language, and odes to prominent freedom fighters. He fought for the emancipation of women, against child marriage, vehemently opposed the caste system, and stood for reforming society and religion. His poems were the first to be nationalized in India in 1949.

His works include &quot;Panjali Sabatham&quot;, &quot;Kannan Paatu&quot;, &quot;Kuyil Paatu&quot;, &quot;Paapa Paatu&quot;, &quot;Chinnanchriu Kiliye&quot; and &quot;Vinayagar Nanmanimalai&quot;. He also translated Patanjali&#x27;s &quot;Yoga Sutra&quot; and &quot;Bhagavat Gita&quot; to Tamil. Apart from this he also wrote various patriotic songs, religious verses, short stories and translations of speeches of reformist leaders.

== Legacy ==

The last years of his life were spent in a house in Thiruvallikeni in Chennai. The house was bought and renovated by the Government of Tamil Nadu in 1993 and named &quot;Bharathi Illam&quot; (Home of Bharathi). The house in which he was born in Ettayapuram and the house where he lived in Puducherry are maintained as memorial houses. A statue of Bharathi, a memorial complex and a photo exhibition related to his life history are on display at Etayapuram, his birth place.

In 1960, India Post issued a commemorative stamp on Bharati. The Subramanyam Bharti Award was constituted in 1987 to award contributions to literature. The award is conferred annually by the Ministry of Human Resource Development of Government of India. In 2021, Government of Tamil Nadu instituted a yearly &quot;Bharati young poet Award&quot;. Statutes of Bharathi include the Indian Parliament and Marina Beach facade in Chennai. Roads are named after him include Bharathiar road in Coimbatore and Subramaniam Bharti Marg in New Delhi. Several educational institutions are named after him including Bharathiar University, a state university, which was established in 1982 at Coimbatore.

== In popular culture ==
A Tamil film titled &quot;Bharathi&quot; was made in the year 2000 on the life of the poet by Gnana Rajasekaran, which won National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Tamil. The movie &quot;Kappalottiya Thamizhan&quot; based on the life of V. O. Chidambaram Pillai also chronicles the life of Bharathi. The musical duo Hiphop Tamizha use a caricature of Bharati as a part of their logo. Many of the poems written by Bharati are used in various films in the form of songs. Phrases or lines from his poems are also used as film titles.

==See also==
* Project Madurai Tamil literature repository

== Notes ==
==References==
==Further reading==
* “Subramania Barati and Tamil Modernism” 
* &quot;Fictionalizing an Untold History&quot; 

==External links==


* Works by Bharathi at the open access repository: Project Madurai
* Long list of works by Bharathi on the left side menu, some songs have audio files
* Songs by Mahakavi Bharathiyar</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q256286" start="0" end="21" title="Subramania Bharati" label="C. Subramania Bharati"/>
<link wikidata="Q256286" start="28" end="43" title="Subramania Bharati" label="C. Subramaniyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="280" end="285" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="527" end="555" title="Indian Independence movement" label="Indian Independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="575" end="596" title="emancipation of women" label="emancipation of women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546421" start="606" end="620" title="child marriage" label="child marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q130695" start="634" end="646" title="Caste system in India" label="caste system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525166" start="708" end="719" title="Ettayapuram" label="Ettayapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q15200" start="723" end="743" title="Tirunelveli district" label="Tirunelveli district"/>
<link wikidata="Q15198" start="757" end="768" title="Thoothukudi district" label="Thoothukudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q213248" start="814" end="825" title="Tirunelveli" label="Tirunelveli"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="845" end="853" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7652885" start="989" end="1002" title="Swadesamitran" label="Swadesamitran"/>
<link wikidata="Q926175" start="1016" end="1025" title="The Hindu" label="The Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353846" start="1143" end="1158" title="Sister Nivedita" label="Sister Nivedita"/>
<link wikidata="Q47478" start="1174" end="1191" title="Vivekananda" label="Swami Vivekananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="1220" end="1238" title="British Raj" label="British Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q646374" start="1318" end="1324" title="French India" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q639421" start="1336" end="1347" title="Pondicherry" label="Pondicherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q591305" start="1402" end="1417" title="Indian elephant" label="Indian elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522649" start="1421" end="1456" title="Parthasarathy Temple, Chennai" label="Thiruvallikeni Parthasarathy Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q16312928" start="1770" end="1786" title="Panjali Sabatham" label="Panjali Sabatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="1942" end="1947" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q231680" start="1964" end="1973" title="Patanjali" label="Patanjali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068646" start="1987" end="1997" title="Yoga Sutra" label="Yoga Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q46802" start="2014" end="2027" title="Bhagavat Gita" label="Bhagavat Gita"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681244" start="2171" end="2184" title="Tamil Brahmin" label="Tamil Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525166" start="2207" end="2218" title="Ettayapuram" label="Ettayapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q15200" start="2222" end="2242" title="Tirunelveli district" label="Tirunelveli district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772596" start="2244" end="2261" title="Madras Presidency" label="Madras Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q15198" start="2275" end="2295" title="Thoothukudi district" label="Thoothukudi district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="2297" end="2307" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2546" end="2553" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="2558" end="2563" title="Maths" label="Maths"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="2578" end="2586" title="engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58838" start="2767" end="2776" title="Saraswati" label="Saraswati"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="3128" end="3136" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="3185" end="3203" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="3254" end="3262" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="3264" end="3269" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3274" end="3281" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q228405" start="3612" end="3619" title="Madurai" label="Madurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030" start="3745" end="3755" title="journalism" label="journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7652885" start="3843" end="3856" title="Swadesamitran" label="Swadesamitran"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="3922" end="3946" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353846" start="3993" end="4008" title="Sister Nivedita" label="Sister Nivedita"/>
<link wikidata="Q47478" start="4024" end="4035" title="Vivekananda" label="Vivekananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="4172" end="4177" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q170485" start="4186" end="4192" title="Parvati" label="Shakti"/>
<link wikidata="Q484260" start="4224" end="4228" title="Guru" label="Guru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="4288" end="4296" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10240" start="4308" end="4324" title="Dadabhai Naoroji" label="Dadabhai Naoroji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573608" start="4341" end="4347" title="Swaraj" label="Swaraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712976" start="4512" end="4526" title="M.P.T. Acharya" label="M.P.T. Acharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="4797" end="4804" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="4809" end="4826" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629" start="4900" end="4905" title="Surat" label="Surat"/>
<link wikidata="Q492527" start="4925" end="4948" title="V.O. Chidambaram Pillai" label="V.O. Chidambaram Pillai"/>
<link wikidata="Q312555" start="5111" end="5130" title="Bal Gangadhar Tilak" label="Bal Gangadhar Tilak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="5385" end="5391" title="Madras" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q639421" start="5460" end="5471" title="Pondicherry (city)" label="Pondicherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q646374" start="5493" end="5499" title="French India" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="5957" end="5985" title="Indian Independence movement" label="Indian Independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q192207" start="5991" end="6000" title="Aurobindo" label="Aurobindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395763" start="6002" end="6012" title="Lajpat Rai" label="Lajpat Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906289" start="6017" end="6039" title="Varahaneri Venkatesa Subrahmanya Iyer" label="V. V. Subrahmanya Iyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802579" start="6147" end="6151" title="Arya (journal)" label="Arya"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="6211" end="6227" title="Veda" label="Vedic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q16312928" start="6296" end="6312" title="Panjali Sabatham" label="Panjali Sabatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q231680" start="6407" end="6416" title="Patanjali" label="Patanjali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068646" start="6430" end="6440" title="Yoga Sutra" label="Yoga Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q46802" start="6457" end="6470" title="Bhagavat Gita" label="Bhagavat Gita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="6480" end="6494" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil language"/>
<link wikidata="Q279951" start="6543" end="6552" title="Cuddalore" label="Cuddalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q464318" start="6732" end="6744" title="Annie Besant" label="Annie Besant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962877" start="6749" end="6769" title="C.P. Ramaswamy Aiyar" label="C.P. Ramaswamy Aiyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="6869" end="6875" title="Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi" label="Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7652885" start="6921" end="6934" title="Swadesamitran" label="Swadesamitran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="6954" end="6960" title="Madras" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q9824" start="7205" end="7210" title="Erode" label="Erode"/>
<link wikidata="Q591305" start="7273" end="7288" title="Indian elephant" label="Indian elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522649" start="7310" end="7345" title="Parthasarathy Temple, Chennai" label="Thiruvallikeni Parthasarathy Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q192624" start="8038" end="8043" title="Metre (poetry)" label="metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="8524" end="8545" title="emancipation of women" label="emancipation of women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546421" start="8555" end="8569" title="child marriage" label="child marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q130695" start="8594" end="8606" title="Caste system in India" label="caste system"/>
<link wikidata="Q16312928" start="8741" end="8757" title="Panjali Sabatham" label="Panjali Sabatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q231680" start="8932" end="8941" title="Patanjali" label="Patanjali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068646" start="8955" end="8965" title="Yoga Sutra" label="Yoga Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q46802" start="8982" end="8995" title="Bhagavat Gita" label="Bhagavat Gita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454031" start="9217" end="9231" title="Triplicane" label="Thiruvallikeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589327" start="9286" end="9310" title="Government of Tamil Nadu" label="Government of Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519720" start="9649" end="9659" title="India Post" label="India Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530334" start="9705" end="9729" title="Subramanyam Bharti Award" label="Subramanyam Bharti Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294642" start="9831" end="9869" title="Ministry of Human Resource Development" label="Ministry of Human Resource Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="9873" end="9892" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="10019" end="10036" title="Indian Parliament" label="Indian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q673659" start="10041" end="10053" title="Marina Beach" label="Marina Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="10168" end="10177" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534400" start="10242" end="10263" title="Bharathiar University" label="Bharathiar University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603893" start="10267" end="10283" title="State university (India)" label="state university"/>
<link wikidata="Q9885" start="10318" end="10328" title="Coimbatore" label="Coimbatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q926324" start="10358" end="10368" title="Tamil cinema" label="Tamil film"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901193" start="10382" end="10390" title="Bharathi (2000 film)" label="Bharathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574067" start="10450" end="10467" title="Gnana Rajasekaran" label="Gnana Rajasekaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967189" start="10479" end="10529" title="National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Tamil" label="National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367124" start="10547" end="10569" title="Kappalottiya Thamizhan" label="Kappalottiya Thamizhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088357" start="10664" end="10675" title="Musical ensemble" label="musical duo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14565611" start="10676" end="10690" title="Hiphop Tamizha" label="Hiphop Tamizha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886349" start="10738" end="10742" title="logo" label="logo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249200" start="10907" end="10922" title="Project Madurai" label="Project Madurai"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="423387" wikidata="Q421541" url="?curid=423387" title="Antifreeze protein">
<text>Antifreeze proteins (AFPs) or ice structuring proteins refer to a class of polypeptides produced by certain animals, plants, fungi and bacteria that permit their survival in temperatures below the freezing point of water. AFPs bind to small ice crystals to inhibit the growth and recrystallization of ice that would otherwise be fatal. There is also increasing evidence that AFPs interact with mammalian cell membranes to protect them from cold damage. This work suggests the involvement of AFPs in cold acclimatization.

==Non-colligative properties==
Unlike the widely used automotive antifreeze, ethylene glycol, AFPs do not lower freezing point in proportion to concentration. Rather, they work in a noncolligative manner. This phenomenon allows them to act as an antifreeze at concentrations 1/300th to 1/500th of those of other dissolved solutes. Their low concentration minimizes their effect on osmotic pressure. The unusual properties of AFPs are attributed to their selective affinity for specific crystalline ice forms and the resulting blockade of the ice-nucleation process.

==Thermal hysteresis==
AFPs create a difference between the melting point and freezing point (busting temperature of AFP bound ice crystal) known as thermal hysteresis. The addition of AFPs at the interface between solid ice and liquid water inhibits the thermodynamically favored growth of the ice crystal. Ice growth is kinetically inhibited by the AFPs covering the water-accessible surfaces of ice.

Thermal hysteresis is easily measured in the lab with a nanolitre osmometer. Organisms differ in their values of thermal hysteresis. The maximum level of thermal hysteresis shown by fish AFP is approximately −3.5 °C (Sheikh Mahatabuddin et al., SciRep)(29.3 °F). In contrast, aquatic organisms are exposed only to −1 to −2 °C below freezing. During the extreme winter months, the spruce budworm resists freezing at temperatures approaching −30 °C.

The rate of cooling can influence the thermal hysteresis value of AFPs. Rapid cooling can substantially decrease the nonequilibrium freezing point, and hence the thermal hysteresis value. Consequently, organisms cannot necessarily adapt to their subzero environment if the temperature drops abruptly.

==Freeze tolerance versus freeze avoidance==
Species containing AFPs may be classified as

Freeze avoidant: These species are able to prevent their body fluids from freezing altogether. Generally, the AFP function may be overcome at extremely cold temperatures, leading to rapid ice growth and death.

Freeze tolerant: These species are able to survive body fluid freezing. Some freeze tolerant species are thought to use AFPs as cryoprotectants to prevent the damage of freezing, but not freezing altogether. The exact mechanism is still unknown. However, it is thought AFPs may inhibit recrystallization and stabilize cell membranes to prevent damage by ice. They may work in conjunction with ice nucleating proteins (INPs) to control the rate of ice propagation following freezing.

== Diversity ==
There are many known nonhomologous types of AFPs.

===Fish AFPs===
Antifreeze glycoproteins or AFGPs are found in Antarctic notothenioids and northern cod. They are 2.6-3.3 kD. AFGPs evolved separately in notothenioids and northern cod. In notothenioids, the AFGP gene arose from an ancestral trypsinogen-like serine protease gene.

*Type I AFP is found in winter flounder, longhorn sculpin and shorthorn sculpin. It is the best documented AFP because it was the first to have its three-dimensional structure determined. Type I AFP consists of a single, long, amphipathic alpha helix, about 3.3-4.5 kD in size. There are three faces to the 3D structure: the hydrophobic, hydrophilic, and Thr-Asx face.
**Type I-hyp AFP (where hyp stands for hyperactive) are found in several righteye flounders. It is approximately 32 kD (two 17 kD dimeric molecules). The protein was isolated from the blood plasma of winter flounder. It is considerably better at depressing freezing temperature than most fish AFPs. The ability is partially derived from its many repeats of the Type I ice-binding site.
*Type II AFPs (e.g. ) are found in sea raven, smelt and herring. They are cysteine-rich globular proteins containing five disulfide bonds. Type II AFPs likely evolved from calcium dependent (c-type) lectins. Sea ravens, smelt, and herring are quite divergent lineages of teleost. If the AFP gene were present in the most recent common ancestor of these lineages, it is peculiar that the gene is scattered throughout those lineages, present in some orders and absent in others. It has been suggested that lateral gene transfer could be attributed to this discrepancy, such that the smelt acquired the type II AFP gene from the herring.
*Type III AFPs are found in Antarctic eelpout. They exhibit similar overall hydrophobicity at ice binding surfaces to type I AFPs. They are approximately 6kD in size. Type III AFPs likely evolved from a sialic acid synthase (SAS) gene present in Antarctic eelpout. Through a gene duplication event, this gene—which has been shown to exhibit some ice-binding activity of its own—evolved into an effective AFP gene by loss of the N-terminal part.
*Type IV AFPs () are found in longhorn sculpins. They are alpha helical proteins rich in glutamate and glutamine. This protein is approximately 12KDa in size and consists of a 4-helix bundle. Its only posttranslational modification is a pyroglutamate residue, a cyclized glutamine residue at its N-terminus.

===Plant AFPs===

The classification of AFPs became more complicated when antifreeze proteins from plants were discovered. Plant AFPs are rather different from the other AFPs in the following aspects:

#They have much weaker thermal hysteresis activity when compared to other AFPs.
#Their physiological function is likely in inhibiting the recrystallization of ice rather than in preventing ice formation.
#Most of them are evolved pathogenesis-related proteins, sometimes retaining antifungal properties.

===Insect AFPs===
There are a number of AFPs found in insects, including those from &quot;Dendroides&quot;, &quot;Tenebrio&quot; and &quot;Rhagium&quot; beetles, spruce budworm and pale beauty moths, and midges (same order as flies). Insect AFPs share certain similarities, with most having higher activity (i.e. greater thermal hysteresis value, termed hyperactive) and a repetitive structure with a flat ice-binding surface. Those from the closely related &quot;Tenebrio&quot; and &quot;Dendroides&quot; beetles are homologous and each 12–13 amino-acid repeat is stabilized by an internal disulfide bond. Isoforms have between 6 and 10 of these repeats that form a coil, or beta-solenoid. One side of the solenoid has a flat ice-binding surface that consists of a double row of threonine residues. Other beetles (genus &quot;Rhagium&quot;) have longer repeats without internal disulfide bonds that form a compressed beta-solenoid (beta sandwich) with four rows of threonine residus, and this AFP is structurally similar to that modelled for the non-homologous AFP from the pale beauty moth. In contrast, the AFP from the spruce budworm moth is a solenoid that superficially resembles the &quot;Tenebrio&quot; protein, with a similar ice-binding surface, but it has a triangular cross-section, with longer repeats that lack the internal disulfide bonds. The AFP from midges is structurally similar to those from &quot;Tenebrio&quot; and &quot;Dendroides&quot;, but the disulfide-braced beta-solenoid is formed from shorter 10 amino-acids repeats, and instead of threonine, the ice-binding surface consists of a single row of tyrosine residues. Springtails (Collembola) are not insects, but like insects, they are arthropods with six legs. A species found in Canada, which is often called a &quot;snow flea&quot;, produces hyperactive AFPs. Although they are also repetitive and have a flat ice-binding surface, the similarity ends there. Around 50% of the residues are glycine (Gly), with repeats of Gly-Gly- X or Gly-X-X, where X is any amino acid. Each 3-amino-acid repeat forms one turn of a polyproline type II helix. The helices then fold together, to form a bundle that is two helices thick, with an ice-binding face dominated by small hydrophobic residues like alanine, rather than threonine. Other insects, such as an Alaskan beetle, produce hyperactive antifreezes that are even less similar, as they are polymers of sugars (xylomannan) rather than polymers of amino acids (proteins). Taken together, this suggests that most of the AFPs and antifreezes arose after the lineages that gave rise to these various insects diverged. The similarities they do share are the result of convergent evolution.

===Sea ice organism AFPs===
Many microorganisms living in sea ice possess AFPs that belong to a single family. The diatoms &quot;Fragilariopsis cylindrus&quot; and &quot;F. curta&quot; play a key role in polar sea ice communities, dominating the assemblages of both platelet layer and within pack ice. AFPs are widespread in these species, and the presence of AFP genes as a multigene family indicates the importance of this group for the genus &quot;Fragilariopsis&quot;. AFPs identified in &quot;F. cylindrus&quot; belong to an AFP family which is represented in different taxa and can be found in other organisms related to sea ice (&quot;Colwellia&quot; spp., &quot;Navicula glaciei&quot;, &quot;Chaetoceros neogracile&quot; and &quot;Stephos longipes and Leucosporidium antarcticum&quot;) and Antarctic inland ice bacteria (Flavobacteriaceae), as well as in cold-tolerant fungi (&quot;Typhula ishikariensis&quot;, &quot;Lentinula edodes&quot; and &quot;Flammulina populicola&quot;).

Several structures for sea ice AFPs have been solved. This family of proteins fold into a beta helix that form a flat ice-binding surface. Unlike the other AFPs, there is not a singular sequence motif for the ice-binding site.

AFP found from the metagenome of the ciliate &quot;Euplotes focardii&quot; and psychrophilic bacteria has an efficient ice re-crystallization inhibition ability. 1 μM of &quot;Euplotes focardii&quot; consortium ice-binding protein (&quot;Efc&quot;IBP) is enough for the total inhibition of ice re-crystallization in –7.4 °C temperature. This ice-recrystallization inhibition ability helps bacteria to tolerate ice rather than preventing the formation of ice. &quot;Efc&quot;IBP produces also thermal hysteresis gap, but this ability is not as efficient as the ice-recrystallization inhibition ability. &quot;Efc&quot;IBP helps to protect both purified proteins and whole bacterial cells in freezing temperatures. Green fluorescent protein is functional after several cycles of freezing and melting when incubated with &quot;Efc&quot;IBP. &quot;Escherichia coli&quot; survives longer periods in 0 °C temperature when the &quot;efcIBP&quot; gene was inserted to &quot;E. coli&quot; genome. &quot;Efc&quot;IBP has a typical AFP structure consisting of multiple beta-sheets and an alpha-helix. Also, all the ice-binding polar residues are at the same site of the protein.

== Evolution ==
The remarkable diversity and distribution of AFPs suggest the different types evolved recently in response to sea level glaciation occurring 1–2 million years ago in the Northern hemisphere and 10-30 million years ago in Antarctica. Data collected from deep sea ocean drilling has revealed that the development of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current was formed over 30 million years ago. The cooling of Antarctic imposed from this current caused a mass extinction of teleost species that were unable to withstand freezing temperatures. Notothenioids species with the antifreeze glycoprotein were able to survive the glaciation event and diversify into new niches.

This independent development of similar adaptations is referred to as convergent evolution. Evidence for convergent evolution in Northern cod (Gadidae) and Notothenioids is supported by the findings of different spacer sequences and different organization of  introns and exons as well as unmatching AFGP tripeptide sequences, which emerged from duplications of short ancestral sequences which were differently permuted (for the same tripeptide) by each group. These groups diverged approximately 7-15 million years ago. Shortly after (5-15 mya), the AFGP gene evolved from an ancestral pancreatic trypsinogen gene in Notothenioids. AFGP and trypsinogen genes split via a sequence divergence - an adaptation which occurred alongside the cooling and eventual freezing of the Antarctic Ocean. The evolution of the AFGP gene in Northern cod occurred more recently (~3.2 mya) and emerged from a noncoding sequence via tandem duplications in a Thr-Ala-Ala unit. Antarctic notothenioid fish and arctic cod, Boreogadus saida, are part of two distinct orders and have very similar antifreeze glycoproteins. Although the two fish orders have similar antifreeze proteins, cod species contain arginine in AFG, while Antarctic notothenioid do not. The role of arginine as an enhancer has been investigated in Dendroides canadensis antifreeze protein (DAFP-1) by observing the effect of a chemical modification using 1-2 cyclohexanedione. Previous research has found various enhancers of this bettles&#x27; antifreeze protein including a thaumatin-like protein and polycarboxylates. Modifications of DAFP-1 with the arginine specific reagent resulted in the partial and complete loss of thermal hysteresis in DAFP-1, indicating that arginine plays a crucial role in enhancing its ability. Different enhancer molecules of DAFP-1 have distinct thermal hysteresis activity. Amornwittawat et al. 2008 found that the number of carboxylate groups in a molecules influence the enhancing ability of DAFP-1. Optimum activity in TH is correlated with high concentration of enhancer molecules. Li et al. 1998 investigated the effects of pH and solute on thermal hysteresis in Antifreeze proteins from Dendrioides canadensis. TH activity of DAFP-4 was not affected by pH unless the there was a low solute concentration (pH 1) in which TH decreased. The effect of five solutes; succinate, citrate, malate, malonate, and acetate, on TH activity was reported. Among the five solutes, citrate was shown to have the greatest enhancing effect.

This is an example of a proto-ORF model, a rare occurrence where new genes pre exist as a formed open reading frame before the existence of the regulatory element needed to activate them.

In fishes, horizontal gene transfer is responsible for the presence of Type II AFP proteins in some groups without a recently shared phylogeny. In Herring and smelt, up to 98% of introns for this gene are shared; the method of transfer is assumed to occur during mating via sperm cells exposed to foreign DNA. The direction of transfer is known to be from herring to smelt as herring have 8 times the copies of AFP gene as smelt (1) and the segments of the gene in smelt house transposable elements which are otherwise characteristic of and common in herring but not found in other fishes.

There are two reasons why many types of AFPs are able to carry out the same function despite their diversity:
# Although ice is uniformly composed of water molecules, it has many different surfaces exposed for binding. Different types of AFPs may interact with different surfaces.
# Although the five types of AFPs differ in their primary structure of amino acids, when each folds into a functioning protein they may share similarities in their three-dimensional or tertiary structure that facilitates the same interactions with ice.
Antifreeze glycoprotein activity has been observed across several ray-finned species including eelpouts, sculpins, and cod species. Fish species that possess the antifreeze glycoprotein express different levels of protein activity. Polar cod (&quot;Boreogadus saida)&quot; exhibit similar protein activity and properties to the Antarctic species, &quot;T. borchgrevinki&quot;. Both species have higher protein activity than saffron cod (&quot;Eleginus gracilis&quot;). Ice antifreeze proteins have been reported in diatom species to help decrease the freezing point of organism&#x27;s proteins. Bayer-Giraldi et al. 2010 found 30 species from distinct taxa with homologues of ice antifreeze proteins. The diversity is consistent with previous research that has observed the presence of these genes in crustaceans, insects, bacteria, and fungi. Horizontal gene transfer is responsible for the presence of ice antifreeze proteins in two sea diatom species, F. cylindrus and F. curta.

== Mechanisms of action ==
AFPs are thought to inhibit ice growth by an adsorption–inhibition mechanism. They adsorb to nonbasal planes of ice, inhibiting thermodynamically-favored ice growth. The presence of a flat, rigid surface in some AFPs seems to facilitate its interaction with ice via Van der Waals force surface complementarity.

== Binding to ice ==
Normally, ice crystals grown in solution only exhibit the basal (0001) and prism faces (1010), and appear as round and flat discs. However, it appears the presence of AFPs exposes other faces. It now appears the ice surface 2021 is the preferred binding surface, at least for AFP type I. Through studies on type I AFP, ice and AFP were initially thought to interact through hydrogen bonding (Raymond and DeVries, 1977). However, when parts of the protein thought to facilitate this hydrogen bonding were mutated, the hypothesized decrease in antifreeze activity was not observed. Recent data suggest hydrophobic interactions could be the main contributor. It is difficult to discern the exact mechanism of binding because of the complex water-ice interface. Currently, attempts to uncover the precise mechanism are being made through use of molecular modelling programs (molecular dynamics or the Monte Carlo method).

== Binding mechanism and antifreeze function ==

According to the structure and function study on the antifreeze protein from &quot;Pseudopleuronectes americanus&quot;, the antifreeze mechanism of the type-I AFP molecule was shown to be due to the binding to an ice nucleation structure in a zipper-like fashion through hydrogen bonding of the hydroxyl groups of its four Thr residues to the oxygens along the formula_1 direction in ice lattice, subsequently stopping or retarding the growth of ice pyramidal planes so as to depress the freeze point.

The above mechanism can be used to elucidate the structure-function relationship of other antifreeze proteins with the following two common features:
# recurrence of a Thr residue (or any other polar amino acid residue whose side-chain can form a hydrogen bond with water) in an 11-amino-acid period along the sequence concerned, and
# a high percentage of an Ala residue component therein.

== History ==
In the 1950s, Norwegian scientist Scholander set out to explain how Arctic fish can survive in water colder than the freezing point of their blood. His experiments led him to believe there was “antifreeze” in the blood of Arctic fish. Then in the late 1960s, animal biologist Arthur DeVries was able to isolate the antifreeze protein through his investigation of Antarctic fish. These proteins were later called antifreeze glycoproteins (AFGPs) or antifreeze glycopeptides to distinguish them from newly discovered nonglycoprotein biological antifreeze agents (AFPs). DeVries worked with Robert Feeney (1970) to characterize the chemical and physical properties of antifreeze proteins. In 1992, Griffith &quot;et al.&quot; documented their discovery of AFP in winter rye leaves. Around the same time, Urrutia, Duman and Knight (1992) documented thermal hysteresis protein in angiosperms. The next year, Duman and Olsen noted AFPs had also been discovered in over 23 species of angiosperms, including ones eaten by humans. They reported their presence in fungi and bacteria as well.

== Name change ==
Recent attempts have been made to relabel antifreeze proteins as ice structuring proteins to more accurately represent their function and to dispose of any assumed negative relation between AFPs and automotive antifreeze, ethylene glycol. These two things are completely separate entities, and show loose similarity only in their function.

== Commercial and medical applications ==
Numerous fields would be able to benefit from the protection of tissue damage by freezing. Businesses are currently investigating the use of these proteins in:
* Increasing freeze tolerance of crop plants and extending the harvest season in cooler climates
* Improving farm fish production in cooler climates
* Lengthening shelf life of frozen foods
* Improving cryosurgery
* Enhancing preservation of tissues for transplant or transfusion in medicine
* Therapy for hypothermia
* Human Cryopreservation (Cryonics)

Unilever has obtained UK, US, EU, Mexico, China, Philippines, Australia and New Zealand approval to use a genetically modified yeast to produce antifreeze proteins from fish for use in ice cream production. They are labeled &quot;ISP&quot; or ice structuring protein on the label, instead of AFP or antifreeze protein.

== Recent news ==
One recent, successful business endeavor has been the introduction of AFPs into ice cream and yogurt products. This ingredient, labelled ice-structuring protein, has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration. The proteins are isolated from fish and replicated, on a larger scale, in genetically modified yeast.

There is concern from organizations opposed to genetically modified organisms (GMOs) who believe that antifreeze proteins may cause inflammation. Intake of AFPs in diet is likely substantial in most northerly and temperate regions already. Given the known historic consumption of AFPs, it is safe to conclude their functional properties do not impart any toxicologic or allergenic effects in humans.

As well, the transgenic process of ice structuring proteins production is widely used in society. Insulin and rennet are produced using this technology. The process does not impact the product; it merely makes production more efficient and prevents the death of fish that would otherwise be killed to extract the protein.

Currently, Unilever incorporates AFPs into some of its American products, including some Popsicle ice pops and a new line of Breyers Light Double Churned ice cream bars. In ice cream, AFPs allow the production of very creamy, dense, reduced fat ice cream with fewer additives. They control ice crystal growth brought on by thawing on the loading dock or kitchen table, which reduces texture quality.

In November 2009, the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences published the discovery of a molecule in an Alaskan beetle that behaves like AFPs, but is composed of saccharides and fatty acids.

A 2010 study demonstrated the stability of superheated water ice crystals in an AFP solution, showing that while the proteins can inhibit freezing, they can also inhibit melting.
In 2021, EPFL and Warwick scientists have found an artificial imitation of antifreeze proteins.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
== External links ==
*Cold, Hard Fact: Fish Antifreeze Produced in Pancreas
*Antifreeze Proteins: Molecule of the Month , by David Goodsell, RCSB Protein Data Bank</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q421541" start="0" end="19" title="Antifreeze protein" label="Antifreeze proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q421541" start="21" end="25" title="Antifreeze protein" label="AFPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q421541" start="30" end="54" title="Antifreeze protein" label="ice structuring proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="75" end="87" title="polypeptides" label="polypeptides"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="108" end="114" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="117" end="122" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="125" end="130" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="135" end="143" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325808" start="241" end="253" title="ice crystals" label="ice crystals"/>
<link wikidata="Q284256" start="280" end="297" title="crystallization" label="recrystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q419763" start="504" end="519" title="acclimatization" label="acclimatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q194207" start="599" end="614" title="ethylene glycol" label="ethylene glycol"/>
<link wikidata="Q28784" start="707" end="718" title="colligative" label="colligative"/>
<link wikidata="Q193135" start="903" end="919" title="osmotic pressure" label="osmotic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067654" start="1549" end="1568" title="nanolitre osmometer" label="nanolitre osmometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758763" start="1873" end="1887" title="spruce budworm" label="spruce budworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q909022" start="2943" end="2953" title="nucleating" label="nucleating"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="3067" end="3080" title="Convergent evolution" label="nonhomologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q187126" start="3124" end="3137" title="glycoproteins" label="glycoproteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="3160" end="3169" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q571473" start="3170" end="3182" title="notothenioid" label="notothenioid"/>
<link wikidata="Q208028" start="3188" end="3200" title="Gadidae" label="northern cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071815" start="3403" end="3418" title="winter flounder" label="winter flounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073666" start="3420" end="3436" title="longhorn sculpin" label="longhorn sculpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481591" start="3441" end="3458" title="shorthorn sculpin" label="shorthorn sculpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966392" start="4169" end="4178" title="sea raven" label="sea raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q166316" start="4180" end="4185" title="Smelt (fish)" label="smelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="4190" end="4197" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="4256" end="4270" title="disulfide bond" label="disulfide bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q204861" start="4405" end="4412" title="teleost" label="teleost"/>
<link wikidata="Q300929" start="4807" end="4814" title="eelpout" label="eelpout"/>
<link wikidata="Q27887010" start="5451" end="5464" title="pyroglutamate" label="pyroglutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q181619" start="5485" end="5494" title="glutamine" label="glutamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q284398" start="5510" end="5520" title="N-terminus" label="N-terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q372016" start="5955" end="5967" title="pathogenesis" label="pathogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193237" start="6006" end="6016" title="Fungicide" label="antifungal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045460" start="8465" end="8475" title="xylomannan" label="xylomannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213926" start="8798" end="8805" title="sea ice" label="sea ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="8855" end="8861" title="diatom" label="diatom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="9104" end="9109" title="genes" label="genes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19685592" start="9382" end="9391" title="Colwellia" label="Colwellia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458145" start="9569" end="9586" title="Flavobacteriaceae" label="Flavobacteriaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861360" start="9630" end="9651" title="Typhula ishikariensis" label="Typhula ishikariensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q320999" start="9665" end="9681" title="Lentinula edodes" label="Lentinula edodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10496299" start="9698" end="9719" title="Flammulina populicola" label="Flammulina populicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q487869" start="9819" end="9829" title="beta helix" label="beta helix"/>
<link wikidata="Q106345" start="9994" end="10001" title="ciliate" label="ciliate"/>
<link wikidata="Q272983" start="10670" end="10695" title="Green fluorescent protein" label="Green fluorescent protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="10801" end="10817" title="Escherichia coli" label="Escherichia coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q283449" start="11015" end="11025" title="beta-sheet" label="beta-sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q283399" start="11034" end="11045" title="alpha-helix" label="alpha-helix"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="11262" end="11272" title="glaciation" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="11875" end="11895" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q208028" start="11948" end="11955" title="Gadidae" label="Gadidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q829980" start="12806" end="12822" title="Boreogadus saida" label="Boreogadus saida"/>
<link wikidata="Q121438" start="14985" end="15005" title="transposable element" label="transposable element"/>
<link wikidata="Q899763" start="15430" end="15447" title="primary structure" label="primary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q898483" start="15565" end="15583" title="tertiary structure" label="tertiary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q180254" start="16688" end="16698" title="adsorption" label="adsorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="16739" end="16750" title="basal plane" label="basal plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q189627" start="16909" end="16928" title="Van der Waals force" label="Van der Waals force"/>
<link wikidata="Q174858" start="17817" end="17836" title="molecular modelling" label="molecular modelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q901663" start="17847" end="17865" title="molecular dynamics" label="molecular dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q232207" start="17873" end="17891" title="Monte Carlo method" label="Monte Carlo method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071815" start="18027" end="18056" title="Winter flounder" label="Pseudopleuronectes americanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="18239" end="18253" title="hydroxyl group" label="hydroxyl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q186521" start="18267" end="18270" title="Threonine" label="Thr"/>
<link wikidata="Q186521" start="18615" end="18618" title="Threonine" label="Thr"/>
<link wikidata="Q218642" start="18807" end="18810" title="Alanine" label="Ala"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="19830" end="19841" title="angiosperms" label="angiosperms"/>
<link wikidata="Q194207" start="20176" end="20191" title="ethylene glycol" label="ethylene glycol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705075" start="20699" end="20710" title="cryosurgery" label="cryosurgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q157062" start="20852" end="20860" title="Unilever" label="Unilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="20958" end="20978" title="genetically modified" label="genetically modified"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="21377" end="21405" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q182726" start="21557" end="21586" title="genetically modified organism" label="genetically modified organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q186752" start="21880" end="21890" title="allergenic" label="allergenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q430117" start="21924" end="21934" title="transgenic" label="transgenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="22009" end="22016" title="Insulin" label="Insulin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22021" end="22027" title="Rennet#Fermentation-produced chymosin" label="rennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q157062" start="22245" end="22253" title="Unilever" label="Unilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270260" start="22323" end="22331" title="Popsicle (brand)" label="Popsicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q855373" start="22332" end="22339" title="ice pop" label="ice pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962798" start="22359" end="22366" title="Breyers" label="Breyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146531" start="22657" end="22704" title="Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences" label="Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q173600" start="22807" end="22817" title="Disaccharide" label="saccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="22823" end="22833" title="fatty acid" label="fatty acid"/>
</links>
</doc>
