<doc id="413202" wikidata="Q3535440" url="?curid=413202" title="Fred Trueman">
<text>Frederick Sewards Trueman, (6 February 1931 – 1 July 2006) was an English cricketer who played for Yorkshire County Cricket Club and the England cricket team. He had professional status and later became an author and broadcaster.

Acknowledged as one of the greatest bowlers in cricket&#x27;s history, Trueman deployed a genuinely fast pace and was widely known as &quot;Fiery Fred&quot;. He was the first bowler to take 300 wickets in a Test career. Together with Brian Statham, he opened the England bowling for many years and they formed one of the most famous bowling partnerships in Test cricket history. Trueman was an outstanding fielder, especially at leg slip, and a useful late order batsman who made three first-class centuries. He was awarded his Yorkshire county cap in 1951 and in 1952 was elected &quot;Young Cricketer of the Year&quot; by the Cricket Writers&#x27; Club. For his performances in the 1952 season, he was named one of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year in the 1953 edition of &quot;Wisden Cricketers&#x27; Almanack&quot;.

His talent, skill and public profile were such that British Prime Minister Harold Wilson, himself from Yorkshire, jokingly described him as the &quot;greatest living Yorkshireman&quot;. Even so, Trueman was omitted from numerous England teams because he was frequently in conflict with the cricket establishment, which he often criticised for its perceived &quot;snobbishness&quot; and hypocrisy. After he retired from playing, he became a media personality through his work in television and as an outspoken radio commentator for the BBC, mainly working on &quot;Test Match Special&quot;. He was awarded the OBE in the 1989 Birthday Honours for services to cricket. In 2009, Trueman was inducted into the ICC Cricket Hall of Fame.

On the occasion of England&#x27;s 1000th Test in August 2018, he was named in the country&#x27;s greatest Test XI by the ECB.

==Early life and career==

===Childhood===
Fred Trueman was born at no. 5, Scotch Spring Lane, Stainton near Maltby, West Riding of Yorkshire. He said himself that he weighed at birth and was delivered by his maternal grandmother Mrs Stimpson. Her maiden name was Sewards and Trueman&#x27;s parents decided to honour her by naming him Frederick Sewards Trueman. Not long before his death in 2006, Trueman appeared to discover that Mrs Stimpson was Jewish. He said that he was happy to be considered Jewish but joked that he would be very reluctant to give up on bacon sandwiches. Chris Waters&#x27; 2011 biography states this claim to be untrue and that Elizabeth Stimpson&#x27;s natural parents were a couple from Lincolnshire with no Jewish connections.

His parents were Alan and Ethel Trueman and he was the middle one of seven children. They were a country family, their home being part of a terrace row called Scotch Springs (now demolished) that was surrounded by countryside but about a mile from Maltby Main Colliery and half a mile from Stainton village. Trueman&#x27;s grandfather had been a horse dealer and his father worked primarily with horses too, though for a time he was a coalface worker at Maltby Main. His parents instilled into all the children a strong sense of discipline and the values of honesty and forthrightness.

Trueman&#x27;s education began at the village school in Stainton where his teachers recognised his talent for cricket. Encouraged by his father, he had started bowling when he was four. His father was captain of the Stainton club and Trueman used to accompany him to matches, once playing for the club when he was only eight years old. When Trueman was twelve years old, the family moved to a larger house on Tennyson Road in nearby Maltby, where Trueman attended Maltby Secondary School.

===Development as a cricketer===
At Maltby Secondary School, Trueman had two teachers called Dickie Harrison and Tommy Stubbs who recognised his talent as a bowler and picked him for the school team, even though he was much younger than the other players. His school playing career was interrupted for two years after he was seriously injured by a cricket ball that hit him in the groin. He started playing again in 1945 when he was fourteen but left school that summer to start work, initially in a newsagent. He had several jobs before becoming a professional cricketer. Inhibited by his injury, Trueman might have given up on cricket at this time but instead, motivated by his family, he joined a nearby village club called Roche Abbey, playing regularly for them in 1946. He was successful at Roche Abbey and, before the 1947 season when he was sixteen, came to the notice of former Yorkshire player Cyril Turner who was coaching the Sheffield United Cricket Club which played at Bramall Lane, a ground then in regular use by Yorkshire for first-class cricket.

In his autobiography, Trueman acknowledged his debt to Cyril Turner, &quot;a superb coach&quot;, who taught him how to &quot;hold the ball properly&quot;, enable it to swing both ways and how to follow through properly to complete his bowling action. Trueman played some matches for Sheffield United&#x27;s Second XI team in the 1947 season and was then promoted to the first team so that he could play in the Yorkshire Council League. The following winter, he received an invitation from Yorkshire to attend indoor coaching classes at Headingley, Leeds, under the supervision of Bill Bowes and Arthur Mitchell.

Before the 1948 season began, Trueman was selected by Yorkshire for the Yorkshire Federation team for players under eighteen, effectively the county&#x27;s third team. The team toured the south of England and it was on this tour that Trueman met two of his future Yorkshire colleagues, Brian Close and Ray Illingworth. He enjoyed a successful season with Sheffield, saying that &quot;the year 1948 proved a good one for me&quot;. He had already met a number of great Yorkshire players including George Hirst and he was delighted by an end of season newspaper report in which Herbert Sutcliffe predicted that Trueman would play for Yorkshire before he was nineteen and for England before he was twenty-one.

As the 1949 season began, Trueman was surprised to receive a telegram from Yorkshire which told him he had been chosen to play for the first team in the opening first-class matches against Cambridge University at Fenner&#x27;s and Oxford University at the Parks.

==First-class and international cricket career==

===Beginnings: 1949 to 1951===
Trueman made his first-class debut on Wednesday, 11 May 1949 in the three-day match against Cambridge which Yorkshire won by 9 wickets. He was mistakenly described as a spin bowler in the &quot;Wisden&quot; match report. Opening the bowling in both innings with Brian Close, who was medium pace, Trueman took two for 72 and one for 22 as Cambridge were dismissed for 283 and 196 respectively. Yorkshire scored 317 for six declared and 164 for one so Trueman, who was number 11 in the order, did not bat. Trueman&#x27;s first wicket was that of opening batsman Robert Morris, who was caught by Ellis Robinson for 19. In the second innings, Trueman bowled the future Sussex and England batsman Hubert Doggart for 23. Three other debutants that day who all became England players were Close and opening batsman Frank Lowson for Yorkshire; and Middlesex fast bowler John Warr for Cambridge. Many years later, Warr wrote the biographical piece about Trueman in &quot;Barclays World of Cricket&quot;. Trueman had match figures of six for 72 in his second match against Oxford, which Yorkshire lost by 69 runs. A month later, he took eight for 70 against the Minor Counties on his first appearance at Lord&#x27;s, bowling unchanged through the second innings. Commenting on his first County Championship match, against Surrey at Park Avenue, Bradford, &quot;Wisden&quot; said that he bowled &quot;fast and with effect&quot;.

As with most of their young players, Yorkshire intended to take their time over establishing Trueman and were prepared to set him aside for lengthy periods. The established pace bowlers in 1949 were Alec Coxon and Ron Aspinall, both fast-medium, while captain Norman Yardley was a &quot;capable third seam bowler&quot;. History was against Trueman as the county rarely looked for fast bowlers with express speed, instead preferring &quot;the medium or fast-medium bowler with his capacity for control, economy and long spells&quot;. Trueman, once he became established, was a clear breach of Yorkshire tradition.

The great Yorkshire team of the 1930s had been broken up by the Second World War and a rebuilding phase was underway by the late 1940s, although Yorkshire had won the first post-war County Championship in 1946. Norman Yardley succeeded Brian Sellers as captain in 1948 and his main team members that season were Len Hutton, Ted Lester, Harry Halliday, Vic Wilson, Willie Watson, Frank Smailes, Johnny Wardle, Don Brennan (wicket-keeper), Ellis Robinson, Ron Aspinall and Alex Coxon. Others in the picture were future captain Billy Sutcliffe and two more young fast-medium bowlers, Bill Foord and Johnny Whitehead. The main team changes in 1949 were the retirement of Frank Smailes; the immediate establishment of Close and Lowson, who played in 22 and 24 championship matches respectively while Trueman only played in four; and an injury to Aspinall who was restricted to just three games. Aspinall had taken thirty wickets in his three matches and had been picked for a Test Trial but, at the end of May, he ruptured an Achilles tendon and was out of action for the rest of the season; indeed, he was never an effective bowler again.

Yorkshire initially replaced Aspinall with Frank McHugh but then brought Trueman back in June before dropping him in July in order to try out Foord and Whitehead. Trueman was recalled to play against the New Zealand tourists at Bramall Lane later in July but his debut season ended there and then as he sustained a thigh injury and had to be carried off the field. He could only watch from the sidelines as Yorkshire took part in &quot;a fine struggle&quot; for the championship which, in the end, they shared with Middlesex, both teams earning 192 points. He played in eight first-class matches in 1949, all for Yorkshire; in five matches for the Second XI in the Minor Counties Championship; and in one other match for Yorkshire&#x27;s first team against an Army XI which included another up and coming fast bowler, Frank Tyson.

The third issue of &quot;Playfair Cricket Annual&quot; in 1950 said that Trueman was &quot;built for the job of a fast &#x27;un, and with the spirit too&quot; but added that &quot;Yorkshire will not hasten his development or that of any other promising player&quot;. Trueman in his autobiography was highly critical of this policy and says that on at least one occasion he remonstrated fiercely with his captain about being left out of the first team. Having called him a &quot;fast &#x27;un&quot; in its Yorkshire section, &quot;Playfair&quot; in its &quot;Who&#x27;s Who&quot; section incorrectly described Trueman as &quot;a promising RFM&quot; (i.e., fast medium bowler). Trueman&#x27;s oft-stated view of himself was &quot;t&#x27;fastest bloody bowler that ever drew breath&quot;.

Trueman&#x27;s first match in the 1950 season was for Yorkshire against the West Indies tourists at Park Avenue. He made twelve appearances in the County Championship and played for &quot;The Rest&quot; against England in a Test trial. He made only one appearance for the Second XI. On the face of it, and certainly in terms of his bowling figures to date, it was a surprise that Trueman was selected for the Test Trial. &quot;Wisden&quot; said that this was &quot;a match immortalised by Jim Laker&#x27;s eight for two&quot;. Trueman&#x27;s inclusion was designed to give the England batsmen practice against fast bowling even though, at this period of his career, he was inaccurate in both length and direction. The selectors were driven by the repeated discomfiture of England batsmen against the great Australian bowlers Ray Lindwall and Keith Miller, but John Arlott suspected there was also a subconscious urge to &quot;reflect public feeling, the national desire for a fast bowler, even an inexperienced one – anyone so long as he was fast&quot;.

1950 was a frustrating season for Trueman who was straining to establish himself in the Yorkshire team. The club committee, however, persisted in a policy of short-term usage followed by a period of discard while they looked at Whitehead. Trueman faced the added problem of trying to succeed in an atmosphere of prevailing &quot;discontent in the dressing room&quot; which amounted to much more than a typical &quot;them and us&quot; situation between players and committee. Trueman said that the team itself was &quot;split into cliques&quot;, specifically the &quot;gentlemen players&quot; and one or two senior professionals like Hutton, who had social ambitions, on the one hand; and the younger professionals like himself, Close, Illingworth and Lowson on the other. The situation was exacerbated by bad feeling between some of the professionals, Wardle in particular being a difficult person to have in a team. Although he was fast, Trueman was often wayward and sometimes expensive. These &quot;negatives assumed great importance&quot; in such a dour and unforgiving atmosphere. On Trueman&#x27;s debit side, some of his colleagues perceived him to be &quot;loud-mouthed and seemingly insensitive&quot;.

Trueman was downhearted enough at this time to even think about joining Yorkshire&#x27;s traditional rivals Lancashire. But at the end of the season, he went back to the winter nets where he listened to Bowes and Mitchell, practised, kept himself fit and looked forward with increasing determination to the future. Trueman was an &quot;apt pupil&quot; and Bowes said of him: &quot;He had the three great assets for the job: a love of fast bowling, a powerful physique and a smooth cartwheel action&quot;.

Yorkshire finished third in the County Championship, twenty points adrift of the joint winners Lancashire and Surrey. For the most part, Yorkshire selected from fifteen players in 1950 although a few others made occasional appearances. Yardley captained the team in which Hutton and Lowson were the established openers although, with Hutton&#x27;s Test calls, there were more opportunities for Halliday and Geoffrey Keighley. Lester, Watson, Wilson and Billy Sutcliffe were the other batsmen and Brennan was the wicket-keeper. The main bowlers were Wardle, Coxon and Eddie Leadbeater. Brian Close was doing his national service and could only make a single appearance, Ellis Robinson had departed and Ron Aspinall&#x27;s career had been wrecked by his injury. So Trueman and Whitehead, who made 13 appearances, contested the fourth bowling place but one of the bit players was Bob Appleyard, who would make a major impact in 1951.

The next stage in Trueman&#x27;s development was to harness his speed and exercise full control of the ball. This was what Bowes and Mitchell worked on in 1950–51 and &quot;the improvement in his bowling was immediately noticeable&quot;. Whereas in 1949 and 1950 he had taken 31 wickets in both seasons, he took 90 in 1951 including five wickets in an innings six times. His best analysis of the season was eight for 53 against Nottinghamshire at Trent Bridge when he captured his first hat-trick by making the ball swing with devastating effect, Yorkshire winning by 9 wickets. His hat-trick victims were Reg Simpson, Alan Armitage and Peter Harvey.

All four of Trueman&#x27;s career hat-tricks were taken for Yorkshire and this is a county record he shares with George Macaulay. The hat-trick match was the second time Trueman had destroyed the Nottinghamshire batting that season. A month earlier at Bramall Lane, he had taken three for 26 and eight for 68, enabling Yorkshire to win by an innings and 33 runs. According to &quot;Wisden&quot;, Trueman &quot;bowled at very fast pace and frequently made the ball fly&quot;.

Trueman might have expected that eleven-wicket haul at Bramall Lane to firmly establish his place in the Yorkshire first-team but his immediate reward was to be rested and given twelfth man duties with the Second XI, who were playing against Lincolnshire at Cleethorpes Sports Ground. To be fair to Yorkshire, the teams for the subsequent first and second XI matches had already been chosen before he took his eight for 68. He quickly swallowed his disappointment and his eight for 53 at Trent Bridge was summarised by one of his biographers Don Mosey as &quot;the start of the Trueman era&quot;.

Despite their internal problems and disharmony, Yorkshire finished second behind Warwickshire in the County Championship. One of the problem players, Alex Coxon, surprisingly resigned after the 1950 season and it was widely said that &quot;his face did not fit&quot;, even though he was a top-class bowler who had played for England. Brian Close made only two appearances as he completed his national service; and Ray Illingworth made his debut but played in only the one match. With Johnny Whitehead playing only seven times, Yorkshire relied mainly on a squad of 13 players including Trueman, who played in 26 championship matches. The other twelve regulars were Yardley (captain), Hutton, Lowson, Lester, Watson, Wilson, Halliday, Sutcliffe, Brennan, Wardle, Leadbeater and Appleyard. On Monday, 13 August 1951, Trueman and Bob Appleyard were awarded their county caps by team captain Norman Yardley.

===National service in the RAF: 1951 to 1953===
Since his first involvement with Yorkshire in 1948, Trueman had been working a winter job at Maltby Main in the tally office (contrary to one of the urban legend about him, he was never actually a miner). Yorkshire had encouraged him to work for the National Coal Board so that he would be in a reserved occupation and so avoid national service. In the winter of 1950–51, he learned that his job was to be declassified and that he would be liable for call-up at some stage. He decided to volunteer after the 1951 season and, at the same time, take advantage of a new Yorkshire committee ruling that any capped players who were called up would be paid £5 a week, which was a good wage at the time.

Trueman undertook his national service in the Royal Air Force at RAF Hemswell in Lincolnshire. At that stage, according to &quot;Wisden&quot;, &quot;the RAF was probably less hierarchical than Yorkshire County Cricket Club, and he coped with the vagaries of service life rather better than he did with the Yorkshire committee&quot;. He was there through the next two seasons until he was demobilised at the end of the 1953 season. During this time he made his Test debut for England against India in 1952 and took part in the 1953 Ashes series against Australia.

He was fortunate in having a station commander in Group Captain Jim Warfield who was a cricket enthusiast and was willing to grant him leave for Test and occasional county matches. In addition, Warfield decided to employ Trueman in the sports section, looking after the equipment and playing fields. Nevertheless, this relaxation of the usual rules caused questions to be raised in the House of Commons after the mother of another conscript complained to her local MP that her son had been refused leave to take part in a national banjo playing championship. Trueman claimed that he was the first person to be mentioned in &quot;Hansard&quot; in a cricketing connection. His identity in the RAF was AC2 F. S. Trueman 2549485. He was later promoted to AC1.

National service restricted Trueman to just nine first-class matches in 1952 but four of them were Tests. He made his debut for England on Thursday, 5 June in the first Test against India at Headingley. Len Hutton had been appointed England captain before the series as the first professional to hold the post in the 20th century and the first ever to hold it in a home series. The appointment was controversial, especially among the amateur establishment, but Hutton had &quot;an easy initiation against a weak Indian side, who did not relish the tearaway bowling of the young Trueman&quot;. England, for whom Trueman opened the bowling with Alec Bedser, won the match in four days by 7 wickets. After taking three for 89 in the first innings when India scored 293, Trueman produced a sensational opening spell in the second innings and, after only 14 balls had been bowled, India were reduced to none for four, Trueman taking three of the wickets. He finished with four for 27 as India recovered to score 165. England had made 334 in the first innings and a second innings total of 128 for three secured the win. England won the second Test at Lord&#x27;s by 8 wickets. Trueman, again opening the bowling with Bedser, took four for 72 and four for 110. In the third Test at Old Trafford, England won by an innings and 207 runs with Trueman taking eight for 31 and one for 9. The fourth and final Test at the Oval was ruined by rain and drawn after England scored 326 for six declared and India had been bowled out for only 98. Trueman with five for 48 and Bedser with five for 41 were almost unplayable. Trueman&#x27;s tally of wickets in his debut series was therefore 29. He had a problem during the season in &quot;a tendency to get stitch&quot;, which was diagnosed as &quot;a lack of regular fast bowling exercise&quot;.

In the 1952 County Championship, Yorkshire made a strong challenge but ultimately finished as runners-up to Stuart Surridge&#x27;s great Surrey team which began a remarkable run of seven consecutive titles to 1958. Trueman was restricted to five championship appearances but Yorkshire did get Brian Close back from his national service. Yardley was again the captain and the other mainstays were Hutton, Lowson, Lester, Halliday, Wilson, Watson, Sutcliffe, Brennan, Wardle, Leadbeater and the fast-medium bowler Bill Holdsworth who was effectively Trueman&#x27;s stand-in. Holdsworth played 24 matches in 1952 and 1953 only; but never again after Trueman returned to full-time action in 1954.

As a result of his fine performances in 1952, mainly in Test cricket against India, Trueman was voted the Young Cricketer of the Year by the Cricket Writers&#x27; Club. The following spring, he was named as one of the Cricketers of the Year for 1952 by &quot;Wisden Cricketers&#x27; Almanack&quot; in its 1953 edition (the other four were Harold Gimblett, Tom Graveney, David Sheppard and Stuart Surridge). &quot;Wisden&quot; said of Trueman in its dedication that he &quot;is 5 ft 10½ in. and weighs 13st 9lbs&quot; and &quot;gives promise of becoming a second Harold Larwood&quot;. Having mentioned his problem with &quot;stitch&quot;, &quot;Wisden&quot; remarked that &quot;it is doubtful whether Trueman has reached the stage of physical development to bowl the long spells which may be necessary against Test batsmen of the highest class&quot;. While Yorkshire thought Trueman would need two more seasons &quot;before he can do everything asked&quot;, England certainly possess &quot;the best fast bowling prospect in years&quot; and &quot;Wisden&quot; followed this comment with a direct comparison of Trueman&#x27;s attributes with those of Larwood.

Writing in 1999, Derek Birley said of Trueman at this pivotal moment in his career that he was &quot;still learning his craft and, rather more slowly, how to behave&quot;. Birley viewed Trueman as &quot;an early cricketing example of a post-war phenomenon, the brash and undisciplined youth tolerated for his talent – the anti-hero&quot;. Birley admitted that Trueman eventually became &quot;an immensely popular public figure&quot; thanks to his &quot;rudimentary sense of humour, prodigious memory and forthright views&quot;, all of which made him a media favourite on the one hand but, on the other, the same qualities made him &quot;less popular on the county cricket circuit&quot;, where he was &quot;dreaded off the field like the Ancient Mariner&quot;.

Trueman played football for Lincoln City during his national service. He played for RAF Hemswell in the 1952–53 season and was spotted by Lincoln City manager Bill Anderson, who invited him to play for the Lincoln reserves. Trueman was a forward, playing either as a striker or on the wing. Given the publicity he had received after his performances in the 1952 Test series, there was a lot of public interest in his football and Lincoln&#x27;s attendances increased considerably when he was playing. Eventually, Bill Anderson offered him professional terms but Trueman decided to concentrate on cricket and, aware of the risk to his Test and county career if he sustained a football injury, he declined.

The highlight of the 1953 season, for Trueman and all other England cricket followers, was the series victory over Australia that enabled England to win the Ashes for the first time since the bodyline series in 1932–33. Trueman missed the first four Tests, which were all drawn, and played in the last at the Oval which England won by 8 wickets, partly thanks to him taking four important wickets. &quot;Erratic, yes; wild, most certainly; but full of fire and dynamite&quot;, wrote Jack Fingleton.

Yorkshire by contrast had a poor season, though it could partly be excused by the impact of Test calls, injuries and Trueman&#x27;s national service. They dropped to twelfth place in the County Championship, which was then their lowest-ever position. Ray Illingworth, who had made only a handful of appearances previously, was an ever-present in Yorkshire&#x27;s championship team in 1953 and other young prospects making progress were Mike Cowan, Doug Padgett, Bryan Stott and Ken Taylor. Otherwise, the mainstays were as before: Yardley, Hutton, Lowson, Lester, Halliday, Watson, Wilson, Sutcliffe, Brennan and Wardle. Close played in only two matches and Trueman in ten. Bill Holdsworth made 14 appearances and Bill Foord, in his last season before finally deciding to be a schoolteacher, made 22.

===Clashes with authority: 1954 to 1956===

Trueman&#x27;s first overseas tour, to the West Indies, took place the following winter (1953–54) after he was demobilised by the RAF. He played in eight first-class matches, including three of the five Tests, and took 27 wickets at 33.66 with a best effort of five for 45. It was a controversial tour and its ramifications had an adverse impact on Trueman&#x27;s international career during the next few years. MCC at the outset were &quot;riddled with anxiety&quot; about sending a team abroad under a professional captain but could hardly deny Hutton his right having just won the Ashes. England had a very strong team in which the main bowlers were Trevor Bailey, Jim Laker, Tony Lock, Johnny Wardle, Brian Statham and Trueman. On the other hand, there were some strong characters in the team coupled with weak management.

Hutton discouraged fraternisation with the West Indies players and this went decidedly against Trueman&#x27;s grain, given that he was a gregarious character who liked nothing better than to fraternise. Trueman had made friends with Frank Worrell and other West Indian players when he met them in English league cricket and objected strongly to Hutton&#x27;s policy, claiming that he was not alone in this and especially as Hutton gave no reason for it. Trueman suspected the MCC hierarchy (i.e., Allen, Brown, etc.) of instructing Hutton to make the demand. For his own part, he would not allow anyone to dictate to him with whom he should be friends. West Indian writer C. L. R. James commented on the 1953–54 English team that it was &quot;actively disliked&quot;. He said that this was &quot;not due merely to unsportsmanlike behaviour by individuals&quot; but that there was &quot;evidence to show&quot; that the team was there primarily to &quot;establish the prestige of Great Britain, and by that, of the local whites&quot;.

Trueman quickly alienated the West Indian crowds who disliked his belligerent style, especially when he followed instructions and did not show sympathy for batsmen he had hit with the ball. The West Indian fans nicknamed him &quot;&quot;Mr Bumper Man&quot; and someone wrote a calypso about him that was based on the sea shanty &quot;Drunken Sailor&quot;. He fell foul of off-field incidents too, including one in which he and Tony Lock were blamed for something done by Denis Compton who, as the &quot;golden boy&quot; of English cricket, was effectively beyond reproach. It was while the team was in Barbados that one of the most repeated &quot;Trueman stories&quot; is said to have originated, although it is almost certainly apocryphal. At a dinner, Trueman is said to have ordered a local dignitary, apparently the Indian High Commissioner: &quot;Pass t&#x27;salt, Gunga Din&quot;. At the end of the tour, to his outrage, Trueman had his good-conduct bonus docked. No reason was given and he tried without success to obtain one, but neither Hutton nor MCC would elaborate. Trueman never forgave Hutton and the two never played together for England again.

Trueman played in the first Test at Sabina Park but, with figures of two for 107 and none for 32, he proved expensive and West Indies won by 140 runs. He was omitted from the team for both the second and third Tests but then recalled for the fourth at Queen&#x27;s Park Oval which was drawn; Trueman again struggled and had a return of one for 131 in the first innings as West Indies amassed 681 for eight declared, all of the famous &quot;Three Ws&quot; scoring centuries: Everton Weekes 206, Frank Worrell 167 and Clyde Walcott 124. Trueman was retained for the final Test at Sabina Park which England won by nine wickets to square the series two apiece. He opened the bowling with Bailey and returned figures of two for 39 and three for 88, while Bailey produced a match-winning seven for 34 in the first innings when West Indies were all out for only 139.

Back in England after the 1953–54 tour, Trueman in 1954 was able to play a full season for the first time since 1951. Jim Kilburn wrote that, at the age of 23, Trueman &quot;had acquired a man&#x27;s physique for fast bowling that questioned the courage as well as the technique of opposing batsmen&quot;. He played in 33 matches and, for the first time, exceeded 100 wickets in a season. His tally was 134 at 15.55 with a best return of eight for 28. Yorkshire probably should have won the County Championship in 1954 having won six of their first seven matches but were badly hit by wet weather in August and finished runners-up behind Surrey. Trueman and the medium-paced Appleyard formed an effective combination, backed up by Wardle&#x27;s spin, and Yorkshire had a strong bowling side. The rest of the team mostly comprised Hutton, Lowson, Yardley, Lester, Watson, Vic Wilson, Close, Illingworth and wicket-keeper Roy Booth.

Arlott mentions the hard work put in by Trueman to improve his bowling, first by &quot;smoothing out the last minor unevenness in his run-up&quot; and then by achieving increased accuracy. Trueman said in his autobiography that Yorkshire in the early to mid-1950s were constantly let down by divisions in the team, blaming both Yardley and Hutton for the problems. Re the situation in 1954, he specifically mentions Yardley&#x27;s inability to deal with the attitudes of Wardle and Appleyard.

Despite his excellent form for Yorkshire in 1954, there was no place for Trueman in any of the Test matches against Pakistan, nor was he selected for the tour of Australia and New Zealand the following winter. He became engaged to his first wife, Enid Chapman, in September 1954 and they married in March 1955. He worked as a furniture salesman through the winter months.

Trueman had a problem with so-called &quot;drag&quot; in 1955 when he was no-balled twice for not having his rear foot behind the bowling crease when he released the ball (i.e., he had dragged his back foot over the line before completing delivery). To remedy this, he reduced his run up by six yards, and with no apparent loss of pace. Yorkshire were involved in a two-horse race for the County Championship but were again let down by one poor spell, this time in June, and had to settle for second place as Surrey won a fourth consecutive title. With Appleyard ill, Trueman and Wardle shared the main weight of the bowling with support from Close. As Arlott points out, Yorkshire had a &quot;serious weakness&quot; in the lack of a regular fast bowling partner for Trueman. The situation was alleviated when Cowan was available, but his appearances were limited by national service and then by a back injury sustained on the MCC tour of Pakistan in 1955–56. There were some signs of change, most notably with the arrival of Jimmy Binks as wicket-keeper and, with more appearances by Doug Padgett and Ken Taylor, the 1960s team was beginning to take shape. Appleyard, Hutton and Lester were less active than before. Otherwise, the mainstays with Trueman were Close, Illingworth, Lowson, Billy Sutcliffe, Wardle, Watson, Vic Wilson and Yardley.

Trueman did force his way back into the England team for the second Test at Lord&#x27;s in 1955, when England defeated South Africa by 71 runs. Opening the bowling with Statham, he took two for 73, which was expensive, and none for 39 while Statham won the match for England with two for 49 and a brilliant seven for 39. That was Trueman&#x27;s only Test in 1955 as Frank Tyson was recalled for the third Test at Old Trafford. There was no Test tour in 1955–56 so Trueman had to wait a whole year for his next chance to play for England.

The Australians visited England in 1956 and, Peter May having succeeded Hutton as England captain, Trueman was recalled for two Tests. In the second at Lord&#x27;s, which Australia won by 185 runs, he opened the bowling with Statham and took two for 54 and five for 90. During the second innings, he took his 50th wicket in Test cricket when he had Keith Miller caught behind, but Miller had the last laugh as his ten-wicket haul won the match for Australia. Trueman had done enough to retain his place for the third Test at Headingley where England won by an innings and 42 runs. It was a spinner&#x27;s wicket and 18 of the Australian wickets fell to Laker and Lock. Trueman opened the bowling with Bailey and took one for 19 and one for 21, dismissing Colin McDonald in both innings. Brian Statham returned for the now legendary fourth Test at Old Trafford, taking Trueman&#x27;s place and opening the bowling with Bailey, but no pace bowlers were needed here for this was &quot;Laker&#x27;s Match&quot;, the Surrey off-spinner taking an unparalleled 19 wickets in the match.

Trueman made 31 first-class appearances in 1956 but had difficulty with a persistent strain in his left side, exacerbated by occasional sciatica, and he reverted to his long run after more problems with drag at the start of the season. Yorkshire&#x27;s team underwent change before the season began with the retirements of Hutton and Yardley. Yardley was succeeded as captain by Billy Sutcliffe, with whom Trueman had a good relationship. Rain badly affected the County Championship and Yorkshire managed only eight wins in their 28 matches to finish seventh. With Trueman largely ineffective due to his injury, the bowling was carried by Appleyard, Wardle and the emerging Ray Illingworth. Binks, Illingworth and Vic Wilson played in all of Yorkshire&#x27;s 28 championship matches in 1956. The other essential players, besides Trueman when fit, were Appleyard, Close, Lowson, Padgett, Sutcliffe, Taylor, Wardle and Watson.

Trueman was not included in the 1956–57 tour of South Africa, in which England relied for pace on Bailey, Statham, Tyson and Peter Loader. To keep his name in the frame, Trueman accepted an invitation to make a short tour of India with C. G. Howard&#x27;s XI, which played two matches between 30 December and 8 January. Howard&#x27;s team included Alec Bedser, Tom Graveney, Bill Edrich, Reg Simpson, Willie Watson and the Australians Bruce Dooland and Colin McCool. The two matches, played in Calcutta and Bombay, were to celebrate the Silver Jubilee of the Cricket Association of Bengal, Trueman taking eight wickets and achieving top score in one innings when he struck a rapid 46 not out.

===The great Test bowler: 1957 to 1964===
In 1952, after Trueman&#x27;s early success against India, Len Hutton had commented that he needed another five years to mature as a bowler; and it was in 1957 that Trueman returned to the fore and finally became an established England player. He overcame his side strain and recovered his form, taking 27 wickets in his first four matches. New regulations about time-wasting caused him to reconsider his run up which he limited to eighteen yards.

Trueman was selected for the first Test against West Indies and kept his place for the entire series. He was England&#x27;s leading wicket-taker with 22 at 20.68. His great partnership with Statham began in earnest and for six years the pair were a formidable presence in international cricket, Statham noted for his accuracy and persistence, Trueman for his rhythm and dynamics. Trueman&#x27;s selection in this series can be put into some perspective by the fact that his great rival Frank Tyson achieved 100 wickets in a season for the first time, yet Trueman was now clearly considered England&#x27;s best option to partner Statham. As Arlott recounts, the third Test at Trent Bridge featured &quot;one of the finest sustained bowling performances of Trueman&#x27;s life&quot;. In a high-scoring match which was eventually drawn, Trueman and Statham took 15 wickets between them from a combined 135 overs, which is a considerable total for two pace bowlers. In the context of the match, they were both outstanding and their joint performance was acclaimed as the first major success in a partnership that the selectors now regarded as long-term. England did not have an overseas tour in the winter of 1957–58.

Trueman played in 32 first-class matches in 1957, taking 135 wickets. He had an outstanding time in his favoured leg slip position, holding 36 catches. There were more problems in the Yorkshire dressing room, principally a petition started by certain players for the club committee to sack Billy Sutcliffe from the captaincy. Trueman refused to sign it but, in August, Sutcliffe decided to resign. Despite this, Yorkshire still managed to finish third, though a long way behind champions Surrey. Yorkshire&#x27;s main players in 1957 were Appleyard, Binks, Close, Illingworth, Lowson, Padgett, Sutcliffe, Taylor, Trueman, Wardle, Watson and Vic Wilson.

Ronnie Burnet was Yorkshire&#x27;s new captain in 1958. Not an accomplished player, though he had previously captained the club&#x27;s Second XI, he was a good man-manager and a firm disciplinarian who could get the best out of what was to be a new team in which Trueman was, apart from Brian Close and Vic Wilson, the most experienced player. Burnet made his mark in 1958 with the sacking of Wardle for disciplinary reasons. The other &quot;trouble-maker&quot;, Appleyard, lost his ability as a result of his illnesses and Yorkshire dropped him for good mid-season. Although the team could only finish 11th in the County Championship, having lost 24 full days to the weather, it was a much happier dressing room than it had been since 1946. Regular team members now included Binks, Brian Bolus, Burnet, Close, Cowan, Trueman, Illingworth, Lowson, Padgett, David Pickles, Phil Sharpe, Stott, Taylor, Trueman, Don Wilson and Vic Wilson which meant that the great Yorkshire team of the 1960s was really beginning to take shape.

Trueman played in all five Tests against New Zealand in 1958, taking 15 wickets in the series at an average of 17.06. This was a wet summer and most of the bowling in the series was done by spinners, but he still managed five for 31 in the first Test at Edgbaston. He pulled off a remarkable anticipatory catch in the Lord&#x27;s Test when he stepped forward from his short leg position to catch the ball off a defensive stroke with his hand on the batsman&#x27;s boot. In the final Test at the Oval, he made the highest score of his whole Test career with 39* in twenty minutes, including three sixes off Alex Moir.

Despite sending what was, on paper, a very strong team on the 1958–59 tour of Australasia, England lost the Ashes to Richie Benaud&#x27;s Australians, who won the series 4–0 with the third Test drawn. Tom Graveney recalled that &quot;it was a miserable tour (and England) were never a team&quot;. Graveney agreed with Trueman that the biggest problem was the tour manager, Brown, who &quot;did a very bad job&quot;. Graveney confirmed that Brown had been rude to several team members and &quot;was a very stuck-up individual, at least when he was sober&quot;. Brown tried to make trouble for Trueman from the outset of the tour but Trueman had learned a lot from his West Indian experience five years earlier and made a formal complaint about Brown to the team captain, Peter May. Although May was a public school-educated amateur like Brown, he supported Trueman and reprimanded Brown, telling him to &quot;act in a manner more befitting someone with managerial responsibility&quot;. For his part, Trueman described Brown as &quot;a snob, bad-mannered, ignorant and a bigot&quot;.

Trueman was one of several players who suffered injury or illness on the tour and missed the first Test because of a back problem. He was fit in time for the second Test but was not selected. He took part in the last three Tests, taking nine wickets with a best analysis of four for 90. At the Sydney Cricket Ground, he established an excellent rapport with the Australian spectators. The fourth Test at the Adelaide Oval was the only one in which Statham, Trueman and Tyson played together for England. On the New Zealand leg of the tour, he played in all five first-class matches, including two Tests, and took 20 wickets.

For the first time in Trueman&#x27;s career, Yorkshire won the County Championship outright in 1959. He made a major contribution to that success as he took 140 wickets. Arlott wrote of Trueman&#x27;s deep commitment to the Yorkshire cause in 1959, the title win being the achievement of a career ambition. Trueman owed personal loyalty to Burnet and had developed affinity with his younger colleagues. The club&#x27;s main players in 1959 were Binks, Bolus, Burnet, Close, Illingworth, Padgett, seamer Bob Platt, Sharpe, Stott, Taylor, Trueman and the Wilsons.

England played India in the 1959 Test series and Trueman, whose selection problems were by now behind him, played in all five Tests. He bowled the most overs and took the most wickets, 24 at 16.70. The series was a poor contest, England winning all five Tests as India had a very weak team at the time. The outcome of the series was evident in the first Test, which England won by an innings and 59 runs. &quot;Wisden&quot; records how England captain Peter May used his three pace bowlers Trueman, Statham and Alan Moss &quot;in short relays to keep them fresh&quot;. The tactics gave India &quot;no respite&quot; and Trueman, the main destroyer, &quot;always looked likely to tear through the whole side&quot;.

When MCC toured the West Indies in 1959–60, England had a largely rebuilt team and were not expected to do well but several batsmen scored Test centuries and England won the series 1–0 with four matches drawn. In direct contrast to his previous visit to the Caribbean, this tour was Trueman&#x27;s happiest and most successful, largely because he had an excellent relationship with the manager Walter Robins and did not have to put up with the likes of Allen and Brown.

In 1960, Vic Wilson having succeeded the retired Burnet as captain, Yorkshire won the Championship again but Kilburn wrote that they did so &quot;without laying any pretensions to being an outstanding side&quot;. Trueman&#x27;s bowling by then contributed the team&#x27;s main strength. He played in all five Tests that summer against South Africa yet still captured 150 wickets for Yorkshire, sometimes serving as a fast-medium bowler off a shortened run. His outstanding performance was taking seven in both innings against Surrey at the Oval. Trueman&#x27;s value to the team was illustrated by them, in Kilburn&#x27;s words, &quot;having to wait for wickets when he was not in action&quot;. He made 32 first-class appearances and took 175 wickets, the highest season tally of his entire career, at the outstanding average of 13.98. Yorkshire&#x27;s team in 1960 was mostly drawn from Binks, Jack Birkenshaw, Bolus, Close, Cowan, Illingworth, Padgett, Mel Ryan, Sharpe, Stott, Taylor, Trueman and the Wilsons.

The 1960 Test series against South Africa was the first time Trueman and Statham bowled together throughout and Arlott wrote that they &quot;virtually won that Test rubber&quot;. England won the first three Tests and, in these, Trueman and Statham shared 39 wickets. Their final tallies were Statham 27 and Trueman 25. In its summary of the series, &quot;Wisden&quot; said that the South African batsmen did not come up to expectations because they could not handle Statham and Trueman.

Trueman played in the first four Tests against Australia in 1961 and, although he effectively won the third Test for England, they failed to regain the Ashes. Wisden said that the third Test, played at Headingley, should be remembered as &quot;Trueman&#x27;s Match&quot; because &quot;two devastating spells by him caused Australia to collapse&quot;. He took eleven wickets in the match for 88 runs, his best performance in Test cricket to date, and England won by eight wickets with two days to spare. Yorkshire finished second in the County Championship behind Hampshire, who won the title for the first time. Playfair said the Yorkshire team were looking distinctly jaded in the closing matches. Trueman and Illingworth were the outstanding bowlers for Yorkshire, both taking over 120 wickets in county matches.

In 1962, Yorkshire regained the County Championship title, but had to defeat Glamorgan on the final day of the season to secure the necessary points. Vic Wilson retired at the end of the season. The main players were Binks, Bolus, Close, Illingworth, Padgett, Ryan, Sharpe, Stott, Taylor, Trueman, Don Wilson and Vic Wilson. In another outstanding season of pace and swing, Trueman took 153 first-class wickets in 33 first-class appearances. He also scored 840 runs, which was the best season tally of his whole career but, because of inconsistency, he remained well short of the standard required if he was to be termed an all-rounder, though that is not something he ever pursued given his workload as a specialist bowler. In a five-Test series that year, England made short work of a Pakistan team that was weak in attack. As in 1961, Trueman played in the first four Tests but not the fifth Test at the Oval. He took 22 wickets in the series, his best match being the second Test at Lord&#x27;s in which he took nine, the highlight being six for 31 in the first innings to bowl Pakistan out for only 100.

Trueman and Statham had taken 216 and 229 Test wickets respectively after the 1962 season so, when they toured Australia and New Zealand in 1962–63, both were poised to overtake the world record of 236 set by Alec Bedser, who was England&#x27;s assistant-manager on the tour. Australian captain Richie Benaud was also in contention with 219 but, as expected, it was Statham who broke the record and he extended it to 242 wickets. Statham did not play in New Zealand and Trueman was then able to overtake him, extending the record to 250. The series was drawn, one win apiece, so Australia retained the Ashes. Trueman took three for 83 and five for 62 in England&#x27;s victory at the Melbourne Cricket Ground when captain Ted Dexter used him in short bursts, setting defensive fields until he could return.

Although England were well beaten by Frank Worrell&#x27;s outstanding West Indies team in 1963, Trueman had an outstanding series. After West Indies won the first Test at Old Trafford by ten wickets, many thought they would cruise to a series win but Trueman inspired an England fightback. The second Test at Lord&#x27;s was a classic match in which all four results were possible until the last couple of balls but it ended in a draw. Trueman took eleven wickets in the match with six for 100 and five for 52. Richie Benaud, who had just joined BBC TV, said that Trueman &quot;showed wonderful control of swing and length&quot; in a &quot;magnificent&quot; performance. In the third Test at Edgbaston, Trueman went one better by routing West Indies for England to win by 217 runs. He took five for 75 and seven for 44. In the second innings, he took the last six West Indian wickets in only 24 balls at a cost of four runs. It was all to no avail, though, as West Indies won both the last two Tests to take the series by three Tests to one.

Yorkshire retained the County Championship title in 1963. Tony Nicholson reinforced Yorkshire&#x27;s faster bowling and provided Trueman with an able accomplice. In addition, Yorkshire&#x27;s batting was considerably enhanced by the emergence of Geoff Boycott and John Hampshire. Trueman took 76 wickets in the Championship, 34 in Tests and 129 in all matches. By this time firmly in the category of senior cricketers, Trueman was well aware of his position and its implied privileges but realised that both his energies and his resolve had to be nurtured. He captured five wickets in each innings when Yorkshire defeated West Indies at Acklam Park, eight for 45 against Gloucestershire at Bradford and, for England, had a match return of 12 for 119 at Edgbaston. He scored two centuries, the first of his career, one against Northamptonshire which Kilburn described as &quot;timely in the context of the match&quot; and the other at the Scarborough Festival where he hit six sixes and 11 fours in 67 minutes.

Trueman was selected for the first three Tests against Australia in 1964, was omitted from the fourth and then recalled for the fifth in which he became the first bowler to capture 300 Test wickets. England again failed to recover the Ashes in a generally disappointing 1964 series which is only memorable for Trueman&#x27;s unprecedented feat. On 15 August 1964, he reached the milestone when he had Neil Hawke caught by Colin Cowdrey at slip in the fifth Test at the Oval. Hawke, a good friend of Trueman off the field, was the first to congratulate him. The occasion produced one of Trueman&#x27;s few concessions to fatigue when he was asked if he thought his record would ever be broken and he quipped: &quot;Aye, but whoever does it will be bloody tired&quot;. As Warr pointed out: &quot;This comment reveals the essence of the man. A touch of belligerence, a hint of humility, a pinch of roughness and an over-riding sense of humour&quot;. Meanwhile, Yorkshire lost the County Championship title which was won for the first time by a very strong Worcestershire team which starred Tom Graveney and featured Basil D&#x27;Oliveira, Norman Gifford and fast bowlers Len Coldwell and Jack Flavell. Trueman&#x27;s overall achievements in 1964 did not meet his own high standards and his tally of exactly 100 wickets was well down on his totals in recent seasons.

===Final flourishes: 1965 to 1972===

Trueman&#x27;s Test career ended in 1965 after he had played in the first two of a three-match series against New Zealand. In Kilburn&#x27;s view, Trueman&#x27;s &quot;decline&quot; was &quot;not from skilful and purposeful and beautiful bowling but from devastating fast bowling&quot; and it may have been accelerated by the change in 1964 to the no-ball law which, he contends, impacted the rhythm of fast bowlers with long run-ups culminating in a long delivery stride. Trueman continued to play first-class cricket for Yorkshire till the end of the 1968 season when his retirement was by his own decision. He bowed out of Test cricket with a then world record of 307 wickets at an average of 21.54.

Although he was the first bowler to take 300 Test wickets, he had undergone numerous clashes and problems with the England cricketing hierarchy and was not involved in the tours of Australia (1954–55); South Africa (1956–57) and (1964–65); India and Pakistan (1961–62); or India (1963–64). From the beginning to the end of his international career, England played 118 Tests and he missed 51 of them. He recalled in his memoirs: &quot;Irrespective of the fact I was at the top of my game for Yorkshire and frequently topped the county bowling averages, I was often overlooked for England. To my mind the reason for this was personal. Quite simply, some of the selection committee did not like my forthright attitude, which they misinterpreted as being &quot;bolshy&quot;. Rather than pick the best eleven players for the job, the selection committee would often choose someone because he was, in their eyes, a gentleman and a decent chap. Such attributes often took precedence over someone&#x27;s ability to play international cricket&quot;. He also wrote: &quot;For this reason I was selected for far fewer Tests than I believe I should have been. To my mind, if I&#x27;d had the opportunity to play in those Tests, I&#x27;m sure I would have topped 400 wickets. But that was not to be, even though I was regularly taking 100-plus wickets a season for Yorkshire&quot;.

Trueman made 33 first-class appearances in 1966 and was able to focus on his county career, helping the team to win the first of three consecutive County Championships to 1968. He says he &quot;grew old gracefully (in cricketing terms)&quot;. He took 111 wickets, the twelfth and final time that he achieved 100 in a season. He made 31 first-class appearances in 1967 but greatly reduced his workload as a bowler, operating mainly in short spells. He had recognised that he could no longer maintain fast pace for the same time as he had done formerly, though he did comment on encountering &quot;any number of sluggish wickets that summer&quot;.

In 1968, with Brian Close injured for a long period, Trueman was Yorkshire&#x27;s acting captain in several matches and ensured that the team completed their hat-trick of titles. An event that gave Trueman considerable satisfaction was to lead Yorkshire to victory, by an innings and 69 runs, against a Test-strength Australian team at Bramall Lane. Trueman showed great tactical awareness throughout the match with a timely declaration of Yorkshire&#x27;s innings and then ensuring that Australia faced slow bowlers only during periods of poor light. He himself took key wickets and Yorkshire, always in control, &quot;surged confidently to their victory&quot;. He followed his policy of the previous season by bowling in short spells.

Following Yorkshire&#x27;s victory over the Australians, Trueman decided to take stock of his career and decided that it was a good time to retire, so that he could &quot;bow out while still at the top&quot;. As it happened, Brian Statham had announced that he would retire at the end of the season and Trueman decided to delay his own announcement after seeing the emotion of Statham&#x27;s last match at Old Trafford. Trueman admitted that he would be unable to cope with a similar display of emotion by Yorkshire followers and postponed his announcement until well after the season had ended. He then quietly delivered a polite letter to the Yorkshire committee and so happily &quot;avoided a big farewell&quot;

Although he had officially retired, Trueman made one final first-class appearance in 1969 when he agreed to appear at the Scarborough Festival and play for the International Cavaliers against the touring Barbados team. He surprisingly reappeared in 1972 when he joined Derbyshire and played in six limited overs matches.

===Summary of career statistics===
For the details of this, see &quot;Playfair&quot; in 1969 and 1970. Trueman&#x27;s autobiography has an extensive career stats appendix starting on page 381.

In 603 first-class matches, Trueman scored 9,231 runs, including three centuries, with a highest score of 104 and held 439 catches. He took 2,304 wickets, including four hat-tricks, at an average of 18.27 with a best analysis of eight for 28. In 67 Test appearances, he scored 981 runs with a highest score of 39* and held 64 catches. He took a then world record 307 Test wickets with a best analysis of eight for 31. His tally of 1,745 wickets for Yorkshire is bettered only by Wilfred Rhodes, George Hirst, Schofield Haigh and George Macaulay. He achieved 100 wickets in a season on 12 occasions, with a best return of 175 wickets in 1960. He holds the record for most consecutive first-class matches played (67) in which he took a wicket. Trueman played in only 18 limited overs matches and took 28 wickets.

==Style and technique==

===Approach to cricket===
In his own words, Fred Trueman &quot;didn&#x27;t play cricket for social reasons like some of the fancy amateurs&quot;. It was his living and he &quot;played to win&quot;. Conversely, he would try and do something each day to make the crowd laugh and &quot;he breathed life and humour into any cricket match&quot;. He took his bowling very seriously indeed but he liked to entertain when he was batting or fielding. On the occasions when he captained his team, especially in 1968 when Brian Close was injured for a long time, he proved to be &quot;a shrewd and intelligent exponent of the craft (of captaincy)&quot;.

According to David Frith, it was his &quot;sense of fun and mischief&quot; that prompted Trueman to make a habit of visiting the opposition dressing room and this was always &quot;more than a social call&quot;. Sometimes he did genuinely want to see a &quot;good mate&quot; in the other team, such as Tony Lock or Brian Statham, but more often than not it was &quot;a declaration of war, an acutely personal challenge, clothed in rollicking humour and self-caricature&quot;.

Trueman always maintained his hostility towards the perceived arrogance and &quot;snobbishness&quot; of some in the cricketing establishment, especially the likes of Allen (or &quot;Sir&quot;, as he wished to be called). Trueman hated what he called &quot;fancy caps&quot; or &quot;jazz &#x27;ats&quot;, which specifically meant those of MCC and the universities, and was alleged to say on seeing the wearer of such a cap that he would &quot;pin him to t&#x27;bloody sightscreen&quot;. On one occasion, a Cambridge University batsman, having just been dismissed, acknowledged him with the condescending compliment: &quot;That was a very good ball, Mr Trueman&quot;. Trueman replied: &quot;Aye, wasted on thee&quot;. In a similar vein, his view of the Gentlemen v Players fixture was that it was a &quot;ludicrous business&quot; that was &quot;thankfully abolished&quot; after the 1962 season.

===Bowling===
John Warr, with whom Trueman shared his first-class debut, wrote that from the beginning of his career, Trueman&#x27;s run-up was &quot;curving and long but nicely modulated&quot;. David Frith continued with Trueman reaching the wicket, where he turned his body side-on and cocked back his ball-carrying right arm, as the leading left arm was hoisted, before &quot;an awesome cartwheel&quot; sent him into a follow through which &quot;resembled a Sea Fury finishing its mission along the runway of an aircraft carrier&quot;. Warr said Trueman&#x27;s final stride had a &quot;pronounced drag&quot; which caused him some difficulties when the front-foot rule was introduced. His bowling arm was kept high through the delivery stride, to generate extra bounce and pace off the pitch, and the movement of the ball was &quot;predominantly away from the bat&quot; (i.e., the out-swinger). Trueman himself maintained that his ability to bowl outswingers consistently was &quot;another new ingredient I brought to the county game&quot;. As Maurice Leyland said to him: &quot;Keep bowling those outswingers, Fred, and you&#x27;ll be all right. That&#x27;s the one that gets the great batsmen out!&quot; Trueman acknowledged that other great fast bowlers who could bowl the outswinger well were Ray Lindwall and Wes Hall; but Brian Statham and Frank Tyson could not.

In Jim Kilburn&#x27;s view, &quot;(Trueman&#x27;s) place among the truly great bowlers of cricket history is beyond question&quot;. He had a &quot;resilience of spirit (that was) as marked as the physical power that gave him such remarkable freedom from injury over the years&quot;. His name on the team-sheet was &quot;an advertisement for any match&quot;. Trueman&#x27;s method was a long, accelerating run-up ending in a wide delivery stride with a &quot;cartwheel&quot; swing of the arms and a balanced follow-through. Technically, he was &quot;highly accomplished&quot; as he had much more than mere speed at his command, for he learned in-swing, out-swing and variation of pace and length. Kilburn&#x27;s final analysis of Trueman&#x27;s contribution to Yorkshire cricket is: &quot;In an XI representing all the county history he would be selected&quot;.

In his early days, Trueman had very fast pace but tended to be wayward and was liable to be punished accordingly. His natural hostility in that period earned him his famous nickname of &quot;Fiery Fred&quot;. As time went by, much of the belligerence and raw pace faded being replaced by a growing mastery of the bowling arts. Strength, determination and stamina were always among Trueman&#x27;s greatest attributes and with maturity came a control of both seam and swing. In Warr&#x27;s view, Trueman learned that it was unwise to always follow a boundary with a bouncer and instead he cultivated the yorker as &quot;a potent weapon&quot;. Trueman was one of the most charismatic cricketers of the post-war period and this charisma has been summarised by Mick Pope and Paul Dyson in &quot;the rolling up of the flapping shirt sleeve on the walk back to his mark; the tossing back of the wayward locks of black hair before the smooth accelerated run to the wicket culminating with a high cartwheel action and drag of the back foot through the crease&quot;, the conclusion being that &quot;Trueman is one of English cricket&#x27;s icons&quot;.

Trueman&#x27;s career lasted twenty seasons, an extremely long span for a fast bowler, and Arlott noted of him that he maintained his form and ability &quot;much longer than the peak period (i.e., a decade) of even the best of the kind (and) he was, when the fire burned, as fine a fast bowler as any&quot;. When explaining his success as a fast bowler, Trueman always maintained that he was &quot;blessed by two things from birth&quot;: the &quot;Trueman tenacity&quot; and the &quot;perfect physique for a fast bowler&quot;. He said that the essentials for that perfect physique were having strong, thick legs – &quot;always the first essentials&quot; – with big shoulders and hips.

&quot;Wisden&quot; described Fred Trueman as &quot;probably the greatest fast bowler England has produced&quot;. Trueman would have considered this to be an understatement as he believed himself to be &quot;t&#x27;finest fast bowler that ever drew breath&quot; and there were many who agreed with him.

===Batting and fielding===
Although he always saw himself as a specialist bowler, Trueman was an outstanding fielder and a useful late order batsman. He preferred to field close in, his favourite position being leg slip, and he was a fine and safe catcher. Warr says Trueman was a &quot;brilliant ambidextrous thrower&quot; and he &quot;made life very easy for his captain to place him advantageously in the field&quot;. Though he had some talent as a batsman, Trueman never aspired to becoming a genuine all-rounder. He lacked the necessary consistency as he batted primarily to entertain but he had a good defensive technique with a range of attacking strokes which he would employ boldly. His batting consistency did improve in later years and he scored three first-class centuries.

==Media work==
===&quot;Test Match Special&quot;===
Trueman was an expert summariser for the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Test Match Special&quot; radio cricket commentaries from 1974 to 1999, forming close friendships with commentators John Arlott and Brian Johnston. He was well known for his direct style of commentary and frequently used a catch phrase, &quot;I don&#x27;t know what&#x27;s going off out there&quot;, to express his dismay that current England players lacked his knowledge of tactics. Trueman was noted for his dislike of many aspects of the modern game, especially one-day cricket and the frequency with which current fast bowlers sustained injury. He was criticised by some for being unduly negative about current players and for glorifying cricket &quot;in my day&quot;. He once remarked, amusingly without any sense of irony: &quot;We didn&#x27;t have metaphors in my day. We didn&#x27;t beat about the bush&quot;.

Trueman was nevertheless respected for his unsurpassed knowledge of the mechanics of fast bowling, and many feel he should have been used as a bowling coach for England&#x27;s under-achieving teams of the 1980s and 1990s, a point once emphasised by his fellow-summariser Trevor Bailey on &quot;Test Match Special&quot;. A good example of Trueman&#x27;s coaching ability had occurred in 1975 when he was approached by the Australian fast bowler Dennis Lillee for help. Lillee was having trouble with both his run-up and bowling action, problems that Trueman had already observed and mentioned on the radio. Trueman gave Lillee the technical advice that provided the solution and Lillee was soon able to recover his form, though this was at the expense of England. Trueman received criticism from many people in the England camp for helping an Australian player, especially after Lillee publicly acknowledged his debt to Trueman. Bailey, on the other hand, completely rejected this criticism and said that the &quot;prima donnas&quot; of English cricket should also have the sense to consult experts like Trueman.

===Television, journalism and other media work===
In the 1970s Trueman presented the Yorkshire Television ITV programme &quot;Indoor League&quot;, which was broadcast at 5.15 pm on a Thursday evening, after the children&#x27;s programmes. This show had a notably Northern, working class focus, and featured pub games such as darts, bar billiards, shove ha&#x27;penny, skittles and arm-wrestling. Trueman anchored the programme with a pint of bitter and his pipe to hand, and signed off each week with his catchphrase, &quot;Ah&#x27;ll sithee&quot; (Yorkshire dialect for &quot;I&#x27;ll be seeing you&quot;).

He made guest appearances in many British television programmes of the 1970s. He played himself in an episode of &quot;Two in Clover&quot; (series 2, episode 6), where he appeared alongside Sid James and Victor Spinetti. Another notable appearance was as Earnest Egan in the &quot;Dad&#x27;s Army&quot; episode &quot;The Test&quot; (series 4, episode 10), which centred on a cricket match. Trueman&#x27;s character bowled one ball and then retired with a shoulder injury.

He was the subject of &quot;This Is Your Life&quot; on 5 December 1979. He wrote a column in the &quot;Sunday People&quot; newspaper for 43 years to provide coverage of cricket and rugby league. Soon after his retirement from cricket, he tried his hand at being a stand-up comedian but found after-dinner speaking to be a more congenial and lucrative occupation.

==Personal and family life==

Fred Trueman married Enid Chapman on 19 March 1955 at All Saints&#x27; Church, Scarborough, and had three children: Karen, Rebecca and Rodney. After divorce in 1972, Trueman remarried on 28 February 1973 at the register office in Skipton. His second wife was Veronica Wilson who had two children: Sheenagh and Patrick. They lived in the Craven village of Flasby in the Yorkshire Dales. Trueman was the titular proprietor of a company called Freddie Trueman Sports Ltd which operated a sporting goods shop in Skipton until it was dissolved.

In June 1991, his daughter Rebecca married Damon Welch, the son of film actress Raquel Welch, but the marriage ended in divorce two years later.

==Politics==

Trueman was a monarchist and long-time supporter of the Conservative Party.

==Honours==

Trueman was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 1989 Birthday Honours for services to cricket. After his &quot;Test Match Special&quot; colleague Brian Johnston had nicknamed him &quot;Sir Frederick&quot;, there were those who thought he had really been knighted and many, particularly in his native county, who could not understand why he had not.

Having been a pipe-smoker all of his adult life, Trueman was elected Pipe Smoker of the Year in 1974 by the British Pipesmokers&#x27; Council. This award was discontinued in 2004, two years before Trueman was diagnosed with lung cancer, because its organisers feared it fell foul of new laws on tobacco promotion.

==Death==

Trueman was diagnosed with small cell carcinoma of the lung in May 2006. He died of the disease on 1 July 2006 at Airedale General Hospital in Steeton with Eastburn, West Yorkshire. His funeral service was held at the Bolton Priory on 6 July, and was attended by former and current Yorkshire players, including Ray Illingworth and Brian Close. His body was then interred in the Priory&#x27;s cemetery. A book of condolence was also opened at Headingley cricket ground and later presented to his widow. 
==Statue==

On 18 March 2010, a bronze statue of Trueman (&quot;illustrated above&quot;) by Yorkshire-born sculptor Graham Ibbeson was unveiled by Veronica Trueman at the Leeds and Liverpool Canal basin in Skipton. Also in attendance were Trueman&#x27;s brother Dennis and the former Test umpire Dickie Bird.

==See also==
* List of international cricket five-wicket hauls by Fred Trueman

==References==
==Bibliography==

===Specific===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Article on Fred Trueman written by John Warr.
* 
* 

===General===
* &quot;Playfair Cricket Annual&quot; (1950 to 1969). Playfair Books Ltd.
* &quot;Wisden Cricketers&#x27; Almanack&quot; (1950 to 1969). John Wisden &amp; Co. Ltd.

==External links==

===Information===

===Photographs===
* Fred Trueman, wearing his England sweater, celebrates a successful bowling spell
* Fred Trueman&#x27;s bowling action – his sideways-on style
* Fred Trueman&#x27;s bowling action – his follow-through
* Fred Trueman (top right) and the 1954 Yorkshire team
* Fred Trueman celebrates his 300th wicket in Test cricket with his England team mates
* Fred Trueman on &quot;Test Match Special&quot;
* Fred Trueman and the cast of &quot;Dad&#x27;s Army&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3535440" start="0" end="25" title="Fred Trueman" label="Frederick Sewards Trueman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="74" end="81" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177444" start="99" end="128" title="Yorkshire County Cricket Club" label="Yorkshire County Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321565" start="137" end="157" title="England cricket team" label="England cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="166" end="185" title="Amateur status in first-class cricket#Distinction between amateurs and professionals" label="professional status"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965383" start="465" end="478" title="Brian Statham" label="Brian Statham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="660" end="668" title="Fielding positions in cricket#Catching positions" label="leg slip"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="683" end="693" title="Batting order (cricket)#Lower order or tail" label="late order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026317" start="729" end="738" title="century (cricket)" label="centuries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="759" end="779" title="Cap (sport)#Cricket" label="Yorkshire county cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184991" start="818" end="845" title="Cricket Writers&amp;#x27; Club Young Cricketer of the Year" label="Young Cricketer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569447" start="952" end="981" title="Wisden Cricketers of the Year" label="Wisden Cricketers of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304651" start="1011" end="1043" title="Wisden Cricketers&amp;#x27; Almanack" label="Wisden Cricketers&amp;#x27; Almanack"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="1127" end="1140" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1587" end="1590" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377229" start="1616" end="1634" title="Test Match Special" label="Test Match Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="1661" end="1664" title="Officer of the Order of the British Empire" label="OBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585083" start="1672" end="1693" title="1989 Birthday Honours" label="1989 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146533" start="1758" end="1782" title="ICC Cricket Hall of Fame" label="ICC Cricket Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q733178" start="2007" end="2015" title="Stainton, South Yorkshire" label="Stainton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734841" start="2021" end="2027" title="Maltby, South Yorkshire" label="Maltby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934075" start="2029" end="2053" title="West Riding of Yorkshire" label="West Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744761" start="2917" end="2937" title="Maltby Main Colliery" label="Maltby Main Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q820037" start="3104" end="3119" title="miner" label="coalface worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="3366" end="3373" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4295" end="4317" title="Amateur status in first-class cricket#Distinction between amateurs and professionals" label="professional cricketer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177444" start="4633" end="4642" title="Yorkshire County Cricket Club" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200902" start="4650" end="4662" title="Cyril Turner" label="Cyril Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492768" start="4684" end="4713" title="Sheffield United Cricket Club" label="Sheffield United Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q897533" start="4730" end="4742" title="Bramall Lane" label="Bramall Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="4790" end="4809" title="first-class cricket" label="first-class cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506615" start="4980" end="4995" title="Swing bowling" label="swing both ways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951198" start="5007" end="5021" title="follow through (cricket)" label="follow through"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061609" start="5348" end="5358" title="Headingley Cricket Ground" label="Headingley"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="5360" end="5365" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528384" start="5392" end="5402" title="Bill Bowes" label="Bill Bowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526587" start="5407" end="5422" title="Arthur Mitchell (cricketer)" label="Arthur Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334335" start="5711" end="5722" title="Brian Close" label="Brian Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526947" start="5727" end="5742" title="Ray Illingworth" label="Ray Illingworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527312" start="5920" end="5932" title="George Hirst" label="George Hirst"/>
<link wikidata="Q95847" start="6000" end="6017" title="Herbert Sutcliffe" label="Herbert Sutcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321565" start="6097" end="6104" title="England national cricket team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q949035" start="6321" end="6341" title="Cambridge University Cricket Club" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443529" start="6345" end="6358" title="Fenner&amp;#x27;s" label="Fenner&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q821330" start="6363" end="6380" title="Oxford University Cricket Club" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894869" start="6384" end="6393" title="University Parks" label="the Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196454" start="6604" end="6610" title="wicket" label="wicket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684170" start="6646" end="6657" title="spin bowling" label="spin bowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304651" start="6671" end="6677" title="Wisden Cricketers&amp;#x27; Almanack" label="Wisden"/>
<link wikidata="Q45085" start="6760" end="6771" title="Fast bowling" label="medium pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q810903" start="6976" end="6979" title="batting (cricket)" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365985" start="7070" end="7084" title="Ellis Robinson (cricketer)" label="Ellis Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505744" start="7142" end="7148" title="Sussex County Cricket Club" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927269" start="7169" end="7183" title="Hubert Doggart" label="Hubert Doggart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869924" start="7269" end="7284" title="opening batsman" label="opening batsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488023" start="7285" end="7297" title="Frank Lowson" label="Frank Lowson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725694" start="7317" end="7326" title="Middlesex County Cricket Club" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000003" start="7339" end="7348" title="John Warr" label="John Warr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869173" start="7629" end="7643" title="Minor Counties" label="Minor Counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q331613" start="7671" end="7682" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137275" start="7754" end="7773" title="County Championship" label="County Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725632" start="7789" end="7795" title="Surrey County Cricket Club" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137616" start="7799" end="7810" title="Park Avenue (stadium)" label="Park Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905" start="7812" end="7820" title="Bradford" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714110" start="8095" end="8105" title="Alec Coxon" label="Alec Coxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827600" start="8110" end="8122" title="Ron Aspinall" label="Ron Aspinall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333749" start="8156" end="8170" title="Norman Yardley" label="Norman Yardley"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8574" end="8590" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137275" start="8692" end="8711" title="County Championship" label="County Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965251" start="8746" end="8759" title="Brian Sellers" label="Brian Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q969666" start="8822" end="8832" title="Len Hutton" label="Len Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693439" start="8834" end="8844" title="Ted Lester" label="Ted Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669415" start="8846" end="8860" title="Harry Halliday (cricketer, born 1920)" label="Harry Halliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924940" start="8862" end="8872" title="Vic Wilson (cricketer)" label="Vic Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179691" start="8874" end="8887" title="Willie Watson (England cricketer)" label="Willie Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526150" start="8889" end="8902" title="Frank Smailes" label="Frank Smailes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527057" start="8904" end="8917" title="Johnny Wardle" label="Johnny Wardle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292314" start="8919" end="8946" title="Don Brennan (cricketer)" label="Don Brennan (wicket-keeper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365985" start="8948" end="8962" title="Ellis Robinson (cricketer)" label="Ellis Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913348" start="9035" end="9050" title="Billy Sutcliffe" label="Billy Sutcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909014" start="9091" end="9101" title="Bill Foord" label="Bill Foord"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263830" start="9106" end="9122" title="John Whitehead (cricketer)" label="Johnny Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q223172" start="9531" end="9546" title="Achilles tendon" label="Achilles tendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481900" start="9689" end="9701" title="Francis McHugh" label="Frank McHugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143797" start="9850" end="9861" title="New Zealand national cricket team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725694" start="10161" end="10170" title="Middlesex County Cricket Club" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869083" start="10311" end="10338" title="Minor Counties Championship" label="Minor Counties Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526201" start="10464" end="10475" title="Frank Tyson" label="Frank Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203316" start="10503" end="10526" title="Playfair Cricket Annual" label="Playfair Cricket Annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q912881" start="11341" end="11352" title="West Indies cricket team" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149734" start="11453" end="11461" title="Non-international England cricket teams" label="The Rest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526029" start="11754" end="11763" title="Jim Laker" label="Jim Laker"/>
<link wikidata="Q462187" start="12090" end="12102" title="Ray Lindwall" label="Ray Lindwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735268" start="12107" end="12119" title="Keith Miller" label="Keith Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180931" start="12125" end="12136" title="John Arlott" label="John Arlott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725657" start="13640" end="13650" title="Lancashire County Cricket Club" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534718" start="14445" end="14462" title="Geoffrey Keighley" label="Geoffrey Keighley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526902" start="14605" end="14621" title="Eddie Leadbeater" label="Eddie Leadbeater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162774" start="14649" end="14665" title="Conscription in the United Kingdom" label="national service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528195" start="14915" end="14928" title="Bob Appleyard" label="Bob Appleyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344790" start="15398" end="15413" title="Nottinghamshire County Cricket Club" label="Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096399" start="15417" end="15429" title="Trent Bridge" label="Trent Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q85765892" start="15457" end="15466" title="Hat-trick (cricket)" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357637" start="15576" end="15587" title="Reg Simpson" label="Reg Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706075" start="15589" end="15602" title="Alan Armitage" label="Alan Armitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057959" start="15735" end="15750" title="George Macaulay" label="George Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551241" start="16340" end="16352" title="Lincolnshire County Cricket Club" label="Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16356" end="16381" title="Cleethorpes#Sports" label="Cleethorpes Sports Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293181" start="16640" end="16649" title="Don Mosey" label="Don Mosey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725705" start="16777" end="16789" title="Warwickshire County Cricket Club" label="Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17556" end="17567" title="County cap#Cricket" label="county caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971538" start="17899" end="17918" title="National Coal Board" label="National Coal Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="18393" end="18408" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275372" start="18412" end="18424" title="RAF Hemswell" label="RAF Hemswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q23090" start="18428" end="18440" title="Lincolnshire" label="Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143793" start="18838" end="18843" title="India national cricket team" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q725151" start="18878" end="18883" title="The Ashes" label="Ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q142555" start="18899" end="18908" title="Australia national cricket team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975529" start="18961" end="18974" title="Group Captain" label="Group Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="19297" end="19313" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="19376" end="19378" title="Member of Parliament" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="19442" end="19447" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q524352" start="19540" end="19547" title="Hansard" label="Hansard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143793" start="19850" end="19855" title="India national cricket team" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061609" start="19859" end="19869" title="Headingley Cricket Ground" label="Headingley"/>
<link wikidata="Q969666" start="19871" end="19881" title="Len Hutton" label="Len Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859529" start="20311" end="20322" title="Alec Bedser" label="Alec Bedser"/>
<link wikidata="Q331613" start="20814" end="20825" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572215" start="20944" end="20956" title="Old Trafford Cricket Ground" label="Old Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q388755" start="21406" end="21412" title="side stitch" label="stitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627143" start="21605" end="21620" title="Stuart Surridge" label="Stuart Surridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333689" start="22009" end="22024" title="Bill Holdsworth" label="Bill Holdsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184991" start="22297" end="22324" title="Cricket Writers&amp;#x27; Club Young Cricketer of the Year" label="Young Cricketer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569447" start="22409" end="22431" title="Wisden Cricketers of the Year" label="Cricketers of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527683" start="22530" end="22545" title="Harold Gimblett" label="Harold Gimblett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047239" start="22547" end="22559" title="Tom Graveney" label="Tom Graveney"/>
<link wikidata="Q577347" start="22561" end="22575" title="David Sheppard" label="David Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627143" start="22580" end="22595" title="Stuart Surridge" label="Stuart Surridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107240" start="22753" end="22767" title="Harold Larwood" label="Harold Larwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261807" start="23366" end="23378" title="Derek Birley" label="Derek Birley"/>
<link wikidata="Q708177" start="24086" end="24101" title="The Rime of the Ancient Mariner" label="Ancient Mariner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="24125" end="24133" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q18519" start="24138" end="24150" title="Lincoln City F.C." label="Lincoln City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907915" start="24269" end="24282" title="Bill Anderson (English footballer)" label="Bill Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908463" start="25008" end="25016" title="bodyline" label="bodyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112479" start="25299" end="25313" title="Jack Fingleton" label="Jack Fingleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829502" start="25752" end="25762" title="Michael Cowan (cricketer)" label="Mike Cowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300796" start="25764" end="25776" title="Doug Padgett" label="Doug Padgett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980398" start="25778" end="25789" title="Bryan Stott" label="Bryan Stott"/>
<link wikidata="Q367052" start="25794" end="25804" title="Ken Taylor (cricketer, born 1935)" label="Ken Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="26205" end="26216" title="Caribbean" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q552874" start="26815" end="26828" title="Trevor Bailey" label="Trevor Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526029" start="26830" end="26839" title="Jim Laker" label="Jim Laker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822800" start="26841" end="26850" title="Tony Lock" label="Tony Lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527057" start="26852" end="26865" title="Johnny Wardle" label="Johnny Wardle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965383" start="26867" end="26880" title="Brian Statham" label="Brian Statham"/>
<link wikidata="Q954650" start="27223" end="27236" title="Frank Worrell" label="Frank Worrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q773828" start="27662" end="27676" title="C. L. R. James" label="C. L. R. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q752785" start="28301" end="28308" title="calypso music" label="calypso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195253" start="28341" end="28351" title="sea shanty" label="sea shanty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261354" start="28358" end="28372" title="Drunken Sailor" label="Drunken Sailor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725351" start="28495" end="28508" title="Denis Compton" label="Denis Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="28626" end="28634" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370745" start="29221" end="29232" title="Sabina Park" label="Sabina Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223408" start="29437" end="29459" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park Oval" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park Oval"/>
<link wikidata="Q515790" start="29659" end="29673" title="Everton Weekes" label="Everton Weekes"/>
<link wikidata="Q462487" start="29701" end="29714" title="Clyde Walcott" label="Clyde Walcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196126" start="30164" end="30175" title="Jim Kilburn" label="Jim Kilburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372600" start="30966" end="30975" title="Roy Booth" label="Roy Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q182538" start="31588" end="31596" title="Pakistan national cricket team" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527467" start="32871" end="32882" title="Jimmy Binks" label="Jimmy Binks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423651" start="33310" end="33322" title="South Africa national cricket team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526201" start="33557" end="33568" title="Frank Tyson" label="Frank Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533598" start="33775" end="33784" title="Peter May (cricketer)" label="Peter May"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735268" start="34079" end="34091" title="Keith Miller" label="Keith Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145360" start="34485" end="34499" title="Colin McDonald (Australian cricketer)" label="Colin McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q565276" start="34946" end="34954" title="sciatica" label="sciatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757857" start="35861" end="35873" title="Peter Loader" label="Peter Loader"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534686" start="35972" end="35994" title="Geoffrey Howard (cricketer and administrator)" label="C. G. Howard&amp;#x27;s XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047239" start="36097" end="36109" title="Tom Graveney" label="Tom Graveney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528662" start="36111" end="36122" title="Bill Edrich" label="Bill Edrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357637" start="36124" end="36135" title="Reg Simpson" label="Reg Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977397" start="36171" end="36184" title="Bruce Dooland" label="Bruce Dooland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145357" start="36189" end="36201" title="Colin McCool" label="Colin McCool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184956" start="36295" end="36324" title="Cricket Association of Bengal" label="Cricket Association of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365819" start="38790" end="38803" title="Ronnie Burnet" label="Ronnie Burnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963144" start="39573" end="39584" title="Brian Bolus" label="Brian Bolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238572" start="39647" end="39660" title="David Pickles" label="David Pickles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182401" start="39662" end="39673" title="Phil Sharpe (cricketer)" label="Phil Sharpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293740" start="39699" end="39709" title="Don Wilson (cricketer)" label="Don Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284346" start="40071" end="40080" title="Edgbaston Cricket Ground" label="Edgbaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595513" start="40376" end="40377" title="not out" label="*"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717514" start="40423" end="40432" title="Alex Moir" label="Alex Moir"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="40513" end="40524" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739019" start="40552" end="40565" title="Richie Benaud" label="Richie Benaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047239" start="40636" end="40648" title="Tom Graveney" label="Tom Graveney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496696" start="40808" end="40813" title="Freddie Brown (cricketer)" label="Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533598" start="41205" end="41214" title="Peter May (cricketer)" label="Peter May"/>
<link wikidata="Q856393" start="41812" end="41833" title="Sydney Cricket Ground" label="Sydney Cricket Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462430" start="41926" end="41939" title="Adelaide Oval" label="Adelaide Oval"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933669" start="42647" end="42656" title="Bob Platt" label="Bob Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533598" start="43159" end="43168" title="Peter May (cricketer)" label="Peter May"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526474" start="43218" end="43227" title="Alan Moss" label="Alan Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526180" start="43815" end="43828" title="Walter Robins" label="Walter Robins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529488" start="44787" end="44802" title="Jack Birkenshaw" label="Jack Birkenshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813900" start="44847" end="44855" title="Mel Ryan" label="Mel Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126578" start="45957" end="45966" title="Hampshire County Cricket Club" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q330136" start="48004" end="48028" title="Melbourne Cricket Ground" label="Melbourne Cricket Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q12983106" start="48042" end="48052" title="Ted Dexter" label="Ted Dexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q954650" start="48165" end="48178" title="Frank Worrell" label="Frank Worrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823060" start="49229" end="49243" title="Tony Nicholson" label="Tony Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528190" start="49417" end="49430" title="Geoff Boycott" label="Geoff Boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237521" start="49435" end="49449" title="John Hampshire" label="John Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674270" start="49808" end="49819" title="Acklam Park" label="Acklam Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735265" start="49842" end="49857" title="Gloucestershire County Cricket Club" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026317" start="49949" end="49958" title="century (cricket)" label="centuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344193" start="49997" end="50013" title="Northamptonshire County Cricket Club" label="Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430286" start="50109" end="50129" title="Scarborough Festival" label="Scarborough Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q13118346" start="50583" end="50593" title="Neil Hawke" label="Neil Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982596" start="50604" end="50617" title="Colin Cowdrey" label="Colin Cowdrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725667" start="51235" end="51249" title="Worcestershire County Cricket Club" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047239" start="51269" end="51281" title="Tom Graveney" label="Tom Graveney"/>
<link wikidata="Q810026" start="51295" end="51316" title="Basil D&amp;#x27;Oliveira" label="Basil D&amp;#x27;Oliveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052271" start="51318" end="51332" title="Norman Gifford" label="Norman Gifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527365" start="51350" end="51362" title="Len Coldwell" label="Len Coldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11057359" start="51367" end="51379" title="Jack Flavell" label="Jack Flavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049015" start="55919" end="55942" title="International Cavaliers" label="International Cavaliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590497" start="55963" end="55976" title="Barbados cricket team" label="Barbados team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788018" start="56028" end="56038" title="Derbyshire County Cricket Club" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360926" start="56324" end="56328" title="run (cricket)" label="runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026317" start="56346" end="56355" title="century (cricket)" label="centuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q705379" start="56398" end="56405" title="caught" label="catches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196454" start="56421" end="56427" title="wicket" label="wicket"/>
<link wikidata="Q85765892" start="56445" end="56455" title="Hat-trick (cricket)" label="hat-tricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595513" start="56587" end="56588" title="not out" label="*"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047212" start="56754" end="56768" title="Wilfred Rhodes" label="Wilfred Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527312" start="56770" end="56782" title="George Hirst" label="George Hirst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527283" start="56784" end="56799" title="Schofield Haigh" label="Schofield Haigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057959" start="56804" end="56819" title="George Macaulay" label="George Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233871" start="57769" end="57780" title="David Frith" label="David Frith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527374" start="58398" end="58403" title="Gubby Allen" label="Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533752" start="58983" end="59002" title="Gentlemen v Players" label="Gentlemen v Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366779" start="59587" end="59595" title="Hawker Sea Fury" label="Sea Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793296" start="60172" end="60187" title="Maurice Leyland" label="Maurice Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q462187" start="60425" end="60437" title="Ray Lindwall" label="Ray Lindwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567366" start="60442" end="60450" title="Wes Hall" label="Wes Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055632" start="61962" end="61968" title="yorker" label="yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377229" start="64390" end="64408" title="Test Match Special" label="Test Match Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964233" start="64521" end="64535" title="Brian Johnston" label="Brian Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189313" start="65652" end="65665" title="Dennis Lillee" label="Dennis Lillee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117103" start="66406" end="66426" title="Yorkshire Television" label="Yorkshire Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="66427" end="66430" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741907" start="66447" end="66460" title="The Indoor League" label="Indoor League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788657" start="66584" end="66592" title="Northern England" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="66628" end="66631" title="pub" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q131471" start="66646" end="66651" title="darts" label="darts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857978" start="66653" end="66666" title="bar billiards" label="bar billiards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191320" start="66668" end="66687" title="shove ha&amp;#x27;penny" label="shove ha&amp;#x27;penny"/>
<link wikidata="Q8921300" start="66689" end="66697" title="skittles (sport)" label="skittles"/>
<link wikidata="Q282772" start="66702" end="66715" title="arm-wrestling" label="arm-wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q27201" start="66763" end="66769" title="bitter (beer)" label="bitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q104526" start="66778" end="66782" title="smoking pipe (tobacco)" label="pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q507462" start="66870" end="66887" title="Yorkshire dialect" label="Yorkshire dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859393" start="67050" end="67063" title="Two in Clover" label="Two in Clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086861" start="67121" end="67130" title="Sid James" label="Sid James"/>
<link wikidata="Q253813" start="67135" end="67150" title="Victor Spinetti" label="Victor Spinetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q659575" start="67212" end="67227" title="Dad&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Dad&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768551" start="67248" end="67256" title="The Test (Dad&amp;#x27;s Army)" label="The Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249607" start="67432" end="67449" title="This Is Your Life (UK TV series)" label="This Is Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253247" start="67507" end="67520" title="Sunday People" label="Sunday People"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="67585" end="67597" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q743521" start="67877" end="67888" title="Scarborough, North Yorkshire" label="Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q516131" start="68028" end="68035" title="Skipton" label="Skipton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139085" start="68135" end="68141" title="Craven District" label="Craven"/>
<link wikidata="Q19970564" start="68153" end="68159" title="Flasby" label="Flasby"/>
<link wikidata="Q977613" start="68167" end="68182" title="Yorkshire Dales" label="Yorkshire Dales"/>
<link wikidata="Q229545" start="68419" end="68431" title="Raquel Welch" label="Raquel Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="68555" end="68573" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="68614" end="68656" title="Officer of the Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585083" start="68670" end="68691" title="1989 Birthday Honours" label="1989 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q104526" start="68986" end="68997" title="Smoking pipe (tobacco)" label="pipe-smoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197231" start="69041" end="69064" title="Pipe Smoker of the Year" label="Pipe Smoker of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q738170" start="69325" end="69345" title="small cell carcinoma" label="small cell carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698667" start="69412" end="69437" title="Airedale General Hospital" label="Airedale General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871398" start="69441" end="69462" title="Steeton with Eastburn" label="Steeton with Eastburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17670883" start="69516" end="69529" title="Bolton Priory" label="Bolton Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526947" start="69609" end="69624" title="Ray Illingworth" label="Ray Illingworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334335" start="69629" end="69640" title="Brian Close" label="Brian Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592938" start="69917" end="69931" title="Graham Ibbeson" label="Graham Ibbeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424148" start="69972" end="69997" title="Leeds and Liverpool Canal" label="Leeds and Liverpool Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q516131" start="70007" end="70014" title="Skipton" label="Skipton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143894" start="70090" end="70096" title="Umpire (cricket)" label="umpire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345554" start="70097" end="70108" title="Dickie Bird" label="Dickie Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020945" start="70126" end="70189" title="List of international cricket five-wicket hauls by Fred Trueman" label="List of international cricket five-wicket hauls by Fred Trueman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000003" start="70288" end="70297" title="John Warr" label="John Warr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203316" start="70328" end="70351" title="Playfair Cricket Annual" label="Playfair Cricket Annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304651" start="70402" end="70434" title="Wisden Cricketers&amp;#x27; Almanack" label="Wisden Cricketers&amp;#x27; Almanack"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413203" wikidata="Q2019896" url="?curid=413203" title="Kingsey">
<text>Kingsey is a small village and civil parish in Aylesbury Vale district in Buckinghamshire, England. It is near the boundary with Oxfordshire, about two miles east of Thame and a mile south of Haddenham.

The village toponym is of 12th-century origin and means &#x27;king&#x27;s island&#x27;, referring to a piece of dry land that belonged to the king in the marshes that were once common in this part of the country. In 1174 the village was called &quot;Eya&quot;, meaning &#x27;island&#x27;, though by 1192 it had gained its more modern name of &quot;Kingesie&quot;. This leads historians to believe that the village is named after King Richard I of England.

Kingsey was transferred to Buckinghamshire from Oxfordshire in 1933, effectively being swapped for Towersey.

Historically people from this village and those surrounding it were known by the derogatory term &#x27;wetfeet&#x27;, because of the high water table of the area leading to the ground being so waterlogged.

Grade 1 listed Tythrop Park in Kingsey is listed as having an early duck decoy similar to that in Boarstall Duck Decoy in Buckinghamshire. (Location map)

==References==
==External links==

* About Kingsey
*Detailed history of Kingsey, British History Online
* Tythrop House Duck Decoy listing in &quot;The Book of Duck Decoys&quot; by Sir Ralph Payne-Gallwey, 1886.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2019896" start="0" end="7" title="Kingsey" label="Kingsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="31" end="43" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q793056" start="47" end="61" title="Aylesbury Vale" label="Aylesbury Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="74" end="89" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="129" end="140" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094727" start="166" end="171" title="Thame" label="Thame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109493" start="192" end="201" title="Haddenham, Buckinghamshire" label="Haddenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="216" end="223" title="Toponymy" label="toponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="358" end="363" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="638" end="658" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565131" start="673" end="703" title="List of Buckinghamshire boundary changes" label="transferred to Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153397" start="760" end="768" title="Towersey" label="Towersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="909" end="920" title="water table" label="water table"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="978" end="992" title="Listed building" label="Grade 1 listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861845" start="993" end="1005" title="Tythrop Park" label="Tythrop Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931468" start="1076" end="1096" title="Boarstall Duck Decoy" label="Boarstall Duck Decoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287499" start="1314" end="1337" title="Ralph Payne-Gallwey" label="Sir Ralph Payne-Gallwey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413204" wikidata="Q1139766" url="?curid=413204" title="Storm drain">
<text>A storm drain, storm sewer (United Kingdom, U.S. and Canada), highway drain, surface water drain/sewer (United Kingdom), or stormwater drain (Australia and New Zealand) is infrastructure designed to drain excess rain and ground water from impervious surfaces such as paved streets, car parks, parking lots, footpaths, sidewalks, and roofs. Storm drains vary in design from small residential dry wells to large municipal systems.

Drains receive water from street gutters on most motorways, freeways and other busy roads, as well as towns in areas with heavy rainfall that leads to flooding, and coastal towns with regular storms. Even rain gutters from houses and buildings can connect to the storm drain. Since many storm drainage systems are gravity sewers that drain untreated storm water into rivers or streams, any hazardous substances poured into the drains will contaminate the destination bodies of water.

Storm drains sometimes cannot manage the quantity of rain that falls in heavy rains or storms. Inundated drains can cause basement and street flooding. Many areas require detention tanks inside a property that temporarily hold runoff in heavy rains and restrict outlet flow to the public sewer. This reduces the risk of overwhelming the public sewer. Some storm drains mix stormwater (rainwater) with sewage, either intentionally in the case of combined sewers, or unintentionally.

== Nomenclature ==
Several related terms are used differently in American and British English.
== Function ==
=== Inlet ===

There are two main types of stormwater drain (highway drain or road gully in the UK) inlets: side inlets and grated inlets. Side inlets are located adjacent to the curb and rely on the ability of the opening under the back stone or lintel to capture flow. They are usually depressed at the invert of the channel to improve capture capacity.

Many inlets have gratings or grids to prevent people, vehicles, large objects or debris from falling into the storm drain. Grate bars are spaced so that the flow of water is not impeded, but sediment and many small objects can also fall through. However, if grate bars are too far apart, the openings may present a risk to pedestrians, bicyclists, and others in the vicinity. Grates with long narrow slots parallel to traffic flow are of particular concern to cyclists, as the front tire of a bicycle may become stuck, causing the cyclist to go over the handlebars or lose control and fall. Storm drains in streets and parking areas must be strong enough to support the weight of vehicles, and are often made of cast iron or reinforced concrete.

Some of the heavier sediment and small objects may settle in a catch basin, or sump, which lies immediately below the outlet, where water from the top of the catch basin reservoir overflows into the sewer proper. The catchbasin serves much the same function as the &quot;trap&quot; in household wastewater plumbing in trapping objects.

In the United States, unlike the plumbing trap, the catch basin does not necessarily prevent sewer gases such as hydrogen sulfide and methane from escaping. However, in the United Kingdom, where they are called gully pots, they are designed as true water-filled traps and do block the egress of gases and rodents.

Most catchbasins contain stagnant water during drier parts of the year and can, in warm countries, become mosquito breeding grounds. Larvicides or disruptive larval hormones, sometimes released from &quot;mosquito biscuits&quot;, have been used to control mosquito breeding in catch basins. Mosquitoes may be physically prevented from reaching the standing water or migrating into the sewer proper by the use of an &quot;inverted cone filter&quot;. Another method of mosquito control is to spread a thin layer of oil on the surface of stagnant water, interfering with the breathing tubes of mosquito larvae.

The performance of catch basins at removing sediment and other pollutants depends on the design of the catchbasin (for example, the size of the sump), and on routine maintenance to retain the storage available in the sump to capture sediment. Municipalities typically have large vacuum trucks that perform this task.

Catch basins act as the first-line pretreatment for other treatment practices, such as retention basins, by capturing large sediments and street litter from urban runoff before it enters the storm drainage pipes.

=== Piping ===
Pipes can come in many different cross-sectional shapes (rectangular, square, bread-loaf-shaped, oval, inverted pear-shaped, egg shaped, and most commonly, circular). Drainage systems may have many different features including waterfalls, stairways, balconies and pits for catching rubbish, sometimes called Gross Pollutant Traps (GPTs). Pipes made of different materials can also be used, such as brick, concrete, high-density polyethylene or galvanized steel. Fibre reinforced plastic is being used more commonly for drain pipes and fittings.

=== Outlet ===
Most drains have a single large exit at their point of discharge (often covered by a grating) into a canal, river, lake, reservoir, sea or ocean. Other than catchbasins, typically there are no treatment facilities in the piping system. Small storm drains may discharge into individual dry wells. Storm drains may be interconnected using slotted pipe, to make a larger dry well system. Storm drains may discharge into human-made excavations known as recharge basins or retention ponds.
== Environmental impacts ==

=== Water quantity ===

Storm drains are often unable to manage the quantity of rain that falls during heavy rains and/or storms. When storm drains are inundated, basement and street flooding can occur. Unlike catastrophic flooding events, this type of urban flooding occurs in built-up areas where human-made drainage systems are prevalent. Urban flooding is the primary cause of sewer backups and basement flooding, which can affect properties repeatedly.

Clogged drains also contribute to flooding by the obstruction of storm drains. Communities or cities can help reduce this by cleaning leaves from the storm drains to stop ponding or flooding into yards. Snow in the winter can also clog drains when there is an unusual amount of rain in the winter and snow is plowed atop storm drains.

Runoff into storm sewers can be minimized by including &quot;sustainable urban drainage systems&quot; (UK term) or &quot;low impact development&quot; or &quot;green infrastructure&quot; practices (US terms) into municipal plans. To reduce stormwater from rooftops, flows from eaves troughs (rain gutters and downspouts) may be infiltrated into adjacent soil, rather than discharged into the storm sewer system. Storm water runoff from paved surfaces can be directed to unlined ditches (sometimes called swales or bioswales) before flowing into the storm sewers, again to allow the runoff to soak into the ground. Permeable paving materials can be used in building sidewalks, driveways and in some cases, parking lots, to infiltrate a portion of the stormwater volume.

Many areas require that properties have detention tanks that temporarily hold rainwater runoff, and restrict the outlet flow to the public sewer. This lessens the risk of overburdening the public sewer during heavy rain. An overflow outlet may also connect higher on the outlet side of the detention tank. This overflow prevents the detention tank from completely filling. Restricting water flow and temporarily holding the water in a detention tank public this way makes it far less likely for rain to overwhelm the sewers.

=== Water quality ===
The &quot;first flush&quot; from urban runoff can be extremely dirty. Storm water may become contaminated while running down the road or other impervious surface, or from lawn chemical run-off, before entering the drain.
Water running off these impervious surfaces tends to pick up gasoline, motor oil, heavy metals, trash and other pollutants from roadways and parking lots, as well as fertilizers and pesticides from lawns. Roads and parking lots are major sources of nickel, copper, zinc, cadmium, lead and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which are created as combustion byproducts of gasoline and other fossil fuels. Roof runoff contributes high levels of synthetic organic compounds and zinc (from galvanized gutters). Fertilizer use on residential lawns, parks and golf courses is a significant source of nitrates and phosphorus.

Separation of undesired runoff can be achieved by installing devices within the storm sewer system. These devices are relatively new and can only be installed with new development or during major upgrades. They are referred to as oil-grit separators (OGS) or oil-sediment separators (OSS). They consist of a specialized manhole chamber, and use the water flow and/or gravity to separate oil and grit.

=== Mosquito breeding ===
Catch basins are commonly designed with a sump area below the outlet pipe level—a reservoir for water and debris that helps prevent the pipe from clogging. Unless constructed with permeable bottoms to let water infiltrate into underlying soil, this subterranean basin can become a mosquito breeding area, because it is cool, dark, and retains stagnant water for a long time. Combined with standard grates, which have holes large enough for mosquitoes to enter and leave the basin, this is a major problem in mosquito control.

Basins can be filled with concrete up to the pipe level to prevent this reservoir from forming. Without proper maintenance, the functionality of the basin is questionable, as these catch basins are most commonly not cleaned annually as is needed to make them perform as designed. The trapping of debris serves no purpose because once filled they operate as if no basins were present, but continue to allow a shallow area of water retention for the breeding of mosquito. Moreover, even if cleaned and maintained, the water reservoir remains filled, accommodating the breeding of mosquitoes.

== Relationship to sanitary sewer systems ==
Storm drains are separate and distinct from sanitary sewer systems. The separation of storm sewers from sanitary sewers helps prevent sewage treatment plants becoming overwhelmed by infiltration/inflow during a rainstorm, which could discharge untreated sewage into the environment.

Many storm drainage systems drain untreated storm water into rivers or streams. In the US, many local governments conduct public awareness campaigns about this, lest people dump waste into the storm drain system. In Cleveland, Ohio, for example, all new catch basins installed have inscriptions on them not to dump any waste, and usually include a fish imprint as well. Trout Unlimited Canada recommends that a yellow fish symbol be painted next to existing storm drains.

=== Combined sewers ===

Cities that installed their sewage collection systems before the 1930s typically used single piping systems to transport both urban runoff and sewage. This type of collection system is referred to as a &quot;combined sewer system&quot; (CSS). The cities&#x27; rationale when combined sewers were built was that it would be cheaper to build just a single system. In these systems a sudden large rainfall that exceeds sewage treatment capacity is allowed to overflow directly from storm drains into receiving waters via structures called &quot;combined sewer overflows&quot;.

Storm drains are typically installed at shallower depths than combined sewers. This is because combined sewers were designed to accept sewage flows from buildings with basements, in addition to receiving surface runoff from streets.

About 860 communities in the US have combined sewer systems, serving about 40 million people. New York City, Washington, D.C., Seattle and other cities with combined systems have this problem due to a large influx of storm water after every heavy rain event. Some cities have dealt with this by adding large storage tanks or ponds to hold the water until it can be treated. Chicago has a system of tunnels, collectively called the Deep Tunnel, underneath the city for storing its stormwater. Many areas require detention tanks or roof detention systems that temporarily hold runoff in heavy rains and restrict outlet flow to the public sewer. This lessens the risk of overwhelming the public sewer in heavy rain. An overflow outlet may also connect higher on the outlet side of the detention tank. This overflow prevents the detention tank from completely filling. By restricting the flow of water in this way and temporarily holding the water in a detention vault or tank or by rooftop detention, public sewers are less likely to overflow.

== Regulations and local building codes ==
Building codes and local government ordinances vary significantly on the handling of storm drain runoff. New developments might be required to construct their storm drain processing capacity for returning the runoff to the water table and bioswales may be required in sensitive ecological areas to protect the watershed.

In the United States, cities, suburban communities, and towns with over 100,000 population, smaller community drainage systems in urbanized areas, and additional municipal systems that are specifically designated by state agencies are required to obtain discharge permits for their storm sewer systems under the Clean Water Act. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) issued stormwater regulations for large cities in 1990 and for other communities in 1999. The permits require local governments to operate stormwater management programs, covering both construction of new buildings and facilities, and maintenance of their existing municipal drainage networks. For new construction projects, many municipalities require builders to obtain approval of the site drainage system and structural plans. State government facilities, such as roads and highways, are also subject to the stormwater management regulations.

=== Examples ===
Southeastern Los Angeles County installed thousands of stainless steel, full-capture trash devices on their road drains in 2011.

== Exploration ==

An international subculture has grown up around exploring stormwater drains. Societies such as the Cave Clan regularly explore the drains underneath cities. This is commonly known as &quot;urban exploration&quot;, but is also known as &quot;draining&quot; when in specific relation to storm drains.

== Residence ==

In several large American cities, homeless people live in storm drains. At least 300 people live in the 200 miles of underground storm drains of Las Vegas, many of them making a living finding unclaimed winnings in the gambling machines. An organization called Shine a Light was founded in 2009 to help the drain residents after over 20 drowning deaths occurred in the preceding years. A man in San Diego was evicted from a storm drain after living there for nine months in 1986.

== History ==
Archaeological studies have revealed use of rather sophisticated stormwater runoff systems in ancient cultures. For example, in Minoan Crete around 2000 BC, cities such as Phaistos were designed to have storm drains and channels to collect precipitation runoff. At Cretan Knossos, storm drains include stone-lined structures large enough for a person to crawl through. Other examples of early civilizations with elements of stormwater drain systems include early people of Mainland Orkney such as Gurness and the Brough of Birsay in Scotland.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
*Urban runoff
*Water pollution
*Pervious concrete roads

== References ==
== External links ==

*EPA – Combined Sewer Overflows 
*EPA Storm Drain Stenciling Took Kit
*7 Steps to Clean Water from Great Lakes Green Initiative (example of a local public awareness program)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1139766" start="2" end="13" title="Storm drain" label="storm drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139766" start="15" end="26" title="Storm drain" label="storm sewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="28" end="42" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="44" end="48" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="53" end="59" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139766" start="62" end="75" title="Storm drain" label="highway drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139766" start="77" end="96" title="Storm drain" label="surface water drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139766" start="97" end="102" title="Storm drain" label="sewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="104" end="118" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139766" start="124" end="140" title="Storm drain" label="stormwater drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="142" end="151" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="156" end="167" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481320" start="199" end="204" title="Drainage" label="drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="221" end="233" title="ground water" label="ground water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434713" start="239" end="257" title="impervious surface" label="impervious surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110023" start="391" end="399" title="dry well" label="dry well"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094134" start="456" end="469" title="street gutter" label="street gutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="479" end="487" title="motorway" label="motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="514" end="518" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="581" end="586" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q81054" start="622" end="627" title="storm" label="storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q152833" start="635" end="646" title="rain gutter" label="rain gutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q30681114" start="744" end="757" title="gravity sewer" label="gravity sewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138713" start="1086" end="1101" title="Stormwater detention vault" label="detention tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966166" start="1316" end="1322" title="sewage" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q361472" start="1360" end="1374" title="combined sewer" label="combined sewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029652" start="1380" end="1395" title="Infiltration/Inflow" label="unintentionally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421263" start="1551" end="1561" title="stormwater" label="stormwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527816" start="1882" end="1889" title="grating" label="grating"/>
<link wikidata="Q637703" start="1946" end="1952" title="debris" label="debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="2056" end="2064" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592793" start="2691" end="2695" title="sump" label="sump"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241671" start="2918" end="2926" title="plumbing" label="plumbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="3062" end="3078" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="3083" end="3090" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046751" start="3289" end="3303" title="stagnant water" label="stagnant water"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367" start="3370" end="3378" title="mosquito" label="mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q522817" start="3397" end="3406" title="Larvicide" label="Larvicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003646" start="3731" end="3747" title="mosquito control" label="mosquito control"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="3917" end="3925" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="3936" end="3946" title="water pollution" label="pollutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227441" start="4152" end="4164" title="vacuum truck" label="vacuum truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058719" start="4249" end="4258" title="water treatment" label="treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413117" start="4278" end="4293" title="retention basin" label="retention basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358090" start="4348" end="4360" title="urban runoff" label="urban runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481320" start="4587" end="4595" title="Drainage" label="Drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q34038" start="4647" end="4656" title="waterfall" label="waterfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641430" start="4835" end="4860" title="high-density polyethylene" label="high-density polyethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q263125" start="4882" end="4906" title="Fibre reinforced plastic" label="Fibre reinforced plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527816" start="5066" end="5073" title="grating" label="grating"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="5082" end="5087" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="5102" end="5111" title="reservoir" label="reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110023" start="5266" end="5274" title="dry well" label="dry well"/>
<link wikidata="Q15909735" start="5748" end="5762" title="urban flooding" label="urban flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="6088" end="6094" title="Leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="6157" end="6161" title="Snow" label="Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q14976" start="6263" end="6269" title="Snowplow" label="plowed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897115" start="6351" end="6385" title="sustainable urban drainage systems" label="sustainable urban drainage systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432882" start="6411" end="6433" title="Low-impact development (Canada/US)" label="low impact development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427027" start="6449" end="6469" title="green infrastructure" label="green infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q152833" start="6581" end="6592" title="rain gutter" label="rain gutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127330" start="6617" end="6628" title="infiltration (hydrology)" label="infiltrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344823" start="6793" end="6799" title="Swale (geographical feature)" label="swales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086881" start="6803" end="6811" title="bioswale" label="bioswale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638253" start="6903" end="6919" title="Permeable paving" label="Permeable paving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251535" start="6965" end="6973" title="driveway" label="driveway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138713" start="7099" end="7114" title="Stormwater detention vault" label="detention tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181971" start="7617" end="7628" title="first flush" label="first flush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358090" start="7640" end="7652" title="urban runoff" label="urban runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434713" start="7750" end="7768" title="impervious surface" label="impervious surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="7889" end="7897" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q193784" start="7899" end="7908" title="motor oil" label="motor oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q105789" start="7910" end="7922" title="Heavy metal (chemistry)" label="heavy metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q45701" start="7924" end="7929" title="waste" label="trash"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="7994" end="8004" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="8010" end="8019" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="8077" end="8083" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="8085" end="8091" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="8093" end="8097" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="8099" end="8106" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="8108" end="8112" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q407212" start="8117" end="8148" title="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon" label="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="8179" end="8189" title="combustion" label="combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="8223" end="8234" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q273499" start="8276" end="8285" title="chemical synthesis" label="synthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="8286" end="8302" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="8308" end="8312" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q690418" start="8319" end="8329" title="galvanization" label="galvanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="8427" end="8434" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="8440" end="8450" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358090" start="8683" end="8701" title="oil-grit separator" label="oil-grit separator"/>
<link wikidata="Q532998" start="8773" end="8780" title="manhole" label="manhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805497" start="10088" end="10102" title="sanitary sewer" label="sanitary sewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029652" start="10226" end="10245" title="Infiltration/Inflow" label="infiltration/inflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="10544" end="10559" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846628" start="10698" end="10713" title="Trout Unlimited" label="Trout Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="10714" end="10720" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358090" start="10952" end="10964" title="urban runoff" label="urban runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q361472" start="11034" end="11048" title="combined sewer" label="combined sewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="11729" end="11742" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="11744" end="11760" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="11762" end="11769" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="12009" end="12016" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853303" start="12066" end="12077" title="Tunnel and Reservoir Plan" label="Deep Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138713" start="12584" end="12607" title="Stormwater detention vault" label="detention vault or tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333573" start="12720" end="12733" title="Building code" label="Building code"/>
<link wikidata="Q843713" start="12756" end="12766" title="Local ordinance" label="ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="12943" end="12954" title="water table" label="water table"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086881" start="12959" end="12967" title="bioswale" label="bioswale"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="13030" end="13039" title="drainage basin" label="watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978742" start="13354" end="13369" title="Clean Water Act" label="Clean Water Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="13375" end="13406" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="13891" end="13898" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906555" start="13978" end="14009" title="Gateway Cities" label="Southeastern Los Angeles County"/>
<link wikidata="Q264965" start="14144" end="14154" title="subculture" label="subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054890" start="14226" end="14235" title="Cave Clan" label="Cave Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130439" start="14316" end="14333" title="urban exploration" label="urban exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="14478" end="14486" title="homeless" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="14589" end="14598" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="14839" end="14848" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="14939" end="14953" title="Archaeological" label="Archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444790" start="15015" end="15021" title="surface runoff" label="runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="15067" end="15073" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="15074" end="15079" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q249707" start="15111" end="15119" title="Phaistos" label="Phaistos"/>
<link wikidata="Q173527" start="15211" end="15218" title="Knossos" label="Knossos"/>
<link wikidata="Q148749" start="15412" end="15427" title="Mainland Orkney" label="Mainland Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q923355" start="15436" end="15443" title="Gurness" label="Gurness"/>
<link wikidata="Q594381" start="15452" end="15468" title="Brough of Birsay" label="Brough of Birsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="15472" end="15480" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358090" start="15513" end="15525" title="Urban runoff" label="Urban runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="15527" end="15542" title="Water pollution" label="Water pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171262" start="15544" end="15561" title="Pervious concrete" label="Pervious concrete"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413206" wikidata="Q4301081" url="?curid=413206" title="Richard Molesworth, 3rd Viscount Molesworth">
<text>Field Marshal Richard Molesworth, 3rd Viscount Molesworth, PC (Ire), FRS (1680 – 12 October 1758) was an Anglo-Irish army officer and politician. He fought in the Battle of Blenheim before being appointed aide-de-camp to the Duke of Marlborough during the War of the Spanish Succession. During the Battle of Ramillies, Molesworth offered Marlborough his own horse after Marlborough fell from the saddle. Molesworth then recovered his commander&#x27;s charger and slipped away: by these actions he helped to save Marlborough&#x27;s life. Molesworth went on Lieutenant of the Ordnance in Ireland and was wounded at the Battle of Preston during the Jacobite rising of 1715 before serving as Master-General of the Ordnance in Ireland and then Commander-in-Chief, Ireland.

==Military career==
Born the younger son of Robert Molesworth, 1st Viscount Molesworth and Letitia Molesworth (née Coote, daughter of Richard Coote, Lord Coloony), Molesworth abandoned his legal studies and was commissioned as an ensign in Orkney&#x27;s Regiment on 14 April 1702.

Promoted to captain, Molesworth served with his regiment at the Battle of Blenheim in August 1704, before being appointed aide-de-camp to the Duke of Marlborough on 22 May 1706 during the War of the Spanish Succession. During the Battle of Ramillies, which took place the following day, Molesworth offered Marlborough his own horse after Marlborough fell from the saddle. Molesworth then recovered his master&#x27;s charger and slipped away: by these actions he helped to save his master&#x27;s life. Promoted to captain in the Coldstream Guards and lieutenant colonel in the Army on 5 May 1707, he was present at the relief of Brussels in 1708 and at the Battle of Malplaquet in September 1709 and was wounded by a mine at the Siege of Mons in October 1709. He commanded an infantry regiment in Catalonia under the Duke of Argyll from July 1710 until he returned to England in late 1712.

Molesworth became Lieutenant of the Ordnance in Ireland in December 1714 and was elected Member of Parliament in the Irish House of Commons for Swords in 1715. He raised a regiment of Dragoons in 1715 and was wounded at the Battle of Preston in November 1715 during the Jacobite rising of that year. After taking part in the competition to develop a marine chronometer, he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in March 1722.

Molesworth became colonel of the Inniskilling Regiment of Foot in March 1725 and succeeded his brother as 3rd Viscount Molesworth on 17 February 1726. He went on to be colonel of the Viscount Molesworth&#x27;s Regiment of Dragoons in May 1732 and, having been promoted to major-general on 18 December 1735 and appointed a Lord Justice for Ireland in December 1736, he became colonel of the 5th Regiment of Dragoons in June 1737. Promoted to the local rank of lieutenant-general in Ireland in 1739, he became Master-General of the Ordnance in Ireland in 1740. Promoted to the substantive rank of lieutenant-general on 1 July 1742 and to general of the horse on 24 March 1746, he became Commander-in-Chief, Ireland in September 1751. At this time he lived at 14 Henrietta Street in Dublin.

Promoted to field marshal on 3 December 1757, Molesworth became Governor of the Royal Hospital Kilmainham; he died in London on 12 October 1758 and was buried in Kensington. He was succeeded in the title by his only son Richard. Lady Molesworth died in a house fire in 1763 with two of her daughters.
==Family==
Molesworth first married Jane Lucas, of whose family little is known; they had three children, Amelia, Letitia, and Mary, who became the second wife of Robert Rochfort, 1st Earl of Belvedere, and suffered greatly from his ill-treatment of her, which became a subject of public comment. Following the death of his first wife he married Mary Jenney Ussher, daughter of the Reverend William Ussher, Archdeacon of Clonfert, and his wife Mary Jenney, on 7 February 1744 and had seven children from this union: Richard, 4th Viscount Molesworth, Henrietta (who married Right Hon. John Staples, MP for Antrim), Elizabeth, Charlotte, Melosina, Mary and Louisa (who married firstly William Ponsonby, 1st Baron Ponsonby, and secondly William Fitzwilliam, 4th Earl Fitzwilliam). Mary and Melosina perished along with their mother in a house fire in 1763.

==References==
==Sources==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="0" end="13" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301081" start="14" end="57" title="Richard Molesworth, 3rd Viscount Molesworth" label="Richard Molesworth, 3rd Viscount Molesworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994229" start="59" end="67" title="Privy Council of Ireland" label="PC (Ire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="69" end="72" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q154635" start="163" end="181" title="Battle of Blenheim" label="Battle of Blenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="205" end="217" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="225" end="244" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="Duke of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="256" end="285" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q161325" start="298" end="317" title="Battle of Ramillies" label="Battle of Ramillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q192249" start="396" end="402" title="saddle" label="saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259217" start="556" end="593" title="Irish Board of Ordnance" label="Lieutenant of the Ordnance in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636587" start="617" end="634" title="Battle of Preston (1715)" label="Battle of Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q12130474" start="646" end="669" title="Jacobite rising of 1715" label="Jacobite rising of 1715"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259217" start="688" end="729" title="Irish Board of Ordnance" label="Master-General of the Ordnance in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152170" start="739" end="766" title="Commander-in-Chief, Ireland" label="Commander-in-Chief, Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347739" start="813" end="855" title="Robert Molesworth, 1st Viscount Molesworth" label="Robert Molesworth, 1st Viscount Molesworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326209" start="903" end="930" title="Earl of Bellomont" label="Richard Coote, Lord Coloony"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="980" end="992" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595679" start="999" end="1005" title="ensign (rank)" label="ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446069" start="1009" end="1031" title="Royal Scots" label="Orkney&amp;#x27;s Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="1063" end="1070" title="Captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q154635" start="1115" end="1133" title="Battle of Blenheim" label="Battle of Blenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="1173" end="1185" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="1193" end="1212" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="Duke of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="1239" end="1268" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q161325" start="1281" end="1300" title="Battle of Ramillies" label="Battle of Ramillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q192249" start="1415" end="1421" title="saddle" label="saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107953" start="1579" end="1596" title="Coldstream Guards" label="Coldstream Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="1601" end="1619" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="1679" end="1687" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q316897" start="1707" end="1727" title="Battle of Malplaquet" label="Battle of Malplaquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q111145659" start="1779" end="1792" title="Siege of Mons (1709)" label="Siege of Mons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="1847" end="1856" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q335974" start="1867" end="1881" title="John Campbell, 2nd Duke of Argyll" label="Duke of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259217" start="1959" end="1996" title="Irish Board of Ordnance" label="Lieutenant of the Ordnance in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948400" start="2058" end="2080" title="Irish House of Commons" label="Irish House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659332" start="2085" end="2091" title="Swords (Parliament of Ireland constituency)" label="Swords"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636587" start="2165" end="2182" title="Battle of Preston (1715)" label="Battle of Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="2211" end="2226" title="Jacobite risings" label="Jacobite rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307829" start="2291" end="2309" title="marine chronometer" label="marine chronometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="2328" end="2355" title="Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="2390" end="2397" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632568" start="2405" end="2434" title="27th (Inniskilling) Regiment of Foot" label="Inniskilling Regiment of Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032666" start="2555" end="2602" title="9th Queen&amp;#x27;s Royal Lancers" label="Viscount Molesworth&amp;#x27;s Regiment of Dragoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="2644" end="2657" title="major-general" label="major-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259405" start="2694" end="2718" title="Lord Justices (Ireland)" label="Lord Justice for Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817898" start="2762" end="2786" title="5th Royal Irish Lancers" label="5th Regiment of Dragoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="2831" end="2849" title="lieutenant-general" label="lieutenant-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259217" start="2880" end="2921" title="Irish Board of Ordnance" label="Master-General of the Ordnance in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="3057" end="3075" title="Commander-in-Chief" label="Commander-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747125" start="3129" end="3148" title="14 Henrietta Street" label="14 Henrietta Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="3152" end="3158" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="3173" end="3186" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859559" start="3241" end="3266" title="Royal Hospital Kilmainham" label="Royal Hospital Kilmainham"/>
<link wikidata="Q288781" start="3323" end="3333" title="Kensington" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q27589850" start="3625" end="3663" title="Robert Rochfort, 1st Earl of Belvedere" label="Robert Rochfort, 1st Earl of Belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q48804433" start="3869" end="3891" title="Archdeacon of Clonfert" label="Archdeacon of Clonfert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258882" start="4046" end="4058" title="John Staples" label="John Staples"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777327" start="4067" end="4073" title="Antrim (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016998" start="4145" end="4181" title="William Ponsonby, 1st Baron Ponsonby" label="William Ponsonby, 1st Baron Ponsonby"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009134" start="4196" end="4237" title="William Fitzwilliam, 4th Earl Fitzwilliam" label="William Fitzwilliam, 4th Earl Fitzwilliam"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413207" wikidata="Q726215" url="?curid=413207" title="Taxi (1998 film)">
<text>Taxi is a 1997 French action comedy film starring Samy Naceri, Frédéric Diefenthal and Marion Cotillard, written by Luc Besson and directed by Gérard Pirès. It is the first installment in the &quot;Taxi&quot; film series. It has four sequels, &quot;Taxi 2&quot;, &quot;Taxi 3 &quot;, &quot;Taxi 4&quot; and &quot;Taxi 5.

The film is set in Marseille. In the film, a bumbling police inspector blackmails a taxi driver into helping him track down a German gang. He soon moves into the driver&#x27;s house. The driver is motivated to complete their crime-fighting mission, in order to get rid of his new housemate.

== Plot ==
Daniel Morales is a highly talented driver living in Marseille, France, who has little regard for traffic laws and the police, and is in a loving relationship with his girlfriend Lilly. He leaves his job as a delivery man at local pizza parlor &quot;Pizza Joe&quot; to become a taxi driver, driving his white custom 1997 Peugeot 406, which is equipped with various racing modifications that are mechanically concealed.

Young, bumbling police inspector Émilien Coutant-Kerbalec lives with his widowed mother, and has just failed his 8th driver&#x27;s test. No one takes him seriously at work, including police sergeant Petra, towards whom he harbors an unrequited crush. Commissioner Gibert soon briefs the officers on a new case: a German gang that has successfully committed a series of high-profile robberies throughout Europe, and has now arrived in Marseille. The gang is known for their efficiency, skilled driving, and their use of red Mercedes-Benz 500E cars as escape vehicles. Anticipating the gang&#x27;s next move, Gibert places police officers around the targeted bank. After the robbers enter the bank, Émilien accidentally causes a multi-vehicle collision and a gun fight with the French Minister&#x27;s escort convoy, allowing the Germans to escape.

The next day, Émilien decides to take a taxi to work and rides with Daniel. Not knowing his fare&#x27;s occupation, Daniel shows off his car and breaks several traffic laws. Émilien detains Daniel, but then asks for his help with catching the German gang in exchange for returning Daniel&#x27;s license - desperate for respect and Petra&#x27;s attention. Looking at photos of the getaway cars, Daniel concludes that the tires come from a garage owned by Kruger, the only German mechanic in town. Daniel reluctantly joins Émilien at a stakeout of the garage, where they spot the German robbers. The next morning, Émilien tries to interrogate Kruger, who opens fire at the duo and escapes.

The police locate the gang&#x27;s next target and manage to shoot a tracking device onto one of the cars. However, the gang stops at a secluded garage and repaints the cars silver, inadvertently sabotaging the tracking device and allowing them to escape again. Émilien then learns that he had left the stove on at his flat and burned it down, forcing him and his mother to stay at Daniel&#x27;s place. Eager to get rid of Émilien, Daniel correctly deduces the gang&#x27;s repaint strategy, and through a friend he tracks the robbers to a racetrack. Daniel provokes the gang into a race and wins, later inspiring Émilien to approach Petra romantically. The duo then become friends, and devise a plan to finally catch the gang red-handed.

The next day, having duplicated the control keys to twenty traffic lights throughout the city, Émilien provides Daniel with a closed radio line. Daniel recruits his old co-workers from Pizza Joe, to whom Émilien distributes the keys and walkie-talkies. After the gang drives away from another robbery, Daniel follows them and successfully taunts the Germans into another race. As the delivery men use the traffic lights to clear a path for the cars, the cars drive onto the freeway. Daniel then speeds towards a bridge that is under construction, and slams on the brake; the gang&#x27;s cars jump over the gap and lands on the other side, only to discover that they are trapped on an incomplete bridge section.

After the gang is arrested, Daniel and Émilien are given medals by the police commissioner, and Émilien begins dating Petra. The film ends with Daniel competing at the French Grand Prix in a Formula 3000, sponsored by (to Daniel&#x27;s dismay) the Marseille Police.

== Cast ==
=== Notable stunt drivers ===
==Production==
===Development===
Luc Besson came up with the idea for the movie in 1996, but he was too busy with &quot;The Fifth Element&quot; to direct it at the time, so he decided to simply produce it. He presented his idea to his usual production company, Gaumont, but Gaumont had no trust in the project and turned Besson down. Besson went to two old friends, Michèle and Laurent Pétin, who headed the small production company ARP. They came to an agreement on a 50/50 split, and Besson began searching for a director. He knew Gérard Pirès from long ago, but Pirès hadn&#x27;t directed a film in 15 years. He had been directing commercials including ones for Peugeot, which made him a good fit for the project. For budgetary reasons, the location was chosen as Marseille and the actors were relative unknowns at the time. Better known actors were approached, but they turned the project down. The young unknown actors were explained to financiers such as Canal+ as being easier to identify with for a young audience and also being a bet on the future. The main music theme is based on Misirlou, a popular song of Eastern Mediterranean origin. 

==Reception==

===Box office===
In terms of box office admissions, the &quot;Taxi&quot; series is one of the most successful French franchises ever. The first film was the fourth most successful film in France for the year with 6.4 million admissions and a gross of $39.3 million. It had 2.2 million admissions abroad. The film also had very good TV ratings with 12 million viewers on TF1.

===Critical response===
Almar Haflidason, reviewing the film for BBC, gave it three stars out of five, describing that there was &quot;fun to be had from this film when it&#x27;s in motion, but the script is a real blow out.&quot; In a research article for the journal French Cultural Studies, Ipek A. Celik Rappas from Koç University describes how the Taxi series &quot;reflects the move in Luc Besson’s career from director to producer of big-budget films, and reveals how his relationship with post-industrial spaces changes as his film locations turn into film-related investments.&quot;

== Remake ==
An American remake, also titled &quot;Taxi&quot;, starring Queen Latifah, Jimmy Fallon, and Gisele Bündchen, was released in October 2004, and was panned by critics. A remake of the original film as a summer series, known as &quot;Taxi Brooklyn&quot;, aired in August 2014 on NBC.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2678111" start="22" end="40" title="action comedy film" label="action comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q317286" start="50" end="61" title="Samy Naceri" label="Samy Naceri"/>
<link wikidata="Q704828" start="63" end="82" title="Frédéric Diefenthal" label="Frédéric Diefenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8927" start="87" end="103" title="Marion Cotillard" label="Marion Cotillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q484779" start="116" end="126" title="Luc Besson" label="Luc Besson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031374" start="143" end="155" title="Gérard Pirès" label="Gérard Pirès"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516380" start="192" end="220" title="Taxi (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Taxi&amp;quot; film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q756572" start="249" end="255" title="Taxi 2" label="Taxi 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="269" end="276" title="Taxi 3 " label="Taxi 3 "/>
<link wikidata="Q756574" start="290" end="296" title="Taxi 4" label="Taxi 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q30726990" start="313" end="319" title="Taxi 5" label="Taxi 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="341" end="350" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q511138" start="376" end="392" title="police inspector" label="police inspector"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="406" end="417" title="Taxicab driver" label="taxi driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="678" end="687" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="689" end="695" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="903" end="914" title="Taxicab driver" label="taxi driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q328139" start="941" end="957" title="Peugeot 406" label="1997 Peugeot 406"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560500" start="1568" end="1586" title="Mercedes-Benz 500E" label="Mercedes-Benz 500E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339582" start="1772" end="1795" title="multi-vehicle collision" label="multi-vehicle collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997" start="4199" end="4216" title="French Grand Prix" label="French Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q362400" start="4222" end="4234" title="Formula 3000" label="Formula 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q106506" start="4459" end="4476" title="The Fifth Element" label="The Fifth Element"/>
<link wikidata="Q913462" start="4600" end="4607" title="Gaumont Film Company" label="Gaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742" start="5004" end="5011" title="Peugeot" label="Peugeot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032540" start="5300" end="5306" title="Canal+ (French TV channel)" label="Canal+"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497786" start="5430" end="5438" title="Misirlou" label="Misirlou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412906" start="5875" end="5878" title="TF1 Group" label="TF1"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5946" end="5949" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501744" start="6150" end="6173" title="French Cultural Studies" label="French Cultural Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193155" start="6201" end="6215" title="Koç University" label="Koç University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516852" start="6525" end="6529" title="Taxi (2004 film)" label="Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112005" start="6546" end="6559" title="Queen Latifah" label="Queen Latifah"/>
<link wikidata="Q335680" start="6561" end="6573" title="Jimmy Fallon" label="Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q152208" start="6579" end="6594" title="Gisele Bündchen" label="Gisele Bündchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16679145" start="6718" end="6731" title="Taxi Brooklyn" label="Taxi Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="6763" end="6766" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413208" wikidata="Q2459288" url="?curid=413208" title="Kingswood, Buckinghamshire">
<text>Kingswood is a hamlet of 30 dwellings on the South side of the A41 from Waddesdon to Bicester and between the villages of Ludgershall and Grendon Underwood in Buckinghamshire, England. Kingswood is also a civil parish within Aylesbury Vale district. Parish matters are currently administered via a parish meeting. There is one Italian restaurant and public house, Canaletto which opened in 2013. There is also a derelict Village Hall blown down in the Great Storm of 1987.

==Etymology==
The hamlet name refers to the nearby Bernwood Forest, an ancient Royal hunting forest.

==Description==
The houses within the hamlet form part of a larger community encompassing a further 30 dwellings within adjoining parishes and includes a burial ground, another public house, The Cook and Billet, and a Mission Hall at the crossroads built around 1850 and left in trust in 1905 by Henry Grattan Guinness (1835–1910) for the salvation or edification of souls. There is a Site of Special Scientific Interest, Ham Home-cum-Hamgreen Woods.

==History==
The old Roman Akeman Street was the main route to Cirencester, Cheltenham and Bath and the Crooked Billet an important coaching inn / staging post.

The original trustees of the Mission Hall were William Kirby, Sydney Hopcroft, James &amp; John Taylor and William Wellings; and adjoining land then owned by Amy Wellings on one side and William Daniels on the other.
Henry Grattan Guinness established the East London Training Institute for Home and Foreign Missions in Stepney Green in 1873, across the road from the Mission Hall of his friend, Thomas Barnardo and moved to larger premises in Harley House in Bow later in that year. The institute was interdenominational and international, opening its own missions in Congo (1878), Peru (1897), India (1899), Borneo (1948), Nepal (1954), and Irian Jaya (1957). Present day Latin Link descends from the Peru mission.

===Railway===
In the late 19th century the Brill Tramway had a spur to Kingswood.
1871-04-01 Wotton to Quainton Road opened [Wotton Tramway] 
1871-08-19 Wood Siding to Wotton opened [Wotton Tramway] 
1871-11- Brill to Wood Siding opened [Wotton Tramway] 
1871-11- Wood Siding, Church Siding 
1872-01- Wotton, Westcott, Waddesdon Road, Quainton Road (Wotton Tramway) 
1872-04- Brill 
1891-07-01 Verney Junction to Aylesbury started [Metropolitan] 
1892-09-01 Aylesbury to Amersham opened

The Metropolitan extended its route north from Baker Street through Harrow and Rickmansworth to Aylesbury and bought out the Aylesbury &amp; Buckingham Railway from Aylesbury via Quainton Road to Verney Junction - and took over the operation of the Wotton Tramway from Quainton Road to Brill. At the same time Manchester, Sheffield, &amp; Lincolnshire Railway extended its main line south to meet the Metropolitan at Quainton Road and then ran along the latter to Finchley Road, where it diverged west to a separate terminus at Marylebone.

Therefore, it seems that in the latter half of the 1800s Kingswood was not only on the main coaching route to Cirencester, Cheltenham and Bath but also right in the middle of great infrastructure developments linking it to major hubs North and South. This could explain why such an eminent person as Henry Grattan Guinness decided to site his only known UK chapel in Kingswood.

== Tetchwick ==
Within Kingswood parish is the hamlet of Tetchwick, located to the south west of the main village on a spar road off the main A41.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2459288" start="0" end="9" title="Kingswood, Buckinghamshire" label="Kingswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="15" end="21" title="hamlet (place)" label="hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649283" start="63" end="66" title="A41 road" label="A41"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774483" start="72" end="81" title="Waddesdon" label="Waddesdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q251903" start="85" end="93" title="Bicester" label="Bicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="110" end="118" title="villages" label="villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324543" start="122" end="133" title="Ludgershall, Buckinghamshire" label="Ludgershall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592734" start="138" end="155" title="Grendon Underwood" label="Grendon Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="159" end="174" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="211" end="217" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q793056" start="225" end="239" title="Aylesbury Vale" label="Aylesbury Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137437" start="298" end="312" title="parish meeting" label="parish meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000215" start="452" end="471" title="Great Storm of 1987" label="Great Storm of 1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894620" start="525" end="540" title="Bernwood Forest" label="Bernwood Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975546" start="553" end="573" title="Royal forest" label="Royal hunting forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722165" start="872" end="894" title="Henry Grattan Guinness" label="Henry Grattan Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="961" end="996" title="Site of Special Scientific Interest" label="Site of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993633" start="998" end="1025" title="Ham Home-cum-Hamgreen Woods" label="Ham Home-cum-Hamgreen Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q966002" start="1159" end="1171" title="coaching inn" label="coaching inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q692235" start="1585" end="1600" title="Thomas Barnardo" label="Thomas Barnardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822479" start="1950" end="1963" title="Brill Tramway" label="Brill Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="3362" end="3368" title="hamlet (place)" label="hamlet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413210" wikidata="Q1620897" url="?curid=413210" title="Paul Francis Webster">
<text>Paul Francis Webster (December 20, 1907 – March 18, 1984) was an American lyricist who won three Academy Awards for Best Original Song, and was nominated sixteen times for the award.

==Life and career==
Webster was born in New York City, United States, the son of Myron Lawrence Webster and Blanche Pauline Stonehill Webster. His family was Jewish. His father was born in Augustów, Poland. He attended the Horace Mann School (Riverdale, Bronx, New York), graduating in 1926, and then went to Cornell University from 1927 to 1928 and New York University from 1928 to 1930, leaving without receiving a degree. He worked on ships throughout Asia and then became a dance instructor at an Arthur Murray studio in New York City. After college, Webster served as an officer in the U.S. Navy.

By 1931, however, he turned his career direction to writing song lyrics. His first professional lyric was &quot;Masquerade&quot; (music by John Jacob Loeb) which became a hit in 1932, performed by Paul Whiteman.

In 1935, Twentieth Century Fox signed him to a contract to write lyrics for Shirley Temple&#x27;s films, but shortly afterward he went back to freelance writing. His first hit was a collaboration in 1941 with Duke Ellington on the song &quot;I Got It Bad (And That Ain&#x27;t Good)&quot;.

After 1950, Webster worked mostly for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. He won two Academy Awards in collaboration with Sammy Fain, in 1953 and 1955, and another with Johnny Mandel in 1965. Altogether, sixteen of his songs received Academy Award nominations; among lyricists, he is third after Sammy Cahn with twenty-six and Johnny Mercer, who was nominated eighteen times, in number of nominations. In addition, a large number of his songs became major hits on the popular music charts.

Webster is the most successful songwriter of the 1950s on the UK Singles Chart. In 1967, he was asked to write the lyrics for the &quot;Spider-Man&quot; theme song for the television cartoon series of the same name. He was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1972. His papers are collected at Syracuse University Libraries.

Webster&#x27;s first born son, Guy Webster, was a prolific photographer of musicians and bands in the 1960s and 1970s. His younger son, Mona Roger Webster, is a conceptual artist, a real estate investor and a longtime resident of Venice, CA.

Webster continued writing through 1983. He died in 1984 in Beverly Hills, California, and is buried at Hillside Memorial Park in Culver City, California.

==List of songs==
Here is a partial list of songs for which he wrote the lyrics:
===Songs by Paul Francis Webster that won the Academy Award for Best Original Song===
*&quot;Secret Love&quot; (&quot;Calamity Jane&quot;, 1953)
*&quot;Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing&quot; (&quot;Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing&quot;, 1955)
*&quot;The Shadow of Your Smile&quot; (&quot;The Sandpiper&quot;, 1965)

===Nominated for the award===
*&quot;Remember Me to Carolina&quot; (&quot;Minstrel Man&quot;, 1944)
*&quot;Friendly Persuasion (Thee I Love)&quot; (&quot;Friendly Persuasion&quot;, 1956)
*&quot;April Love&quot; (&quot;April Love&quot;, 1957)
*&quot;A Certain Smile&quot; (&quot;A Certain Smile&quot;, 1958)
*&quot;A Very Precious Love&quot; (&quot;Marjorie Morningstar&quot;, 1958)
*&quot;The Green Leaves of Summer&quot; (&quot;The Alamo&quot;, 1960)
*&quot;Love Theme from El Cid (The Falcon and the Dove)&quot; (&quot;El Cid&quot;, 1961)
*&quot;Tender Is the Night&quot; (&quot;Tender Is the Night&quot;, 1962)
*&quot;Love Song From Mutiny on the Bounty (Follow Me)&quot; (&quot;Mutiny on the Bounty&quot;, 1962)
*&quot;So Little Time&quot; (&quot;55 Days at Peking&quot;, 1963)
*&quot;A Time for Love&quot; (&quot;An American Dream&quot;, 1966)
*&quot;Strange Are the Ways of Love&quot; from the film &quot;The Stepmother&quot; (1972)
*&quot;A World that Never Was&quot; from the film &quot;Half a House&quot; (1976)

===Songs winning Grammy Awards for best song of the year===
*&quot;The Shadow of Your Smile&quot; (love theme from &quot;The Sandpiper&quot;, 1966)

===Other songs with lyrics by Paul Francis Webster===
==Song compilation==
* &quot;The Songs of Paul Francis Webster&quot; ()
* &quot;Award-Winning Songs By Paul Francis Webster&quot;, Robbins Music Corporation, 1964

==References==
==External links==

==Other sources==
* Hill, Tony L. &quot;Paul Francis Webster, 1907-1984&quot;, in &quot;Dictionary of Literary Biography 265&quot;. Detroit: Gale Research, 2002.
* Sammy Lifetime Achievement Film Music Award for Paul Francis Webster</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1620897" start="0" end="20" title="Paul Francis Webster" label="Paul Francis Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q602446" start="74" end="82" title="lyrics" label="lyricist"/>
<link wikidata="Q112243" start="97" end="134" title="Academy Award for Best Original Song" label="Academy Awards for Best Original Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="224" end="237" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q464763" start="373" end="381" title="Augustów" label="Augustów"/>
<link wikidata="Q5901972" start="407" end="425" title="Horace Mann School" label="Horace Mann School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569613" start="427" end="453" title="Riverdale, Bronx, New York" label="Riverdale, Bronx, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="493" end="511" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="534" end="553" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="662" end="667" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865273" start="685" end="698" title="Arthur Murray" label="Arthur Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="775" end="784" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q602446" start="852" end="858" title="lyrics" label="lyrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35452888" start="926" end="941" title="John Jacob Loeb" label="John Jacob Loeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q470182" start="984" end="997" title="Paul Whiteman" label="Paul Whiteman"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="1009" end="1030" title="Twentieth Century Fox" label="Twentieth Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q182580" start="1076" end="1090" title="Shirley Temple" label="Shirley Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="1209" end="1223" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040919" start="1242" end="1281" title="I Got It Bad (And That Ain&amp;#x27;t Good)" label="I Got It Bad (And That Ain&amp;#x27;t Good)"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="1328" end="1347" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="1360" end="1374" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q742896" start="1397" end="1407" title="Sammy Fain" label="Sammy Fain"/>
<link wikidata="Q975609" start="1444" end="1457" title="Johnny Mandel" label="Johnny Mandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q112243" start="1509" end="1522" title="Academy Award for Best Song" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q470040" start="1571" end="1581" title="Sammy Cahn" label="Sammy Cahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q363698" start="1602" end="1615" title="Johnny Mercer" label="Johnny Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="1743" end="1756" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="1828" end="1844" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q590234" start="1896" end="1929" title="Spider-Man (theme song)" label="&amp;quot;Spider-Man&amp;quot; theme song"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333456" start="1938" end="1980" title="Spider-Man (1967 TV series)" label="television cartoon series of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="2007" end="2031" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="2069" end="2098" title="Syracuse University Libraries" label="Syracuse University Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q61740550" start="2132" end="2135" title="Guy Webster (photographer)" label="Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="2403" end="2428" title="Beverly Hills, California" label="Beverly Hills, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q493378" start="2473" end="2496" title="Culver City, California" label="Culver City, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444056" start="2673" end="2684" title="Secret Love (Doris Day song)" label="Secret Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228404" start="2698" end="2711" title="Calamity Jane (film)" label="Calamity Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436994" start="2732" end="2763" title="Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing (song)" label="Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q714941" start="2777" end="2808" title="Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing (film)" label="Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522673" start="2829" end="2853" title="The Shadow of Your Smile" label="The Shadow of Your Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q426314" start="2867" end="2880" title="The Sandpiper" label="The Sandpiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869530" start="2969" end="2981" title="Minstrel Man (film)" label="Minstrel Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504075" start="3002" end="3035" title="Friendly Persuasion (song)" label="Friendly Persuasion (Thee I Love)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621402" start="3049" end="3068" title="Friendly Persuasion (1956 film)" label="Friendly Persuasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782050" start="3089" end="3099" title="April Love (song)" label="April Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795903" start="3113" end="3123" title="April Love (film)" label="April Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655791" start="3144" end="3159" title="A Certain Smile (song)" label="A Certain Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3548431" start="3173" end="3188" title="A Certain Smile (film)" label="A Certain Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660424" start="3209" end="3229" title="A Very Precious Love" label="A Very Precious Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010288" start="3243" end="3263" title="Marjorie Morningstar (film)" label="Marjorie Morningstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738179" start="3284" end="3310" title="The Green Leaves of Summer" label="The Green Leaves of Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621909" start="3324" end="3333" title="The Alamo (1960 film)" label="The Alamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q945883" start="3416" end="3422" title="El Cid (film)" label="El Cid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058934" start="3476" end="3495" title="Tender Is the Night (film)" label="Tender Is the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q59084" start="3577" end="3597" title="Mutiny on the Bounty (1962 film)" label="Mutiny on the Bounty"/>
<link wikidata="Q244115" start="3646" end="3663" title="55 Days at Peking" label="55 Days at Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582583" start="3713" end="3730" title="An American Dream (film)" label="An American Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204137" start="3806" end="3820" title="The Stepmother (1972 film)" label="The Stepmother"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204135" start="3890" end="3902" title="Half a House" label="Half a House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522673" start="3984" end="4008" title="The Shadow of Your Smile" label="The Shadow of Your Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q426314" start="4038" end="4051" title="The Sandpiper" label="The Sandpiper"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413211" wikidata="Q1311150" url="?curid=413211" title="Paul Webster">
<text>Paul Webster may refer to:

* Paul Webster (jazz) (1909–1966), American big band musician
* Paul Webster (journalist) (born 1954), British journalist, editor of &quot;The Observer&quot;
* Paul Webster (producer) (born 1952), British film producer
* Paul Francis Webster (1907–1984), American lyricist
*Paul Webster, character in the 1959 film &quot;The Alligator People&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13884557" start="30" end="49" title="Paul Webster (jazz)" label="Paul Webster (jazz)"/>
<link wikidata="Q66010336" start="92" end="117" title="Paul Webster (journalist)" label="Paul Webster (journalist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q601661" start="188" end="211" title="Paul Webster (producer)" label="Paul Webster (producer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620897" start="249" end="269" title="Paul Francis Webster" label="Paul Francis Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006124" start="349" end="369" title="The Alligator People" label="The Alligator People"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413212" wikidata="Q412722" url="?curid=413212" title="Kingswood">
<text>Kingswood may refer to:
==Places==
===Australia===
*Kingswood, New South Wales
*Kingswood (Tamworth), New South Wales
*Kingswood Park, New South Wales
*Kingswood, South Australia

===Canada===
*Kingswood Music Theatre, Vaughan, Ontario 
*Kingswood Drive Public School, an elementary school located in Brampton, Ontario
*Kingswood Elementary School (British Columbia), an elementary school in Richmond
*Kingswood Elementary School (Nova Scotia), an elementary school in Hammonds Plains
*Kingswood University (New Brunswick), a private Christian university in Sussex

===England and Wales===
*Kingswood, Buckinghamshire
*Kingswood, Cheshire West and Chester, a former civil parish in Runcorn Rural District, Cheshire
*Kingswood, Warrington, a location in the United Kingdom in Cheshire
*Kingswood, Kingston upon Hull, a housing estate in the East Riding of Yorkshire
*Kingswood, Essex, a location in the United Kingdom
*Kingswood, South Gloucestershire, on the outskirts of Bristol
**Kingswood (UK Parliament constituency)
**Kingswood Borough, a former borough
*Kingswood, Stroud District, Gloucestershire
**Kingswood Abbey
*Kingswood, Herefordshire, a location in the United Kingdom
*Kingswood, Hertfordshire, a location in the United Kingdom
*Kingswood, Kent
*Kingswood, Dulwich, South London
*Kingswood, Powys, a location in the United Kingdom
*Kingswood, Somerset
*Kingswood, Surrey
*Kingswood, Warwickshire

===Ireland===
*Kingswood, Dublin, a suburb
**Kingswood Luas stop, a tram stop

===United States===
*Kingswood, Kentucky

==Motor vehicles==
*Chevrolet Kingswood, a station-wagon automobile manufactured from 1959 to 1972
**Chevrolet Kingswood Estate, a premium variation of the Chevrolet Kingswood, manufactured from 1969 to 1972 
*Holden Kingswood, an automobile manufactured in various forms from 1968 to 1984

==Media and entertainment==
*&quot;Kingswood Country&quot;, an Australian sitcom, screening from 1980 to 1984
*&quot;Kingswood&quot;, song by The Vasco Era
*Kingswood (band), an Australian indie rock band

== See also==
*King&#x27;s Wood (disambiguation)
*Kingwood (disambiguation)
*Kingswood Academy (disambiguation)
*Kingswood College (disambiguation)
*Kingswood School (disambiguation)
*Royal forest (also known as &quot;kingswood&quot;)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q412722" start="0" end="9" title="Kingswood" label="Kingswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437510" start="52" end="78" title="Kingswood, New South Wales" label="Kingswood, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413759" start="80" end="117" title="Kingswood (Tamworth), New South Wales" label="Kingswood (Tamworth), New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q385155" start="119" end="150" title="Kingswood Park, New South Wales" label="Kingswood Park, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413755" start="152" end="178" title="Kingswood, South Australia" label="Kingswood, South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875242" start="194" end="217" title="Kingswood Music Theatre" label="Kingswood Music Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q594991" start="238" end="267" title="Kingswood Drive Public School" label="Kingswood Drive Public School"/>
<link wikidata="Q14717246" start="320" end="366" title="Kingswood Elementary School (British Columbia)" label="Kingswood Elementary School (British Columbia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902402" start="402" end="443" title="Kingswood Elementary School (Nova Scotia)" label="Kingswood Elementary School (Nova Scotia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413788" start="486" end="506" title="Kingswood University" label="Kingswood University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459288" start="591" end="617" title="Kingswood, Buckinghamshire" label="Kingswood, Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="619" end="655" title="Kingswood, Cheshire West and Chester" label="Kingswood, Cheshire West and Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379735" start="682" end="704" title="Runcorn Rural District" label="Runcorn Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="716" end="737" title="Kingswood, Warrington" label="Kingswood, Warrington"/>
<link wikidata="" start="741" end="771" title="List of United Kingdom locations: Kib-Kin" label="location in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q24060121" start="785" end="814" title="Kingswood, Kingston upon Hull" label="Kingswood, Kingston upon Hull"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="866" end="882" title="Kingswood, Essex" label="Kingswood, Essex"/>
<link wikidata="" start="886" end="916" title="List of United Kingdom locations: Kib-Kin" label="location in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247835" start="918" end="950" title="Kingswood, South Gloucestershire" label="Kingswood, South Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q280886" start="982" end="1020" title="Kingswood (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Kingswood (UK Parliament constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413761" start="1023" end="1040" title="Kingswood Borough" label="Kingswood Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611353" start="1060" end="1086" title="Kingswood, Stroud District" label="Kingswood, Stroud District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417888" start="1106" end="1121" title="Kingswood Abbey" label="Kingswood Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1123" end="1147" title="Kingswood, Herefordshire" label="Kingswood, Herefordshire"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1151" end="1181" title="List of United Kingdom locations: Kib-Kin" label="location in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1183" end="1207" title="Kingswood, Hertfordshire" label="Kingswood, Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1211" end="1241" title="List of United Kingdom locations: Kib-Kin" label="location in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413753" start="1243" end="1258" title="Kingswood, Kent" label="Kingswood, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413777" start="1260" end="1278" title="Kingswood, Dulwich" label="Kingswood, Dulwich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1294" end="1310" title="Kingswood, Powys" label="Kingswood, Powys"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1314" end="1344" title="List of United Kingdom locations: Kib-Kin" label="location in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269078" start="1346" end="1365" title="Kingswood, Somerset" label="Kingswood, Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413757" start="1367" end="1384" title="Kingswood, Surrey" label="Kingswood, Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605568" start="1386" end="1409" title="Kingswood, Warwickshire" label="Kingswood, Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220755" start="1426" end="1443" title="Kingswood, Dublin" label="Kingswood, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104882051" start="1456" end="1475" title="Kingswood Luas stop" label="Kingswood Luas stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462784" start="1511" end="1530" title="Kingswood, Kentucky" label="Kingswood, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071208" start="1552" end="1571" title="Chevrolet Kingswood" label="Chevrolet Kingswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071208" start="1633" end="1659" title="Chevrolet Kingswood Estate" label="Chevrolet Kingswood Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450851" start="1742" end="1758" title="Holden Kingswood" label="Holden Kingswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413772" start="1858" end="1875" title="Kingswood Country" label="Kingswood Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772085" start="1965" end="1978" title="The Vasco Era" label="The Vasco Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388370" start="1980" end="1996" title="Kingswood (band)" label="Kingswood (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411135" start="2044" end="2077" title="King&amp;#x27;s Wood (disambiguation)" label="King&amp;#x27;s Wood (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q443933" start="2079" end="2104" title="Kingwood (disambiguation)" label="Kingwood (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19926772" start="2106" end="2140" title="Kingswood Academy (disambiguation)" label="Kingswood Academy (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413763" start="2142" end="2176" title="Kingswood College (disambiguation)" label="Kingswood College (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413787" start="2178" end="2211" title="Kingswood School (disambiguation)" label="Kingswood School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975546" start="2213" end="2225" title="Royal forest" label="Royal forest"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413213" wikidata="Q2474776" url="?curid=413213" title="James O'Hara, 2nd Baron Tyrawley">
<text>Field Marshal James O&#x27;Hara, 2nd Baron Tyrawley and 1st Baron Kilmaine, PC (1682 – 14 July 1774) was a British Army officer. After serving as a junior officer in Spain and the Low Countries during the War of the Spanish Succession, he went on to become British ambassador to Lisbon establishing a close relationship with King John V there. He undertook a tour as British ambassador to Saint Petersburg before becoming Governor of Gibraltar where he set about improving the fortifications. He was briefly commander of British troops in Portugal during the Seven Years&#x27; War but was replaced within a few months. During his military career, he was colonel of eight different regiments.

==Military career==
Born the son of Charles O&#x27;Hara, 1st Baron Tyrawley, and Frances O&#x27;Hara (&quot;née&quot; Rouse), James O&#x27;Hara was commissioned as a lieutenant in the Royal Fusiliers on 15 March 1703. He was promoted to captain on 24 March 1705.

O&#x27;Hara fought at the Siege of Barcelona in April 1706 and was wounded at the Battle of Almansa in April 1707 during the War of the Spanish Succession. He was redeployed to the Low Countries as aide-de-camp to the Duke of Marlborough and was wounded again at the Battle of Malplaquet in September 1709. He succeeded his father as colonel of the Royal Fusiliers in January 1713 and then served with his regiment in Minorca for several years. For this he was appointed an aide-de-camp to the King in 1717 and, while serving in Ireland, was created Baron Kilmaine in the Peerage of Ireland on 2 January 1722. He succeeded his father as 2nd Baron Tyrawley in June 1724.

Lord Tyrawley and Kilmaine (as he was now) was appointed British ambassador to Lisbon in January 1727 establishing a close relationship with King John V there. Promoted to brigadier-general on 18 December 1735 and to major-general on 17 July 1739, he also became colonel of the 5th Regiment of Horse in August 1739. After retiring from his post in Lisbon in January 1741, he declined an American command later that year. Promoted to lieutenant-general on 5 April 1743, he became colonel of the 2nd Troop Horse Grenadier Guards later that month and was appointed British ambassador to Saint Petersburg in November 1743. He retired from the Saint Petersburg post in February 1745.

Lord Tyrawley became colonel of the 3rd Troop of Horse Guards in April 1745 and colonel of the Lord Tyrawley&#x27;s Regiment in December 1746 before becoming Governor of Minorca in 1747. He was elected Fellow of the Royal Society in January 1748. He went on to become colonel of the 14th Regiment of Dragoons in July 1749, colonel of the 3rd (King&#x27;s Own) Regiment of Dragoons in July 1752 and colonel of the Coldstream Guards in April 1755.

Tyrawley became Governor of Gibraltar in 1756 and set about improving the fortifications. These changes came under criticism from William Skinner who was British Chief Engineer. The two of them were called before the bar of the House of Commons where Lord Tyrawley harangued Skinner who took the anger in good humour. Tyrawley went on to be Governor of Portsmouth in 1759.

Promoted to full general on 14 March 1761, Lord Tyrawley and Kilmaine returned to Lisbon as British ambassador and commander of British troops in February 1762 for the duration of the Seven Years&#x27; War but was replaced by General John Burgoyne in July 1762 and returned to England in protest. Promoted to field marshal on 10 June 1763, he moved to Milbourne House in Barnes in 1770. He died at Twickenham on 14 July 1774 and was buried in the chapel of the Royal Hospital Chelsea.

==Family==
In November 1724, Lord Tyrawley and Kilmaine married Mary Stewart, daughter of The 2nd Viscount Mountjoy. He had no children by this marriage but had at least two illegitimate children including Charles O&#x27;Hara, who followed him into the Army, and George Anne Bellamy, who became an actress.
The diarist Sylas Neville mentions meeting a naval officer stationed at Great Yarmouth in 1771 &quot;whose name is O&#x27;Hara, a natural son of Lord Tyrawley&quot; but this is likely to have been naval Lieutenant William Henry King O&#x27;Hara (d. 1789).

==References==
==Sources==
* Baron&#x27;s Tyrawley accounts from Russia have been released in: Сборник Императорского русского исторического общества, том 102: Дипломатическая переписка английских послов и посланников при русском дворе: Сообщ. из англ. гос. архива М-ва иностр., часть 12-ая: 1744 - 1745 г., С -Петербург 1898.







|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="0" end="13" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474776" start="14" end="74" title="James O&amp;#x27;Hara, 2nd Baron Tyrawley" label="James O&amp;#x27;Hara, 2nd Baron Tyrawley and 1st Baron Kilmaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="76" end="78" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Honourable Privy Council" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="107" end="119" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="166" end="171" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="180" end="193" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="205" end="234" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="279" end="285" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q299650" start="325" end="336" title="John V of Portugal" label="King John V"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="389" end="405" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q195965" start="422" end="443" title="Governor of Gibraltar" label="Governor of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="539" end="547" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="559" end="580" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081306" start="729" end="768" title="Charles O&amp;#x27;Hara, 1st Baron Tyrawley" label="Charles O&amp;#x27;Hara, 1st Baron Tyrawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="841" end="853" title="Commissioned officer" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="859" end="869" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q248220" start="877" end="892" title="Royal Fusiliers" label="Royal Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="930" end="937" title="Captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272485" start="983" end="1001" title="Siege of Barcelona (1706)" label="Siege of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q320394" start="1039" end="1056" title="Battle of Almansa" label="Battle of Almansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="1082" end="1111" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="1138" end="1151" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="1155" end="1167" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="1175" end="1194" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="Duke of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q316897" start="1224" end="1244" title="Battle of Malplaquet" label="Battle of Malplaquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="1291" end="1298" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q52636" start="1375" end="1382" title="Minorca" label="Minorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="1447" end="1455" title="George I of Great Britain" label="the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="1486" end="1493" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859616" start="1529" end="1547" title="Peerage of Ireland" label="Peerage of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862880" start="1598" end="1612" title="Baron Tyrawley" label="Baron Tyrawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="1707" end="1713" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q299650" start="1769" end="1780" title="John V of Portugal" label="King John V"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="1800" end="1817" title="brigadier-general" label="brigadier-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="1845" end="1858" title="major-general" label="major-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817086" start="1906" end="1927" title="4th Royal Irish Dragoon Guards" label="5th Regiment of Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="2061" end="2079" title="lieutenant-general" label="lieutenant-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905433" start="2122" end="2154" title="Horse Grenadier Guards" label="2nd Troop Horse Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="2212" end="2228" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636989" start="2344" end="2369" title="3rd Troop of Horse Guards" label="3rd Troop of Horse Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374399" start="2403" end="2432" title="10th (North Lincoln) Regiment of Foot" label="Lord Tyrawley&amp;#x27;s Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572158" start="2466" end="2485" title="List of Governors of Minorca" label="Governor of Minorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="2510" end="2537" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550035" start="2591" end="2616" title="14th King&amp;#x27;s Hussars" label="14th Regiment of Dragoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636986" start="2646" end="2688" title="3rd The King&amp;#x27;s Own Hussars" label="3rd (King&amp;#x27;s Own) Regiment of Dragoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107953" start="2721" end="2738" title="Coldstream Guards" label="Coldstream Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q195965" start="2771" end="2792" title="Governor of Gibraltar" label="Governor of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018487" start="2885" end="2900" title="William Skinner (engineer)" label="William Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914852" start="2983" end="2999" title="House of Commons of Great Britain" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572186" start="3096" end="3118" title="List of Governors of Portsmouth" label="Governor of Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="3146" end="3153" title="general" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="3211" end="3217" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="3313" end="3334" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q436775" start="3355" end="3376" title="John Burgoyne" label="General John Burgoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="3438" end="3451" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17530988" start="3481" end="3496" title="Milbourne House" label="Milbourne House"/>
<link wikidata="Q668140" start="3500" end="3506" title="Barnes, London" label="Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143278" start="3527" end="3537" title="Twickenham" label="Twickenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628509" start="3590" end="3612" title="Royal Hospital Chelsea" label="Royal Hospital Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018820" start="3705" end="3730" title="William Stewart, 2nd Viscount Mountjoy" label="The 2nd Viscount Mountjoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959926" start="3821" end="3840" title="Charles O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="Charles O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101393" start="3878" end="3897" title="George Anne Bellamy" label="George Anne Bellamy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413216" wikidata="Q409013" url="?curid=413216" title="Chloroacetic acid">
<text>Chloroacetic acid, industrially known as monochloroacetic acid (MCA), is the organochlorine compound with the formula . This carboxylic acid is a useful building block in organic synthesis. It is a colorless solid. Related compounds are dichloroacetic acid and trichloroacetic acid.

==Production==
Chloroacetic acid was first prepared (in impure form) by the French chemist Félix LeBlanc (1813–1886) in 1843 by chlorinating acetic acid in the presence of sunlight, and in 1857 (in pure form) by the German chemist Reinhold Hoffmann (1831–1919) by refluxing glacial acetic acid in the presence of chlorine and sunlight, and then by the French chemist Charles Adolphe Wurtz by hydrolysis of chloroacetyl chloride (), also in 1857.

Chloroacetic acid is prepared industrially by two routes. The predominant method involves chlorination of acetic acid, with acetic anhydride as a catalyst:

This route suffers from the production of dichloroacetic acid and trichloroacetic acid as impurities, which are difficult to separate by distillation:
:

The second method entails hydrolysis of trichloroethylene:

The hydrolysis is conducted at 130–140 °C in a concentrated (at least 75%) solution of sulfuric acid. This method produces a highly pure product, unlike the halogenation route. However, the significant quantities of HCl released have led to the increased popularity of the halogenation route. Approximately 420,000 tonnes are produced globally per year.

==Uses and reactions==
Most reactions take advantage of the high reactivity of the bond. 

In its largest-scale application, chloroacetic acid is used to prepare the thickening agent carboxymethyl cellulose and carboxymethyl starch.

Chloroacetic acid is also used in the production of phenoxy herbicides by etherification with chlorophenols. In this way 2-methyl-4-chlorophenoxyacetic acid (MCPA), 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, and 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T) are produced. It is the precursor to the herbicide glyphosate and dimethoate. Chloroacetic acid is converted to chloroacetyl chloride, a precursor to adrenaline (epinephrine). Displacement of chloride by sulfide gives thioglycolic acid, which is used as a stabilizer in PVC and a component in some cosmetics.

Illustrative of its usefulness in organic chemistry is the &quot;O&quot;-alkylation of salicylaldehyde with chloroacetic acid, followed by decarboxylation of the resulting ether, producing benzofuran.

==Safety==
Like other chloroacetic acids and related halocarbons, chloroacetic acid is a hazardous alkylating agent. The for rats is 76 mg/kg.

It is classified as an extremely hazardous substance in the United States as defined in Section 302 of the U.S. Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (42 U.S.C. 11002), and is subject to strict reporting requirements by facilities which produce, store, or use it in significant quantities.

==See also==
*Fluoroacetic acid

==References==
==External links==
*
*Sublimed crystals of the acid in a brown glass bottle (photo)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q409013" start="0" end="17" title="Chloroacetic acid" label="Chloroacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q409013" start="41" end="62" title="Chloroacetic acid" label="monochloroacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q409013" start="64" end="67" title="Chloroacetic acid" label="MCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q426809" start="77" end="100" title="organochlorine compound" label="organochlorine compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q134856" start="125" end="140" title="carboxylic acid" label="carboxylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153832" start="171" end="188" title="organic synthesis" label="organic synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q412845" start="237" end="256" title="dichloroacetic acid" label="dichloroacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q410116" start="261" end="281" title="trichloroacetic acid" label="trichloroacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="375" end="388" title="Félix LeBlanc" label="Félix LeBlanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q888529" start="412" end="424" title="Halogenation" label="chlorinating"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="425" end="436" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="558" end="577" title="Acetic acid#Nomenclature" label="glacial acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="597" end="605" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="610" end="618" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q366051" start="651" end="672" title="Charles Adolphe Wurtz" label="Charles Adolphe Wurtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="676" end="686" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q411258" start="690" end="711" title="chloroacetyl chloride" label="chloroacetyl chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="821" end="833" title="chlorine" label="chlorination"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="837" end="848" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q407775" start="855" end="871" title="acetic anhydride" label="acetic anhydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="877" end="885" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q412845" start="930" end="949" title="dichloroacetic acid" label="dichloroacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q410116" start="954" end="974" title="trichloroacetic acid" label="trichloroacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="1025" end="1037" title="distillation" label="distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q407936" start="1082" end="1099" title="trichloroethylene" label="trichloroethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="1189" end="1202" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q888529" start="1259" end="1271" title="halogenation" label="halogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211086" start="1318" end="1321" title="Hydrogen chloride" label="HCl"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="1417" end="1423" title="tonnes" label="tonnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q411030" start="1640" end="1663" title="carboxymethyl cellulose" label="carboxymethyl cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q415766" start="1668" end="1688" title="modified starch" label="carboxymethyl starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181399" start="1743" end="1760" title="phenoxy herbicide" label="phenoxy herbicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q149413" start="1812" end="1847" title="2-Methyl-4-chlorophenoxyacetic acid" label="2-methyl-4-chlorophenoxyacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q209222" start="1856" end="1886" title="2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid" label="2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q209188" start="1892" end="1925" title="2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxyacetic acid" label="2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q407232" start="1987" end="1997" title="glyphosate" label="glyphosate"/>
<link wikidata="Q421371" start="2002" end="2012" title="dimethoate" label="dimethoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q411258" start="2048" end="2069" title="chloroacetyl chloride" label="chloroacetyl chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="2086" end="2096" title="adrenaline" label="adrenaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q414738" start="2154" end="2171" title="thioglycolic acid" label="thioglycolic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q146368" start="2206" end="2209" title="PVC" label="PVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q131207" start="2234" end="2243" title="cosmetics" label="cosmetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q414492" start="2333" end="2348" title="salicylaldehyde" label="salicylaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q898436" start="2385" end="2400" title="decarboxylation" label="decarboxylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q103230" start="2418" end="2423" title="ether" label="ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q410089" start="2435" end="2445" title="benzofuran" label="benzofuran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307068" start="2470" end="2488" title="chloroacetic acids" label="chloroacetic acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q387914" start="2501" end="2512" title="halocarbons" label="halocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q177604" start="2547" end="2563" title="alkylating agent" label="alkylating agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="2573" end="2577" title="rats" label="rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619173" start="2615" end="2644" title="List of extremely hazardous substances" label="extremely hazardous substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370630" start="2704" end="2754" title="Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act" label="Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q420215" start="2910" end="2927" title="Fluoroacetic acid" label="Fluoroacetic acid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413217" wikidata="Q680982" url="?curid=413217" title="Prince William Henry, Duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh">
<text>Prince William Henry, Duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh (25 November 1743 – 25 August 1805), was a grandson of George II and a younger brother of George III of the United Kingdom.

==Life==

===Youth===
Prince William Henry was born at Leicester House, Westminster. His parents were Frederick, Prince of Wales, eldest son of George II and Caroline of Ansbach, and Princess Augusta of Saxe-Gotha, then Princess of Wales. He was baptized at Leicester House eleven days later. His godparents were his paternal uncle by marriage, the Prince of Orange; his paternal uncle, the Duke of Cumberland; and his paternal aunt, Princess Amelia. He was fourth in the line of succession at birth.

His father died in 1751, leaving the Prince&#x27;s elder brother, Prince George, heir-apparent to the throne. He succeeded as George III on 25 October 1760, and created William Duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh and Earl of Connaught on 19 November 1764. He had been made a Knight of the Garter on 27 May 1762, and invested on 22 September of that year. In 1764, he began to court Maria Walpole, the Dowager Countess of Waldegrave, an illegitimate granddaughter of Sir Robert Walpole.

===Career and marriage===
He initially wished for active service in the military, but his health and intelligence both proved insufficient. Instead he was appointed colonel of the 13th Regiment of Foot in 1766. That same year, he and Maria married in secret in his home on Pall Mall. This marriage only became known to the King after the passing of the Royal Marriages Act 1772. The Duke and Maria lived at St Leonard&#x27;s Hill in Clewer, near Windsor and had three children, all of whom were styled &quot;Highness&quot; from birth and used the territorial designation of Gloucester in conjunction with their princely styles, as great-grandchildren in the male line of George II.

In 1767, he was promoted to major-general and made colonel of the 3rd Regiment of Foot Guards. The same year he was made Warden of Windsor Forest, gaining the post&#x27;s official residence at Cranbourne Lodge. In 1768, he employed the renowned violin maker Richard Duke as his official instrument maker; giving him private lodgings in Old Gloucester Street and workshops in Gloucester Place. He was made the thirteenth Chancellor of the University of Dublin in 1771, holding the post until 1805.

The Duke and Maria had three children:

* Princess Sophia of Gloucester (&quot;Sophia Matilda&quot;; 29 May 1773 – 29 November 1844), was born in 1773. 
* Princess Caroline of Gloucester (&quot;Caroline Augusta Maria&quot;; 24 June 1774 – 14 March 1775) was christened privately on 22 July 1774; her godparents were the Duchess of Gloucester (her mother), the Hereditary Duchess of Brunswick-Lüneburg (her paternal aunt) and the Hereditary Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg (her uncle by marriage). The princess died at just nine months old following a smallpox inoculation, intended to protect her from the disease.
* Prince William Frederick (15 January 1776 – 30 November 1834)

With the outbreak of the American War of Independence, the Duke hoped for a field command, but George refused. He made a request to serve in the forces of Frederick II of Prussia during the War of Bavarian Succession (1777–1779) – George consented but Frederick himself turned down the offer. He later transferred to the 1st Regiment of Foot Guards, and he became a field marshal on 18 October 1793. He went on to be General Officer Commanding Northern District in 1796, a command that he held until 1802.

===Interests and family connections===

In 1780, the Duke was made a Fellow of the Royal Society and remained interested in medical and scientific matters of the day. In 1797, he invited Norwich surgeon Philip Meadows Martineau to dine with him at Raynham Hall, the home of George Townshend, 1st Marquess Townshend whose first cousin was Thomas Townshend, 1st Viscount Sydney, after whom Sydney, Australia was named. The Marquess, like Martineau was a Whig and, at this time, Lord Lieutenant of Norfolk. In 1825, Sir William Beechey exhibited his portraits of both Martineau and the Duke at the Royal Academy.

Additionally, in 1782, an illegitimate daughter was born to the Duke, 

* Louisa Maria La Coast (6 January 1782 – 10 February 1835), who later married Godfrey Macdonald, 3rd Baron Macdonald.

Her mother was the Duke&#x27;s mistress Lady Almeria Carpenter, a daughter of the first Earl of Tyrconnell.

The Duke died at Gloucester House in London in 1805 and was succeeded as duke by his son William Frederick. He was buried at St George&#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle.

==Titles, styles, honours and arms==
===Titles and styles===
*25 November 1743 – 19 November 1764: &quot;His Royal Highness&quot; Prince William
*19 November 1764 – 25 August 1805: &quot;His Royal Highness&quot; The Duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh
His peerages were gazetted on 17 November 1764.

===Honours===
*27 May 1762: Royal Knight of the Garter (KG)
*Privy Counsellor (PC)
*Royal Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS)

===Arms===

William was granted use of the arms of the kingdom, differenced by a &quot;label argent of five points, the centre bearing a fleur-de-lys azure, the other points each bearing a cross gules&quot;.
==Ancestors==
==References==
==External links==
*, for the Duke&#x27;s remark on The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire
*Royal Berkshire History: Prince William Henry, Duke of Gloucester</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q680982" start="0" end="54" title="Prince William Henry, Duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh" label="Prince William Henry, Duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="110" end="119" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="145" end="177" title="George III" label="George III of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q26898080" start="235" end="263" title="Leicester House, Westminster" label="Leicester House, Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q165349" start="282" end="308" title="Frederick, Prince of Wales" label="Frederick, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="324" end="333" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q76961" start="338" end="357" title="Caroline of Ansbach" label="Caroline of Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q76967" start="363" end="393" title="Princess Augusta of Saxe-Gotha" label="Princess Augusta of Saxe-Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q380949" start="529" end="545" title="William IV, Prince of Orange" label="Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q378088" start="571" end="589" title="Prince William, Duke of Cumberland" label="Duke of Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q62393" start="614" end="629" title="Princess Amelia of Great Britain" label="Princess Amelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832870" start="652" end="670" title="Line of succession to the British throne" label="line of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="748" end="761" title="George III" label="Prince George"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164056" start="859" end="891" title="Duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh" label="Duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164056" start="896" end="913" title="Earl of Connaught" label="Earl of Connaught"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="954" end="974" title="Order of the Garter" label="Knight of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q446919" start="1061" end="1110" title="Maria, Duchess of Gloucester and Edinburgh" label="Maria Walpole, the Dowager Countess of Waldegrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="1149" end="1163" title="Robert Walpole" label="Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q12799162" start="1331" end="1338" title="Colonel (United Kingdom)" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489806" start="1346" end="1367" title="13th Regiment of Foot" label="13th Regiment of Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q925349" start="1439" end="1448" title="Pall Mall, London" label="Pall Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q377769" start="1519" end="1543" title="Royal Marriages Act 1772" label="Royal Marriages Act 1772"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162463" start="1573" end="1595" title="St Leonard&amp;#x27;s Hill" label="St Leonard&amp;#x27;s Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607040" start="1599" end="1605" title="Clewer" label="Clewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="1837" end="1846" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856034" start="1915" end="1942" title="Scots Guards" label="3rd Regiment of Foot Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569306" start="1980" end="1994" title="Windsor Forest" label="Windsor Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181933" start="2042" end="2058" title="Cranbourne Lodge" label="Cranbourne Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q116004970" start="2107" end="2119" title="Richard Duke (violin maker)" label="Richard Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086101" start="2224" end="2240" title="Gloucester Place" label="Gloucester Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566682" start="2269" end="2307" title="Chancellor of the University of Dublin" label="Chancellor of the University of Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q468715" start="2389" end="2418" title="Princess Sophia of Gloucester" label="Princess Sophia of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q680982" start="2502" end="2533" title="Princess Caroline of Gloucester" label="Princess Caroline of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q238458" start="2707" end="2747" title="Princess Augusta of Great Britain" label="Hereditary Duchess of Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q58773" start="2776" end="2813" title="Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick" label="Hereditary Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="2893" end="2901" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q701723" start="2959" end="2983" title="Prince William Frederick, Duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh" label="Prince William Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3047" end="3075" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="3177" end="3200" title="Frederick II of Prussia" label="Frederick II of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157548" start="3212" end="3238" title="War of Bavarian Succession" label="War of Bavarian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q772054" start="3343" end="3370" title="Grenadier Guards" label="1st Regiment of Foot Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="3388" end="3401" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058260" start="3466" end="3483" title="Northern Command (United Kingdom)" label="Northern District"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="3598" end="3625" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777110" start="3732" end="3756" title="Martineau family" label="Philip Meadows Martineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450806" start="3777" end="3789" title="Raynham Hall" label="Raynham Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101971" start="3803" end="3843" title="George Townshend, 1st Marquess Townshend" label="George Townshend, 1st Marquess Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q332533" start="3867" end="3904" title="Thomas Townshend, 1st Viscount Sydney" label="Thomas Townshend, 1st Viscount Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="3917" end="3934" title="Sydney, Australia" label="Sydney, Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="3981" end="3985" title="Whig (political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679626" start="4005" end="4031" title="Lord Lieutenant of Norfolk" label="Lord Lieutenant of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q48566" start="4042" end="4061" title="William Beechey" label="Sir William Beechey"/>
<link wikidata="Q270920" start="4124" end="4137" title="Royal Academy of Arts" label="Royal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576499" start="4291" end="4329" title="Godfrey Macdonald, 3rd Baron Macdonald" label="Godfrey Macdonald, 3rd Baron Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q18526435" start="4377" end="4394" title="Almeria Carpenter" label="Almeria Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537702" start="4420" end="4438" title="George Carpenter, 1st Earl of Tyrconnell" label="Earl of Tyrconnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610643" start="4458" end="4474" title="Grosvenor House" label="Gloucester House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449634" start="4566" end="4605" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="4934" end="4960" title="Order of the Garter" label="Royal Knight of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="4967" end="4983" title="Privy Council of Great Britain" label="Privy Counsellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="4996" end="5023" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q313030" start="5320" end="5375" title="The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire" label="The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413218" wikidata="Q5764876" url="?curid=413218" title="Himachal Pradesh University">
<text>Himachal Pradesh University (HPU) is a public state university at Summer Hill, Shimla, Himachal Pradesh. It was established on 22 July 1970 by &quot;The Himachal Pradesh University Act, 1970&quot; (HP Act No 17 of 1970) by the Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly, before the emergence of Himachal Pradesh as a full state of India.

The university has been awarded Grade &#x27;A&#x27; by NAAC.

The University has a total of 13 faculties, 11 of which comprise 52 departments and 5 centers and institutes, which run 132 academic programmes.

==Constituent colleges and institutes==
*Himachal Pradesh University Business School
*University College of Business Studies, Shimla
*University Institute of Legal Studies, Shimla 
*University Institute of Information Technology, Shimla

==General degree Colleges under Himachal Pradesh University==

Its jurisdiction extends over 7 districts -Bilaspur, Hamirpur, Kinnaur, Shimla, Sirmaur, Solan, Una.

* Government College Sanjauli, Shimla
* Government College Solan
* GB Pant Memorial Govt Degree College, Rampur Bushahr
* Government Degree College, Kumarsain
* Government College, Barsar
* Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Memorial PG college (formerly Government College Hamirpur) is located in Anu Hamirpur, Himachal Pradesh
* Rajiv Gandhi Government Degree College, Shimla
* Rajkiya Kanya Maha Vidyalaya, Shimla.

==Notable alumni==

*Hamid Karzai, former President of Afghanistan, MA in International Relations &amp; Political Science (1983), Doctor of Literature (honorary, 2003)
* J P Nadda, Current National President of Bharatiya Janata Party and former Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare, LL.B from Faculty of Law, Himachal Pradesh University
* Anand Sharma, Former Union Minister of Commerce and Industry, Government of India, LL.B from Faculty of Law, Himachal Pradesh University
* Anupam Kher, Indian actor, drop-out of Government College, Sanjauli 
*Mohit Chauhan, Popular Indian singer, M.Sc in Geology from Government College, Dharamshala
*Ashwani Kumar, Former Governor of Nagaland
*Randeep Guleria, Director of AIIMS, New Delhi, MBBS from Indira Gandhi Medical College
* Sanjay Karol, Judge of the Supreme Court of India, LL.B from Faculty of Law, Himachal Pradesh University
*Suresh Kumar Kashyap, Current State President of BJP
* Indu Goswami, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha
*Rajeev Sharma, Former Judge of Punjab and Haryana High Court, LL.B from Faculty of Law, Himachal Pradesh University
*Abhilasha Kumari, Judicial Member of Lokpal Committee, Faculty of Law, Himachal Pradesh University
*Vijay Sharma, famous painter and a Padam Shri awardee
*Arzu Rana Deuba, Member of Nepali Congress Party
*Tsering Dhondup, Minister of Finance in Central Tibetan Administration
*Singhi Ram, Former Union Minister of Food and Supplies, LLB from Faculty of Law, Himachal Pradesh University
*Ram Lal Thakur, Former Union Youth Services and Sports Minister of LLB from Faculty of Law, Himachal Pradesh University
*Shazia Ilmi, Current Spokesperson of BJP, Graduated from St. Bedes College
*Lakhvinder Singh Rana, MLA, Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly
*Rajinder Garg, MLA, Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly

==References==
==External links==
* Official website
* Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Memorial PG college</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5764876" start="0" end="27" title="Himachal Pradesh University" label="Himachal Pradesh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764876" start="29" end="32" title="Himachal Pradesh University" label="HPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="39" end="45" title="Public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603893" start="46" end="62" title="State university (India)" label="state university"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637335" start="66" end="77" title="Summer Hill, Shimla" label="Summer Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q83786" start="79" end="85" title="Shimla" label="Shimla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="87" end="103" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633627" start="227" end="264" title="Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly" label="Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522862" start="389" end="393" title="National Assessment and Accreditation Council" label="NAAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15224127" start="583" end="626" title="Himachal Pradesh University Business School" label="Himachal Pradesh University Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894795" start="724" end="770" title="University Institute of Information Technology, Himachal Pradesh University" label="University Institute of Information Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588722" start="947" end="982" title="Government College, Sanjauli" label="Government College Sanjauli, Shimla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107027446" start="1012" end="1064" title="Govt. PG College Rampur Bushahr" label="GB Pant Memorial Govt Degree College, Rampur Bushahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200369" start="1094" end="1103" title="Kumarsain" label="Kumarsain"/>
<link wikidata="Q112860727" start="1135" end="1182" title="Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Memorial PG college" label="Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Memorial PG college"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575701" start="1240" end="1266" title="Hamirpur, Himachal Pradesh" label="Hamirpur, Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q43944" start="1378" end="1390" title="Hamid Karzai" label="Hamid Karzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140706" start="1399" end="1423" title="President of Afghanistan" label="President of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193764" start="1527" end="1536" title="J P Nadda" label="J P Nadda"/>
<link wikidata="Q19882312" start="1546" end="1590" title="President of the Bharatiya Janata Party" label="National President of Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525265" start="1602" end="1645" title="Ministry of Health and Family Welfare" label="Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764876" start="1657" end="1700" title="Faculty of Law, Himachal Pradesh University" label="Faculty of Law, Himachal Pradesh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q755831" start="1703" end="1715" title="Anand Sharma" label="Anand Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="1765" end="1784" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764876" start="1796" end="1839" title="Faculty of Law, Himachal Pradesh University" label="Faculty of Law, Himachal Pradesh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q560163" start="1842" end="1853" title="Anupam Kher" label="Anupam Kher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917376" start="1912" end="1925" title="Mohit Chauhan" label="Mohit Chauhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426864" start="2004" end="2017" title="Ashwani Kumar (police officer)" label="Ashwani Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19612523" start="2048" end="2063" title="Randeep Guleria" label="Randeep Guleria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15177600" start="2077" end="2093" title="All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi" label="AIIMS, New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024974" start="2105" end="2134" title="Indira Gandhi Medical College" label="Indira Gandhi Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q59656159" start="2137" end="2149" title="Sanjay Karol" label="Sanjay Karol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764876" start="2198" end="2241" title="Faculty of Law, Himachal Pradesh University" label="Faculty of Law, Himachal Pradesh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q63993625" start="2243" end="2263" title="Suresh Kumar Kashyap" label="Suresh Kumar Kashyap"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779456" start="2273" end="2295" title="List of state presidents of the Bharatiya Janata Party" label="State President of BJP"/>
<link wikidata="Q87723584" start="2298" end="2310" title="Indu Goswami" label="Indu Goswami"/>
<link wikidata="Q73226795" start="2347" end="2360" title="Rajeev Sharma" label="Rajeev Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q130502" start="2378" end="2407" title="Punjab and Haryana High Court" label="Punjab and Haryana High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q56645967" start="2464" end="2480" title="Abhilasha Kumari" label="Abhilasha Kumari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764876" start="2519" end="2562" title="Faculty of Law, Himachal Pradesh University" label="Faculty of Law, Himachal Pradesh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15445849" start="2564" end="2576" title="Vijay Sharma" label="Vijay Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q949193" start="2599" end="2609" title="Padma Shri" label="Padam Shri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802770" start="2619" end="2634" title="Arzu Rana Deuba" label="Arzu Rana Deuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q14913132" start="2669" end="2684" title="Tsering Dhondup" label="Tsering Dhondup"/>
<link wikidata="Q326343" start="2709" end="2739" title="Central Tibetan Administration" label="Central Tibetan Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523499" start="2741" end="2751" title="Singhi Ram" label="Singhi Ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294565" start="2766" end="2795" title="Ministry of Food Processing Industries" label="Minister of Food and Supplies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288515" start="2851" end="2865" title="Ram Lal Thakur" label="Ram Lal Thakur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294590" start="2874" end="2914" title="Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports" label="Union Youth Services and Sports Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491735" start="2972" end="2983" title="Shazia Ilmi" label="Shazia Ilmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164400" start="3029" end="3046" title="St. Bede&amp;#x27;s College, Shimla" label="St. Bedes College"/>
<link wikidata="Q113690882" start="3048" end="3069" title="Lakhvinder Singh Rana" label="Lakhvinder Singh Rana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633627" start="3076" end="3113" title="Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly" label="Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q114873807" start="3115" end="3128" title="Rajinder Garg" label="Rajinder Garg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633627" start="3135" end="3172" title="Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly" label="Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413224" wikidata="Q1135572" url="?curid=413224" title="Taximeter">
<text>A taximeter or fare meter is a mechanical or electronic device installed in taxicabs and auto rickshaws that calculates passenger fares based on a combination of distance travelled and waiting time. Its shortened form, &quot;taxi&quot;, is also a metonym for the hired cars that use them.

==History==
The modern taximeter was invented by German Friedrich Wilhelm Gustav Bruhn in 1891, and the Daimler Victoria—the world&#x27;s first meter-equipped (and gasoline-powered) taxicab—was built by Gottlieb Daimler in 1897.&lt;ref name=&quot;theglobeandmail/5606867&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

Taximeters were originally mechanical and mounted outside the cab, above the driver&#x27;s side front wheel. Meters were soon relocated inside the taxi, and in the 1980s electronic meters were introduced.

== k constant ==
Constant expressed in pulses per kilometre which represents the number of pulses the taximeter must receive in order to correctly indicate a distance traveled of one kilometre.

== Functioning ==
Taximeters, when they are installed to the taxis, require adjustment of k constant. During the movement, car generates signal which transmitted to the taximeter. Number of signals transmitted per k constant ratio results distance travelled. Within pre-installed tariff values and travel data are multiplied and fare is calculated.

==Accessories and features==

Taximeters can include several accessories, or act as components in larger dispatching/control systems. Features include:
* Ticket/receipt printer.
* Fraud control and prevention (on the part of the owner or operator), through the impression of control tickets or computer monitoring. Additionally, taximeters are often visually sealed by a municipal weights and scales authority after initial calibration.
* Radio communication, allowing trip status to be monitored by a dispatcher or supervisor.
* Dispatching of trip assignments through radio or data systems.
* Interaction with GPS systems to assist with dispatching and to provide security.
* Seat sensors that detect the presence of a passenger (to prevent a cab from carrying fares without activating the taximeter).
* Credit or prepaid card support.
* Bluetooth support for communication with smartphones or tablets.
* USB support for setup, diagnostics, and connectivity to the vehicle computer.

==Work cycle==
During normal operation, taximeters repeat cyclically through several stages:

* Free (or For Hire in the UK): The taxicab is empty and available for hire. The luminous sign, if present, is switched on.
* Occupied (or Hired): The taximeter enters in this stage at the start of the trip and the &quot;Free&quot; sign is switched off. In this stage the running fare and the present tariff are displayed. Additional information that can be displayed in this mode includes extras (e.g. credits for luggage), present time, speed, etc.
* To Pay (or Stopped in the UK): At the end of the trip, the driver enters this stage to collect payment, make change, and optionally print a receipt. The exterior roof light may also blink to alert potential passengers that the taxi will soon be available.

==See also==
* Taxicab
* Ohmer fare register
* Mobile data terminal
* Odometer
* Speedometer
* Tachometer

==References==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1135572" start="2" end="11" title="Taximeter" label="taximeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135572" start="15" end="25" title="Taximeter" label="fare meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="76" end="83" title="taxicab" label="taxicab"/>
<link wikidata="Q59720" start="89" end="102" title="auto rickshaw" label="auto rickshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="247" end="254" title="metonym" label="metonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="339" end="345" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419001" start="346" end="376" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Gustav Bruhn" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Gustav Bruhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127310" start="394" end="410" title="List of Daimler cars" label="Daimler Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q57098" start="493" end="509" title="Gottlieb Daimler" label="Gottlieb Daimler"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="1947" end="1958" title="Global Positioning System" label="GPS systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2442" end="2444" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="2451" end="2458" title="taxicab" label="taxicab"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2894" end="2896" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="3140" end="3147" title="Taxicab" label="Taxicab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081096" start="3150" end="3169" title="Ohmer fare register" label="Ohmer fare register"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498347" start="3172" end="3192" title="Mobile data terminal" label="Mobile data terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q745105" start="3195" end="3203" title="Odometer" label="Odometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q475241" start="3206" end="3217" title="Speedometer" label="Speedometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q206976" start="3220" end="3230" title="Tachometer" label="Tachometer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413226" wikidata="Q7781519" url="?curid=413226" title="Theobald, Count of Champagne">
<text>Theobald, Count of Champagne may refer to:

* &quot;Theobald I of Champagne&quot;, Theobald III, Count of Blois, 1012–1089 
* Theobald II, Count of Champagne, also &quot;Theobald IV, Count of Blois&quot;, 1090–1152
* Theobald III, Count of Champagne, 1179–1201
* &quot;Theobald IV of Champagne&quot;, also Theobald I of Navarre, 1201/1234–1253
* &quot;Theobald V of Champagne&quot;, also Theobald II of Navarre, 1238/1253–1270</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q462881" start="83" end="111" title="Theobald III, Count of Blois" label="Theobald III, Count of Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q361369" start="126" end="157" title="Theobald II, Count of Champagne" label="Theobald II, Count of Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q282436" start="217" end="249" title="Theobald III, Count of Champagne" label="Theobald III, Count of Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q314562" start="306" end="327" title="Theobald I of Navarre" label="Theobald I of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q351859" start="388" end="410" title="Theobald II of Navarre" label="Theobald II of Navarre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413227" wikidata="Q580807" url="?curid=413227" title="Albumen print">
<text>The albumen print, also called albumen silver print, is a method of producing a photographic print using egg whites. Published in January 1847 by Louis Désiré Blanquart-Evrard, it was the first commercial process of producing a photo on a paper base from a negative, previous methods - such as the daguerreotype and the tintype - having been printed on metal. It became the dominant form of photographic positives from 1855 to the start of the 20th century, with a peak in the 1860–90 period. During the mid-19th century, the carte de visite became one of the more popular uses of the albumen method. In the 19th century, E. &amp; H. T. Anthony &amp; Company were the largest makers and distributors of albumen photographic prints and paper in the United States.

==Creation process==

# A piece of paper, usually 100% cotton, is coated with an emulsion of egg white (albumen) and salt (sodium chloride or ammonium chloride), then dried. The albumen seals the paper and creates a slightly glossy surface for the sensitizer to rest on.
# The paper is then dipped in a solution of silver nitrate and water which renders the surface sensitive to UV light.
# The paper is then dried in the absence of UV light.
# The dried, prepared paper is placed in a frame in direct contact under a negative. The negative is traditionally a glass negative with collodion emulsion, but this step can be performed with a modern silver halide negative, too. The paper with negative is then exposed to light until the image achieves the desired level of darkness, which is typically a little lighter than the end product. The progress of the print can be checked during the exposure as it is a printing-out process and the image can be seen taking form as it is being exposed to light. Though direct sunlight was used long ago, a UV exposure unit is often used contemporarily because it is more predictable, as the paper is most sensitive to ultraviolet light.
# A bath of sodium thiosulfate fixes the print&#x27;s exposure, preventing further darkening.
# Optional gold or selenium toning improves the photograph&#x27;s tone and stabilizes against fading. Depending on the toner, toning may be performed before or after fixing the print.

Because the image emerges as a direct result of exposure to light, without the aid of a developing solution, an albumen print may be said to be a &quot;printed&quot; rather than a developed photograph.

The table salt (sodium chloride) in the albumen emulsion forms silver chloride when in contact with silver nitrate. Silver chloride is unstable when exposed to light, which makes it decompose into silver and chlorine. The silver ion (Ag+) is reduced to silver (Ag) by addition of an electron during the development/printing process, and the remaining silver chloride is washed out during fixing. The black parts of the image are formed by metallic silver (Ag).

==References==

* Marshall, F.A.S. &quot;Photography: the importance of its applications in preserving pictorial records. Containing a practical description of the Talbotype process&quot; (London: Hering &amp; Remington; Peterborough, T Chadwell &amp; J Clarke, 1855).

== External links ==
* George Eastman House &quot;Photographic Process 3.0: The Albumen Process&quot; (archived 27 October 2016)
* Old Photos of Japan — Samples of hand-tinted albumen photographs 
* Albumen prints from the American University in Cairo Rare Books and Special Collections Digital Library (archived 7 November 2012)
* Albumen Photographs: history, science and preservation
* 
* Photos of Japan — A collection of hand-painted Japanese albumen prints
*Albumen prints from the University of Michigan Museum of Art</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q580807" start="4" end="17" title="Albumen print" label="albumen print"/>
<link wikidata="Q580807" start="31" end="51" title="Albumen print" label="albumen silver print"/>
<link wikidata="Q777856" start="80" end="98" title="photographic print" label="photographic print"/>
<link wikidata="Q796758" start="105" end="115" title="egg whites" label="egg whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q456697" start="146" end="175" title="Louis Désiré Blanquart-Evrard" label="Louis Désiré Blanquart-Evrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q595597" start="257" end="265" title="Negative (photography)" label="negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q179744" start="298" end="311" title="daguerreotype" label="daguerreotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q913381" start="320" end="327" title="tintype" label="tintype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757923" start="526" end="541" title="carte de visite" label="carte de visite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321681" start="622" end="658" title="E. &amp;amp; H. T. Anthony &amp;amp; Company" label="E. &amp;amp; H. T. Anthony &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="799" end="804" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="887" end="902" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q188543" start="906" end="923" title="ammonium chloride" label="ammonium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q901934" start="1012" end="1022" title="Photosensitizer" label="sensitizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207442" start="1079" end="1093" title="silver nitrate" label="silver nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q898735" start="1344" end="1353" title="collodion" label="collodion"/>
<link wikidata="Q29290" start="1409" end="1422" title="silver halide" label="silver halide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="1921" end="1938" title="ultraviolet light" label="ultraviolet light"/>
<link wikidata="Q339866" start="1952" end="1970" title="sodium thiosulfate" label="sodium thiosulfate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2045" end="2049" title="Photographic print toning#Metal replacement toning" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="2053" end="2061" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518070" start="2062" end="2068" title="Photographic print toning" label="toning"/>
<link wikidata="Q216918" start="2485" end="2500" title="silver chloride" label="silver chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q207442" start="2522" end="2536" title="silver nitrate" label="silver nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495870" start="3642" end="3678" title="University of Michigan Museum of Art" label="University of Michigan Museum of Art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413228" wikidata="Q397496" url="?curid=413228" title="Hambledon">
<text>Hambledon may refer to:
* Hambledon, Hampshire, England
**Hambledon Club, was a notable progenitor of the game of cricket
* Hambledon, Surrey, England
* Hambledon Hill, Dorset, England
* , the name of more than one ship of the British Royal Navy

== See also ==
* Hambleden, Buckinghamshire, England
** Hambleden Lock
** Hambleden Mill
* Hambleton (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q397496" start="0" end="9" title="Hambledon" label="Hambledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150285" start="26" end="46" title="Hambledon, Hampshire" label="Hambledon, Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644222" start="58" end="72" title="Hambledon Club" label="Hambledon Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622969" start="124" end="141" title="Hambledon, Surrey" label="Hambledon, Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644220" start="153" end="167" title="Hambledon Hill" label="Hambledon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850580" start="264" end="273" title="Hambleden" label="Hambleden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644215" start="303" end="317" title="Hambleden Lock" label="Hambleden Lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644216" start="321" end="335" title="Hambleden Mill" label="Hambleden Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q254707" start="338" end="364" title="Hambleton (disambiguation)" label="Hambleton (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413232" wikidata="Q1662364" url="?curid=413232" title="USS Grayback (SSG-574)">
<text>USS &quot;Grayback&quot; (SS/SSG/APSS/LPSS-574), the lead ship of her class of submarine, was the second ship of the United States Navy to be named for the grayback.

==Construction and commissioning==
&quot;Grayback&quot;′s keel was laid down on 1 July 1954 by the Mare Island Naval Shipyard of Vallejo, California. She was launched on 2 July 1957, sponsored by Mrs. John A. Moore, widow of the last commanding officer of the previous , and commissioned at Mare Island on 7 March 1958. &quot;Grayback&quot; was initially designated as an attack submarine, but was converted in 1958 into a guided-missile submarine (SSG-574) armed with the Regulus nuclear cruise missile.

==Operational history==
===Guided missile submarine===
&quot;Grayback&quot; represented a new class of SSG guided missile submarines, and was to be the first to carry the Regulus II sea-to-surface missile. In 1958, &quot;Grayback&quot; conducted tests and shakedown along the West Coast. While operating out of Naval Base Ventura County in Port Hueneme, California, in September 1958 she conducted the first successful launching of a Regulus II missile from a submarine, whose predecessor, Regulus I, had led to the capability of navies to attack land bases since its deployment in 1957. Regulus II was cancelled in December 1958 except for test firing of missiles already built, so &quot;Grayback&quot; operationally deployed with four Regulus I missiles. Departing San Diego, California, on 30 October, &quot;Grayback&quot; arrived at Pearl Harbor on 8 November for a month of exercises and maneuvers before returning to Mare Island for her &quot;10,000 mile checkup.&quot;

On 9 February 1959, &quot;Grayback&quot; departed Mare Island to make Pearl Harbor her permanent home base, reaching Hawaii on 7 March via Port Hueneme, California, Long Beach, California, and Mazatlan, Mexico. After a series of exercises there, she cruised to Dutch Harbor, Umak Island, Sequam Island, and Kodiak, Alaska, for further missile exercises from 3–31 July. This was followed by the first of her nine deterrent missile strike missions, from 21 September to 12 November. &quot;Grayback&quot;″s first patrol terminated at Yokosuka, Japan, as did two others. She returned to Pearl Harbor 8 December.

On 22 February 1960, &quot;Grayback&quot; modified her missile launching system and simplified her complex electrical circuits. After this, she again took up deterrent missile strike missions. Over the next 2½ years she completed seven missions for a total of nearly 18 months at sea, much of this time submerged. In addition to Yokosuka, both Adak, Alaska, and Pearl Harbor also served as termination points for these patrols. On her nine patrols she spent more than 20 months at sea and logged over 130,000 miles (209,000 km) on deterrent missile strike missions.

That schedule took its toll. On 27 August 1963, while snorkeling to recharge batteries, &quot;Grayback&quot; was buffeted by particularly strong seas. The buffeting caused the After Main Battery breaker to short, starting a fire in the berthing compartment. One seaman failed to evacuate the compartment and was overcome by smoke and fumes. Main propulsion was lost for a short time, was restored, and &quot;Grayback&quot; returned to Pearl Harbor under her own power. Repairs took two weeks.

According to the documentary &quot;Regulus: The First Nuclear Missile Submarines&quot; the primary target for &quot;Grayback&quot; in the event of a nuclear exchange would be to eliminate the Soviet naval base at Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky. The patrols made by &quot;Grayback&quot; and its sister Regulus-firing submarines represented the first ever deterrent patrols in the history of the submarine Navy, preceding those made by the Polaris missile firing submarines.

As more Polaris missile submarines became operational, they assumed the deterrent functions previously assigned to &quot;Grayback&quot; and her sister ships. The Regulus missile program ended in 1964 and &quot;Grayback&quot; was withdrawn from active service. She decommissioned at Mare Island Naval Shipyard, California, on 25 May 1964.

===Amphibious transport submarine===

A second conversion began at the Mare Island Naval Shipyard in November 1967. The conversion was originally estimated at US$15.2 million, but grew to over US$30 million. She was re-classified from a guided missile submarine to an amphibious transport submarine with hull classification symbol LPSS-574 on 30 August 1968. (The Naval Vessel Registry entry for &quot;Grayback&quot; shows that at one point she was classified as a &quot;plain&quot; transport submarine, an APSS. The term &quot;APSS&quot;, for Auxiliary Personnel Submarine, appeared on the construction plans and documents during the conversion design and construction period (per Structural Naval Architect, Mare Island, 1966-1968). Crew memoirs indicated that they were never aware of it. Presumably, while this classification was &quot;official,&quot; it may have lasted only days.)

The conversion heightened her sail by ten feet, added two auxiliary tanks to the forward end of the engine room (increasing the length of the boat by 12 feet), and converted the missile chambers to carry 67 embarked troops and SEAL Swimmer Delivery Vehicles (SDVs), including a decompression chamber in the starboard hangar.

In June 1972, the &quot;Grayback&quot; carried a team of Navy SEALs into the coastal waters of North Vietnam as part of Operation Thunderhead. This was the last attempt during the Vietnam War to rescue American POWs held in North Vietnam.

In January 1982 five U.S. Navy divers died when a vacuum was inadvertently drawn in a chamber on &quot;Grayback&quot; off the coast of Subic Bay. The diving accident led to changes in how the Navy designed, built, maintained and operated complex submarine based diving systems.

&quot;Grayback&quot; was decommissioned for the second time on 15 January 1984 at Subic Bay Naval Station in the Republic of the Philippines. After decommissioning, &quot;Grayback&quot; was sunk as a target on 13 April 1986 in the South China Sea.
==Awards==


In April 1997, officers and men of &quot;Grayback&quot; and the other four US Navy submarines that conducted strategic deterrent patrols in the Western Pacific between 1959 and 1964 were awarded the right to wear the Navy&#x27;s SSBN Deterrent Patrol insignia.

== References ==

Gardiner, Robert. &quot;Conway&#x27;s All the World&#x27;s Fighting Ships 1947-1995.&quot; London: Conway Maritime Press, Ltd, 1995 Pg. 609-610

== External links ==

* navsource.org: USS &quot;Grayback&quot;
* USS &quot;Grayback&quot; tribute webpage
* USS &quot;Grayback&quot; technical information, pictures schematics</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1662364" start="0" end="47" title="USS Grayback (SSG-574)" label="USS &amp;quot;Grayback&amp;quot; (SS/SSG/APSS/LPSS-574)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544043" start="66" end="75" title="Grayback-class submarine" label="her class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="79" end="88" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="117" end="135" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598284" start="156" end="164" title="Grayback (fish)" label="grayback"/>
<link wikidata="Q582062" start="225" end="229" title="keel" label="keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14592615" start="234" end="243" title="Keel-laying" label="laid down"/>
<link wikidata="Q657784" start="266" end="292" title="Mare Island Naval Shipyard" label="Mare Island Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q208445" start="296" end="315" title="Vallejo, California" label="Vallejo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="325" end="333" title="Ceremonial ship launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q14585645" start="368" end="381" title="John Anderson Moore" label="John A. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247470" start="401" end="419" title="commanding officer" label="commanding officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="442" end="454" title="Ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818021" start="539" end="555" title="attack submarine" label="attack submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001879" start="590" end="614" title="guided-missile submarine" label="guided-missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340751" start="640" end="670" title="SSM-N-8 Regulus" label="Regulus nuclear cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690183" start="844" end="854" title="Regulus II" label="Regulus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082712" start="984" end="1009" title="Naval Base Ventura County" label="Naval Base Ventura County"/>
<link wikidata="Q983853" start="1013" end="1037" title="Port Hueneme, California" label="Port Hueneme, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340751" start="1163" end="1172" title="Regulus missile" label="Regulus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="1440" end="1461" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="1510" end="1522" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q983853" start="1789" end="1813" title="Port Hueneme, California" label="Port Hueneme, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="1815" end="1837" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q40194" start="1843" end="1859" title="Mazatlan, Mexico" label="Mazatlan, Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q8194086" start="1911" end="1923" title="Dutch Harbor" label="Dutch Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536932" start="1925" end="1936" title="Umak Island" label="Umak Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q79985" start="1957" end="1971" title="Kodiak, Alaska" label="Kodiak, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886663" start="2181" end="2196" title="United States Fleet Activities Yokosuka" label="Yokosuka, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="2233" end="2245" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q79371" start="2603" end="2615" title="Adak, Alaska" label="Adak, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="2621" end="2633" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="3261" end="3273" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q859041" start="3796" end="3811" title="UGM-27 Polaris" label="Polaris missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="4098" end="4108" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q657784" start="4198" end="4224" title="Mare Island Naval Shipyard" label="Mare Island Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708390" start="4431" end="4457" title="hull classification symbol" label="hull classification symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475803" start="4491" end="4512" title="Naval Vessel Registry" label="Naval Vessel Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q575986" start="5247" end="5271" title="Swimmer Delivery Vehicle" label="Swimmer Delivery Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q178033" start="5398" end="5408" title="Navy SEALs" label="Navy SEALs"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="5436" end="5449" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097632" start="5461" end="5482" title="Operation Thunderhead" label="Operation Thunderhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="5521" end="5532" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="5552" end="5556" title="prisoner of war" label="POWs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458014" start="5942" end="5951" title="U.S. Naval Base Subic Bay" label="Subic Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="5973" end="6000" title="Republic of the Philippines" label="Republic of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949683" start="6230" end="6249" title="Deterrence theory" label="strategic deterrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392971" start="6350" end="6380" title="SSBN Deterrent Patrol insignia" label="SSBN Deterrent Patrol insignia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413235" wikidata="Q629738" url="?curid=413235" title="USS Growler (SSG-577)">
<text>USS &quot;Growler&quot; (SSG-577) was an early attempt by the U.S. Navy to field a cruise missile submarine that would provide a nuclear deterrent using its second series of cruise missiles. Built to deliver the Regulus I cruise missile, &quot;Growler&quot; was the second and final submarine of the &quot;Grayback&quot; class, fourth boat of the United States Navy to be named after the growler. Since Regulus I and Regulus II programs had problems, &quot;Growler&quot; and &quot;Grayback&quot; were the only two submarines built in this class as instead, the U.S. Navy veered its nuclear deterrence efforts into submarine launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs)—the Polaris missile program.

What makes &quot;Growler&quot; and her sister unusual was her nuclear armament, deployed on a conventional diesel-electric submarine. Her mission was to provide nuclear deterrent capability off the Pacific coast of the Soviet Union during peak years of the Cold War, from 1958 to 1964. Additionally, special forces missions were deployed from her torpedo tubes and nuclear hangar.

Decommissioned in 1964, she was put into service as a museum ship in 1988 as part of the &quot;Intrepid&quot; Sea, Air &amp; Space Museum Complex in New York City.

==Construction and training==
&quot;Growler&quot; was laid down on 15 February 1955 by the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard of Kittery, Maine. She was launched on 5 April 1958 sponsored by Mrs. Robert K. Byerts, widow of Commander Thomas B. Oakley, Jr. &quot;Growler&quot; commissioned at Portsmouth on 30 August 1958 with Lieutenant Commander Charles Priest, Jr., in command.

After training exercises off the East Coast &quot;Growler&quot; sailed south for her shakedown cruise, arriving at the Roosevelt Roads Naval Station, Puerto Rico, on 19 February 1959. After a brief run back to Portsmouth, she returned to the Caribbean Sea in March to train in launching Regulus I and Regulus II nuclear cruise missiles, assisted by USS &quot;Runner&quot;, which was one of several submarines with Regulus guidance equipment. &quot;Growler&quot; returned to Portsmouth 19 April via Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and New London, Connecticut.

==Operational history==
&quot;Growler&quot; then proceeded to the Pacific via Norfolk, Virginia, Key West, Florida, and the Panama Canal, putting in at Pearl Harbor on 7 September to serve as flagship of Submarine Division 12. At Pearl Harbor the guided missile sub participated in a variety of battle and torpedo exercises as well as missile practice before beginning her first Regulus Deterrent Mission. On this mission, which lasted from 12 March to 17 May 1960, &quot;Growler&quot; departed Hawaii with a full store of Regulus sea-to-surface missiles, armed with nuclear warheads, and patrolled under a strict cloak of secrecy. Their patrols could last two months or more at a stretch and required them to remain submerged for hours and even days—which is much less than the patrols of present-day nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines, but was a strain for the crew of a much smaller diesel boat. It is traditional that the log entries for 00:00 (midnight) on New Year&#x27;s Day be made in verse. On 1 January 1961, during &quot;Growler&quot;&#x27;s second patrol, Lieutenant (j.g.) Bruce Felt wrote: &quot;Not our idea of fun and good cheers/But doing our job to ensure many New Years.&quot;

According to the documentary &quot;Regulus: The First Nuclear Missile Submarines&quot;, the primary target for &quot;Growler&quot; in the event of a nuclear exchange would be to eliminate the Soviet naval base at Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky. The patrols made by &quot;Growler&quot; and her sisters represented the first ever deterrent patrols in the history of the submarine Navy, preceding those made by the Polaris missile submarines.

From May 1960 through December 1963, &quot;Growler&quot; made nine such deterrent mission patrols, the fourth of which terminated at Yokosuka, Japan, on 24 April 1962, as the Navy displayed one of its newest weapons.

==Decommissioning and fate==
Returning to Mare Island, California, &quot;Growler&quot; decommissioned 25 May 1964 and was placed in reserve. She was initially moved to the Inactive Fleet section in the Puget Sound Naval Shipyard in Bremerton, Washington, and was later relocated to the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard. She was stricken from the Naval Vessel Register on 1 August 1980 and was scheduled to be used as a torpedo target. However, on 8 August 1988, Congress awarded the hulk to Zachary Fisher, Chairman of the &quot;Intrepid&quot; Sea, Air &amp; Space Museum in New York City.

Due to the renovations to the entire &quot;Intrepid&quot; Sea, Air &amp; Space Museum complex, including and Pier 86, &quot;Growler&quot; was towed to Brooklyn for repairs. Holes found rusted in the hull complicated matters and pushed repair costs past $1.5 million. &quot;Growler&quot; returned to Pier 86 in late February 2009, and was re-opened to the public on 21 May 2009, during the &quot;Intrepid&quot; museum &quot;Fleet Week 2009&quot;
celebration.


== Growler today ==
&quot;Growler&quot; is the only nuclear missile submarine available open to the public in the United States. As the information areas about the sub on Pier 86 are spacious, visitors are encouraged to learn and take in as much information as they can in the early parts of the tour before entering the submarine. Once on board, lines can move quickly and the ability to ask questions of the staff is limited, but encouraged.
==References==

* Gardiner, Robert. &quot;Conway&#x27;s All the World&#x27;s Fighting Ships 1947–1995&quot;, London: Conway Maritime Press, Ltd, 1995, pp. 609–610

== External links ==

*Regulus Missile and Submarine Website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q629738" start="0" end="33" title="USS Growler (SSG-577)" label="USS &amp;quot;Growler&amp;quot; (SSG-577)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001879" start="83" end="107" title="cruise missile submarine" label="cruise missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340751" start="212" end="221" title="Regulus I" label="Regulus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="222" end="236" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544043" start="300" end="326" title="Grayback-class submarine" label="&amp;quot;Grayback&amp;quot; class"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="347" end="365" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q755105" start="388" end="395" title="Largemouth bass" label="growler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949683" start="582" end="600" title="nuclear deterrence" label="nuclear deterrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066330" start="614" end="650" title="submarine launched ballistic missile" label="submarine launched ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q859041" start="664" end="679" title="Polaris missile" label="Polaris missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q575727" start="1126" end="1137" title="museum ship" label="museum ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q952270" start="1161" end="1217" title="Intrepid Sea, Air &amp;amp; Space Museum" label="&amp;quot;Intrepid&amp;quot; Sea, Air &amp;amp; Space Museum Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1221" end="1234" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q14592615" start="1291" end="1300" title="Keel laying" label="laid down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778836" start="1328" end="1353" title="Portsmouth Naval Shipyard" label="Portsmouth Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q973112" start="1357" end="1371" title="Kittery, Maine" label="Kittery, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="1381" end="1389" title="ship naming and launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497970" start="1406" end="1415" title="Ship sponsor" label="sponsored"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1461" end="1482" title="Thomas B. Oakley, Jr." label="Thomas B. Oakley, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="1503" end="1515" title="ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1574" end="1593" title="Charles Priest, Jr." label="Charles Priest, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3850219" start="1727" end="1756" title="Roosevelt Roads Naval Station" label="Roosevelt Roads Naval Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="1758" end="1769" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="1850" end="1863" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340751" start="1895" end="1904" title="Regulus missile" label="Regulus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690183" start="1909" end="1919" title="Regulus II" label="Regulus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873595" start="1957" end="1979" title="USS Runner (SS-476)" label="USS &amp;quot;Runner&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q165972" start="2106" end="2130" title="Fort Lauderdale, Florida" label="Fort Lauderdale, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q49146" start="2136" end="2159" title="New London, Connecticut" label="New London, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="2240" end="2257" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q485186" start="2259" end="2276" title="Key West, Florida" label="Key West, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="2286" end="2298" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="2314" end="2326" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="2657" end="2663" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340751" start="2685" end="2716" title="Regulus missile" label="Regulus sea-to-surface missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412038" start="3561" end="3578" title="Bechevinka" label="Soviet naval base"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951" start="3582" end="3606" title="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky" label="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886663" start="3937" end="3945" title="United States Fleet Activities Yokosuka" label="Yokosuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q657784" start="4064" end="4087" title="Mare Island Naval Shipyard" label="Mare Island, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297188" start="4224" end="4250" title="Puget Sound Naval Shipyard" label="Puget Sound Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q695417" start="4254" end="4275" title="Bremerton, Washington" label="Bremerton, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548690" start="4308" end="4335" title="Philadelphia Naval Shipyard" label="Philadelphia Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475803" start="4363" end="4384" title="Naval Vessel Register" label="Naval Vessel Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416413" start="4500" end="4504" title="Hulk (ship type)" label="hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063955" start="4508" end="4522" title="Zachary Fisher" label="Zachary Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q952270" start="4540" end="4588" title="Intrepid Sea, Air &amp;amp; Space Museum" label="&amp;quot;Intrepid&amp;quot; Sea, Air &amp;amp; Space Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413242" wikidata="Q13002" url="?curid=413242" title="Paul Gascoigne">
<text>Paul John Gascoigne (, born 27 May 1967), nicknamed Gazza, is an English former professional footballer who played as an attacking midfielder. Regarded as one of the best playmakers of his generation and one of the best English footballers of all time, Gascoigne is described by the National Football Museum as &quot;widely recognised as the most naturally talented English footballer of his generation&quot;. Gascoigne was immensely popular during his playing career, with television broadcaster Terry Wogan calling him &quot;probably the most popular man in Britain today&quot; in September 1990, and public interest in and adoration for him came to be known as &quot;Gazzamania&quot;.

Born and raised in Gateshead, Gascoigne signed schoolboy terms with Newcastle United before turning professional with the club in 1984. Three years later, he was sold to Tottenham Hotspur for £2.2 million. He won the FA Cup with Spurs in 1991 before being sold to Italian club Lazio for £5.5 million. In 1995, he was transferred to Rangers for £4.3 million and helped the club to two league titles, a Scottish Cup and a Scottish League Cup. He returned to England in a £3.4 million move to Middlesbrough in 1998. He debuted in the Premier League in the 1998–99 season, having already featured in the 1998 Football League Cup final. He switched to Everton in 2000 and later had spells with Burnley, Gansu Tianma and Boston United.

Gascoigne represented the England national team from 1988 to 1998, in which he was capped 57 times and scored ten goals. He was part of the England team that reached fourth place in the 1990 FIFA World Cup, where he famously cried after receiving a yellow card in the semi-final with West Germany, which meant he would have been suspended for the final had England won the game. He also helped the team to the semi-finals of Euro 96, which included scoring a goal against Scotland, described in 2013 as &quot;one of the most iconic goals in the game&#x27;s recent history&quot;. He has been involved in a number of high-profile goal celebrations at both club and international level, including the &quot;dentist&#x27;s chair&quot; celebration from Euro 96, and mimicking playing the flute with Rangers in 1998, a reference to the Protestant Orange Order.

In the later part of his career, and especially following retirement, Gascoigne&#x27;s life became dominated by severe mental and emotional problems, particularly alcoholism. He has been jailed or sectioned on numerous occasions, and his struggles receive regular coverage in the British press. He has frequently attempted to live without alcohol, though rehabilitation programmes have provided only temporary relief. His issues ended his coaching career, and he has not worked in football since being dismissed as the manager of Kettering Town in 2005.

==Early life==
Gascoigne was born in Gateshead, County Durham, on 27 May 1967. His father, John (1946–2018), was a hod carrier, and his mother, Carol, worked in a factory. He was named Paul John Gascoigne in tribute to Paul McCartney and John Lennon of the Beatles. He is of Irish descent through his grandparents.

He attended Breckenbeds Junior High School, then the Heathfield Senior High School, both in the Low Fell area of Gateshead. He was noticed by football scouts while playing for Gateshead Boys, though failed to impress in a trial at Ipswich Town. Further trials at Middlesbrough and Southampton also proved unsuccessful before the team he supported, Newcastle United, signed him as a schoolboy in 1980. Former Ipswich and Newcastle scout Charlie Woods has claimed Ipswich were keen on signing Gascoigne, but once Newcastle got wind they quickly signed up the youngster. Gascoigne frequently got into trouble with his friend, Jimmy &quot;Five Bellies&quot; Gardner. The pair were even taken to court and fined over a hit and run incident. Newcastle chairman Stan Seymour Jr. described Gascoigne as &quot;George Best without brains&quot;.

While Gascoigne was successful on the football field, his childhood was marked by instability and tragedy. Initially, his family lived in a single upstairs room in a council house with a shared bathroom and moved several times during his early life. When he was ten, Gascoigne witnessed the death of Steven Spraggon, the younger brother of a friend, who was killed in a traffic collision. Around this time, his father began to experience seizures. Gascoigne began developing obsessions and twitches, and was taken into therapy, but soon quit the therapy sessions after his father expressed doubts over the treatment methods.

Gascoigne developed an addiction to gaming machines, frequently spending all his money on them, and also began shoplifting to fund his addiction. He experienced further tragedy when a friend, whom he had encouraged to join Newcastle United from Middlesbrough, died whilst he was working for Gascoigne&#x27;s uncle on a building site.

Brian Tinnion met Gascoigne for the first time at 14 when Tinnion signed for Dunston Juniors, another side Gascoigne played for. Tinnion explained that though Gascoigne eventually became the stand out, by the age of 15, most felt that Ian Bogie would be the top player out of this particular Newcastle youth set up. Gascoigne decided to provide financially for his family – his parents and two sisters – as he saw professional football as a way of earning more money than the rest of the family were capable of. He enjoyed football and later wrote that &quot;I didn&#x27;t have twitches or worry about death when I was playing football&quot;. He was signed on as an apprentice at Newcastle on his 16th birthday.

He was usually overweight whilst signed to the Newcastle youth side. Jack Charlton, the Newcastle manager, claimed Gascoigne was &quot;a bit chubby&quot; and looked anything but a footballer. Gascoigne ate Mars bars and other junk food. Charlton was not overly concerned as he believed this weight would give Gascoigne extra strength on the football pitch and did not seem to slow him down. He also noted that Gascoigne showed early signs of being gaffe-prone and a prankster. Charlton warned Gascoigne about his junk food diet and gave him two weeks to lose the extra weight. Gascoigne then trained for ten days wrapped in a black bag.

==Club career==
===Newcastle United===

====1984–1985: Youth career====
Gascoigne captained Newcastle United&#x27;s youth team to the FA Youth Cup in the 1984–85 season and scored twice in the 4–1 victory over Watford in the final at Vicarage Road. In the first leg of the final, they drew 0–0. Teammate Joe Allon stated that Newcastle were unusually poor in the first leg, but in the second leg, Gascoigne was instrumental in Newcastle&#x27;s victory. After the match, Jack Charlton told Gascoigne he would be in the first team the next day against Norwich City. Gascoigne did travel to Norwich, though Charlton chose not to pick him.

====1985–1987: Constant success====
Gascoigne made his first-team debut as a substitute for George Reilly in a 1–0 win over Queens Park Rangers on 13 April 1985 at St James&#x27; Park. Charlton later noted that Gascoigne&#x27;s first-team appearances under him were too brief to suggest he was more than a useful talent. At the age of 18, Gascoigne signed a two-year £120 a week contract at Newcastle, with the club also having a further two-year option clause. Through noting Gascoigne&#x27;s generous personality, Charlton arranged that around half of Gascoigne&#x27;s wage be paid into a bank account for him to collect in a lump sum at the end of his first contract.

Willie McFaul took over as manager for the 1985–86 season and named Gascoigne in his starting lineup from the opening game of the campaign; he took the place of Chris Waddle, who had been sold to Tottenham Hotspur in the summer. He scored his first goal at home to Oxford United in a 3–0 victory on 21 September 1985 and claimed a further eight goals in the 1985–86 campaign. Newcastle finished 11th in the First Division that season and, at the end of it, Gascoigne was featured on the front cover of the &quot;Rothmans Football Yearbook&quot;. He scored 5 goals in 24 league games in the 1986–87 season, as the &quot;Magpies&quot; slipped to 17th place, just three points above the relegation play-offs.

====1987–1988: Maintained performances and transfer rumours====

 In 1988, on the BBC programme &quot;Football Focus&quot;, Newcastle&#x27;s then all-time top scorer, Jackie Milburn, stated that Gascoigne was &quot;the best player in the world&quot;. In a 0–0 draw with Wimbledon at Plough Lane in February 1988, hard-man Vinnie Jones singled him out for attention, and in an incident that would become a much-publicised photograph, Jones grabbed him by the genitals as Gascoigne screamed in agony. He was named as the PFA Young Player of the Year and listed on the PFA Team of the Year in the 1987–88 season. However, his period at Newcastle coincided with unrest and instability at the club, which left the club unable to hold on to such a talented young player. Gascoigne promised Alex Ferguson that he would sign for Manchester United. Ferguson duly went on holiday to Malta, expecting to sign Gascoigne. On his holiday, he received the news that Gascoigne had signed for Tottenham Hotspur for a record British fee of £2.2 million. In his 1999 autobiography, Ferguson claimed that Gascoigne was wooed into signing for Spurs after they bought a house for his impoverished family. Gascoigne, in his autobiography, states that after he was given his £100,000 signing-on fee, he spent £70,000 buying property for his mother and father.

===Tottenham Hotspur===
====1988–1990: Impressive achievements====
In his first season at White Hart Lane, Gascoigne helped Terry Venables&#x27;s Tottenham Hotspur to sixth in the First Division, scoring 7 goals in 37 appearances. They rose to third place in 1989–90, but were still 16 points behind champions Liverpool. On 26 September, he scored four goals in a 5–0 victory against Hartlepool United in the second round of the 1990–91 Football League Cup. He was named as BBC Sports Personality of the Year in 1990, and on accepting the award said: &quot;I haven&#x27;t won anything in the game as yet. But the World Cup did help to put England on the map&quot;. He was also named as the club&#x27;s Player of the Year.

====1990–1992: Maintained success, injuries and transfer rumours====

Gascoigne was named on the PFA Team of the Year in the 1990–91 season as Tottenham reached the FA Cup Final, with victories over Blackpool, Oxford United, Portsmouth, Notts County and North London derby rivals Arsenal. He scored the opening goal of the 3–1 victory over Arsenal at Wembley with a free-kick, one of six goals he scored in the competition. At this juncture, Spurs were also under significant financial strain with a huge £10 million debt. With Spurs being tied to massive debt, they hired a financial advisor called Nat Solomon. Solomon strongly argued for selling Gascoigne to Lazio to keep the vultures at bay. Going into the final against Nottingham Forest, Spurs had readily accepted an offer from Lazio and Gascoigne had already agreed to the playing terms to join the Italian club. The deal would be worth £8.5 million to Tottenham. His final was to end in injury; however as 15 minutes into the game, he committed a dangerous knee-high foul on Gary Charles and ruptured his own cruciate ligaments in his right knee. England teammate Stuart Pearce scored from the resultant free-kick, and Gascoigne subsequently collapsed after the kick-off, forcing him to leave the match on a stretcher. Tottenham went on to win the Cup in extra-time.

He missed the entire 1991–92 season while he recovered, suffering a further knee injury in late 1991 when an incident at a nightclub on Tyneside kept him out for even longer. The saga over Gascoigne&#x27;s proposed transfer to Lazio dominated the tabloid press throughout 1991, often overshadowing the key national news of that time – namely the recession and rise in unemployment that it sparked – although the broadsheet newspapers generally kept stories about Gascoigne confined to their back pages.

===Lazio===
====1992–1993: Success in Italy====

Gascoigne eventually joined Lazio for a fee of £5.5 million; he received a £2 million signing-on fee and signed a contract worth £22,000 a week. He made his Serie A debut on 27 September 1992 in a match against Genoa, which was televised in Britain as well as Italy. He failed to fully settle in Italy and was beset by negative media interest which was not helped by the numerous occasions he punched reporters, and the time when he belched down a microphone on live television. He was well received by the club&#x27;s fans, but not by the club&#x27;s owner Sergio Cragnotti, who resented him after Gascoigne greeted him by saying &quot;Tua figlia, grande tette&quot; (roughly translated as &quot;Your daughter, big tits&quot;). His form was inconsistent in his first season at the Stadio Olimpico as he had previously spent a year out injured, but he endeared himself to Eagles fans when he scored in the 89th minute to equalise during the Rome derby against AS Roma. He broke his cheekbone whilst on international duty in April 1993, and had to play the remaining games of the season in a mask. Lazio ended the campaign in fifth place, which was considered a success as it meant qualification for European competition for the first time in 16 years.

====1993–1995: Weight issues and fair performances====
Gascoigne fell badly out of shape before the 1993–94 season and was told by manager Dino Zoff to lose 13kg by the start of the campaign else he would lose his first-team place. Gascoigne went on an extreme weight loss diet and shed excess fat. In one spell out injured Zoff told Gascoigne to go on holiday to recuperate. Gascoigne explained to Zoff that he did not want to go on holiday. To the surprise of the Lazio fitness staff, Gascoigne arrived back from his holiday overweight. When he spoke to the coach about his weight, Gascoigne told Zoff, &quot;I told you not to send me on holiday, Signor Zoff!&quot; He captained the club against Cremonese when regular captain Roberto Cravero was substituted.

In 1994, Zdeněk Zeman arrived from Foggia to coach Lazio and Gascoigne. Zeman was a coach who was noted for using his whistle in training sessions. One session, Zeman misplaced his whistle and found it when a goose who frequented the Lazio training ground was seen wearing it. Pierluigi Casiraghi later reasoned Gascoigne was the culprit who placed Zeman&#x27;s whistle on the goose. In April 1994, he broke his leg in training whilst attempting to tackle Alessandro Nesta. Upon his recovery, he was disgruntled with Zeman&#x27;s stern fitness approach, and both club and player decided to part ways at the end of the 1994–95 season.

===Rangers===
====1995–1996: Great influence and success====
Rangers manager Walter Smith flew to visit Gascoigne at his home in the Rome countryside in the early summer of 1995. Smith explained: &quot;He said, &#x27;What are you doing here?&#x27; I said, &#x27;I&#x27;m here to see you.&#x27; He said, &#x27;What is it you&#x27;re wanting?&#x27; I said, &#x27;I&#x27;m here to see if you&#x27;ll come and play for Rangers.&#x27; He said, &#x27;Aye, alright.&#x27;&quot;

Gascoigne signed for Rangers in July 1995 for a club record fee of £4.3 million, on wages of £15,000 a week. He made an immediate impact: in the fifth league game of the 1995–96 season, the Old Firm fixture at Celtic Park, he scored a goal after running almost the full length of the pitch to get on the end of a pass in a breakaway; it proved vital as this was the only match lost by title rivals Celtic during the campaign. On 30 December, Gascoigne was booked by referee Dougie Smith after picking Smith&#x27;s yellow card up from the ground and jokingly &#x27;booking&#x27; the referee during a match against Hibernian. Rangers went on to win the Scottish Premier Division, clinching the title in the penultimate game of the season against Aberdeen at Ibrox Stadium; Gascoigne scored a hat-trick including two solo efforts. Rangers won the double as they also won the Scottish Cup by knocking out Celtic before beating Heart of Midlothian 5–1 in the final at Hampden Park. He scored 19 goals in 42 appearances in all competitions, and was named as both PFA Scotland Players&#x27; Player of the Year and SFWA Footballer of the Year.

====1996–1997: Continued triumphs and decline in form====

Rangers won the league title again in 1996–97, their ninth in succession. Gascoigne claimed hat-tricks against Kilmarnock and Motherwell and ended the campaign with 17 goals in 34 games. However, during this season, manager Walter Smith and assistant Archie Knox became increasingly concerned over Gascoigne&#x27;s reliance on alcohol. The &quot;Gers&quot; won another double by also winning the Scottish League Cup, beating Hearts 4–3 in the final at Celtic Park, with Gascoigne scoring twice and Ally McCoist claiming the other two goals.

In 1997, young Italian player Gennaro Gattuso joined Rangers. He was welcomed to Ibrox by Gascoigne, who defecated in Gattuso&#x27;s sock as a prank. Gascoigne would also buy Gattuso his club suits under the pretence Rangers were paying for them; Gattuso found out many months later from other sources that it was Gascoigne who secretly paid the bill. In November 1997, Gascoigne received a five-match ban after being sent off for violent conduct during the Old Firm derby following an incident with Celtic midfielder Morten Wieghorst. In January 1998, Gascoigne courted serious controversy when he mimed playing a flute (symbolic of the flute-playing of Orange Order marchers) while warming up as a substitute during an Old Firm match at Celtic Park. Having already made the same gesture as a goal celebration shortly after joining the club in 1995, at that time claiming to have been ignorant of its meaning, his actions infuriated Celtic fans who had been taunting him and Gascoigne was fined £20,000 by Rangers after the incident. He also received a death threat from an IRA member. The 1997–98 season was less successful. Gascoigne scored just 3 goals in 28 games and was sold on while Rangers failed to win any trophies after he had departed, losing the league title to Celtic and the Scottish Cup final to Hearts.

===Middlesbrough===
Gascoigne left Scotland to join Middlesbrough for £3.45 million in March 1998, where former England teammate Bryan Robson was manager. His first match was the 1998 Football League Cup Final defeat to Chelsea at Wembley, where he came on as a substitute. He played seven games in the First Division, helping &quot;Boro&quot; into the Premier League as runners-up to Nottingham Forest at the end of the 1997–98 season.

Before the 1998–99 campaign began, Gascoigne began having blackouts after blaming himself for the death of a friend, who died after Gascoigne and a group of friends went on a night out drinking. Despite his ongoing personal problems and his spell in rehab, Gascoigne started the season in good form and helped Middlesbrough into fourth place by Christmas. They ended the season in ninth place and having scored 3 goals in 26 top-flight games Gascoigne was linked with a recall to the England squad, who were now managed by former teammate Kevin Keegan and lacking a creative presence in midfield.

His career went into terminal decline during the 1999–2000 campaign, with Gascoigne breaking his arm after elbowing opposition midfield player George Boateng in the head during Middlesbrough&#x27;s 4–0 defeat to Aston Villa at the Riverside Stadium. He subsequently received a three-match ban and £5,000 fine from the Football Association.

===Everton===
Gascoigne signed a two-year contract with Everton, managed by former Rangers boss Walter Smith, after joining on a free transfer in July 2000. He started the 2000–01 season well despite not playing every game due to his lack of fitness, but a series of niggling injuries and his ongoing depression took him out of the first team picture by Christmas.

After spending time at an alcohol rehabilitation clinic in Arizona, Gascoigne was fit enough to play for the &quot;Toffees&quot; in the 2001–02 season, and he scored his first goal for the club – and last in English football – away to Bolton Wanderers on 3 November. Gascoigne then suffered a hernia injury, which kept him out of action for three months. Walter Smith left Goodison Park in March, and Gascoigne left the club shortly after Smith&#x27;s successor, David Moyes, took charge.

===Later career===

George Reynolds made an attempt to bring Gascoigne to Darlington, at that time playing in the Third Division, but talks broke down, and Gascoigne finished the 2001–02 season with Stan Ternent&#x27;s Burnley. Gascoigne made six First Division appearances for Burnley. The club narrowly missed out on the play-offs, and he left Turf Moor after two months. In 2002, he was inducted into the National Football Museum, being described as &quot;the most naturally gifted English midfielder of his generation&quot;. Fellow England midfielder Paul Ince said that Gascoigne was &quot;the best player I&#x27;ve ever played with ... he had everything. He was amazing.&quot;

In the summer of 2002, Gascoigne went on trial with Major League Soccer club D.C. United but rejected a contract. First Division club Gillingham also made enquiries, and Gascoigne had an unsuccessful trial with the club. In February 2003, he signed a nine-month contract with China League One club Gansu Tianma in both a playing and coaching role. Gascoigne scored in his first match in China, and in total scored two goals in four league games but his mental state meant that he had to return to the United States for treatment against drink and depression in April, and he never returned despite the club ordering him to do so.

In October 2003, Gascoigne was offered an opportunity to train with Wolverhampton Wanderers. However a month later Wolves rejected the option on providing Gascoigne a contract.

In July 2004, Gascoigne was signed as player-coach by League Two side Boston United, and upon signing spoke of his coaching aspirations, saying that &quot;I can become a great coach and a great manager&quot;. Gascoigne left Boston after he made five appearances in three months, citing professional reasons including his coaching career. Former Rangers teammate Graham Roberts made an unsuccessful attempt to sign Gascoigne as a player-coach at Clyde in 2005.

In August 2014 Gascoigne joined amateur club Abbey in the Bournemouth Sunday league

==International career==
Gascoigne was called up to the England under-21 side in the summer of 1987 and scored with a free-kick in his debut in a 2–0 win over Morocco. He went on to win 12 caps for the under-21s under Dave Sexton. The team were semi finalists at the UEFA U-21 Euros and finalists at the Toulon Tournament beaten on both occasions by France in 1988.

Gascoigne was first called up to the full England squad by Bobby Robson for a friendly against Denmark on 14 September 1988 and came on as a late substitute for Peter Beardsley in a 1–0 win. He scored his first goal for England in a 5–0 victory over Albania at Wembley on 26 April 1989. He made his first start in the following game against Chile and kept his first team place for most matches in the run in to the 1990 FIFA World Cup. He also played four games for the England B team. He secured his place in the World Cup squad in a 4–2 win against Czechoslovakia when he scored one goal and was a key component in the other three.

Gascoigne went to the World Cup in Italy, having never started a competitive international. He played in all three of the group games and England topped Group F, Gascoigne providing the assist for Mark Wright&#x27;s winner against Egypt. In the first knockout game against Belgium, he made another assist after chipping a free-kick into the penalty area, where David Platt volleyed the ball into the net. Gascoigne was at the centre of the action again in the quarter-final clash with Cameroon when he gave away a penalty, which Cameroon converted. In extra time, he made a successful through-ball pass from which Gary Lineker won and subsequently scored a penalty, which proved to be the winning goal. Referring to the 1990 World Cup, Bryan Robson later commented that Gascoigne was the &quot;best player&quot; he had ever played with, saying that in 1990 he &quot;was challenging Maradona as the best player in the world at that time.&quot;


On 4 July 1990, England played West Germany in a World Cup semi-final match at Juventus&#x27;s Stadio delle Alpi in Turin. Gascoigne, having already received a yellow card during England&#x27;s 1–0 victory over Belgium in the second round, was booked for a foul on Thomas Berthold, which meant that he would be suspended for the final if England won the match. Television cameras showed that he had tears in his eyes following the yellow card, which made Gascoigne a highly popular figure with the sympathetic British public. The match culminated in a penalty shoot-out, which the Germans won after Stuart Pearce and Chris Waddle missed their penalties. 

Robson quit the England job after the tournament. His successor Graham Taylor dropped Gascoigne in favour of 32-year-old Gordon Cowans in a Euro &#x27;92 qualifier against the Republic of Ireland in November 1990, citing tactical reasons. He returned to the starting lineup for a friendly against Cameroon the following February before an injury in the FA Cup final three months later caused him to miss the next twenty-one England fixtures, including all of UEFA Euro 1992, where England failed to progress beyond the group stages.

Gascoigne returned to fitness in time for the opening qualifying game against Norway in October 1992, and before playing in the 1–1 draw, he responded to a Norwegian television crew&#x27;s request to say &#x27;a few words to Norway&#x27;, by saying &quot;fuck off Norway&quot;. His message was broadcast on Norwegian television and he was forced to apologise for the remark. The following month he scored two goals in a 4–0 victory over Turkey. Qualification ended badly for England, as they ended in third place behind Norway and the Netherlands and missed out on a place in the 1994 FIFA World Cup.

A broken leg in 1994 meant Gascoigne could not play for 15 months. By the time he returned to fitness, Terry Venables – his former manager at Spurs – had been appointed as England manager. As England was hosting UEFA Euro 1996, they did not have to go through the qualification process, so they instead played numerous friendlies, most of which featured Gascoigne in the starting line-up. The last of these games was played in Hong Kong, after which numerous England players were photographed on a night out in which Gascoigne and several others having drinks poured into their mouths whilst sitting in the &quot;dentist&#x27;s chair&quot;. The tournament opened with a 1–1 draw with Switzerland, during which Gascoigne was substituted. He scored in England&#x27;s second game of the tournament, against Scotland (where he was playing at club level at the time). Receiving the ball from Darren Anderton outside the Scotland penalty area, he flicked the ball over Colin Hendry with his left foot and changed direction; Hendry was completely wrong-footed and, as the ball dropped, Gascoigne volleyed it with his right foot past Andy Goram to seal a 2–0 victory. The goal was followed by the &quot;dentist&#x27;s chair&quot; celebration referring to the incident before the tournament, where Gascoigne lay on the ground as if he were sitting in the dentist&#x27;s chair. Teammates sprayed water from Lucozade bottles into his open mouth. Terry Venables later wrote that &quot;Pelé at his best would not have bettered that movement and finish&quot;, calling the goal &quot;a goal of unimpeachable quality, world-class, extraordinary, a wonder to behold&quot;.

England beat the Netherlands 4–1 to make it to the knock-out stages. They then drew 0–0 with Spain before winning 4–2 on penalties, the last of which was converted by Gascoigne. England drew 1–1 with Germany in the semi-finals, and Gascoigne missed the chance to win the game in extra time when he came inches away from connecting to an Alan Shearer cross yards in front of an unguarded German net. England lost to Germany in the resulting penalty shoot-out, with Gareth Southgate missing England&#x27;s sudden death penalty. Referring to the 1996 European Championships, Xavi stated that he remembered &quot;the European Championships in England with Gascoigne playing some great matches&quot;, calling the experience &quot;spectacular&quot;.

Under Glenn Hoddle, Gascoigne was picked regularly and helped England win the Tournoi de France in 1997 ahead of Brazil, France and Italy. Qualification for the 1998 FIFA World Cup went down to the last group game against Italy at the Stadio Olimpico, and Gascoigne put in a disciplined and mature performance to help England secure the 0–0 draw that was enough to take them through to the tournament. Following qualification, British tabloid newspapers would publish pictures of Gascoigne eating kebabs late at night with his DJ friend Chris Evans. These pictures were published only a week before the final squad was due to be chosen. The pictures disturbed Hoddle, who elected not to pick Gascoigne in the final squad. After hearing the news, Gascoigne wrecked Hoddle&#x27;s room in a rage before being restrained. Gascoigne, who won 57 caps and scored ten goals, would never play for England again.

==Managerial and coaching career==
Having already gained some coaching experience in China, Gascoigne signed for Boston United on 30 July 2004. After being at the club for 11 games he left (partly as a result of the club refusing to let him participate in the reality television show &quot;I&#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!&quot;) on 5 October, to begin a football coaching course. After leaving Boston, he stated that he was interested in taking over as manager of Scottish side Greenock Morton, but this came to nothing.

In mid-2005, he spent two months as a player-coach for the recently founded Portuguese team Algarve United, but he returned to England after a proposed contract never materialised. He was appointed manager of Conference North club Kettering Town on 27 October 2005 and also planned to put in enough money to own one-third of the club to show his commitment. Previous manager Kevin Wilson was appointed as director of football, and Paul Davis was appointed as the club&#x27;s assistant manager. Bookmakers put odds on Gascoigne being dismissed before Christmas, though he insisted that he was at the club &quot;for the long haul&quot;. Attempts to get new sponsors on board were successful, though results on the pitch soon went against Kettering. His tenure lasted just 39 days, and the club&#x27;s board dismissed him on 5 December. The club&#x27;s owner, Imraan Ladak, blamed Gascoigne&#x27;s alcohol problems, stating that he drank almost every day he worked. Gascoigne later claimed that the owner had interfered incessantly and harboured ambitions of being a manager himself, despite knowing little about football. He was never on a contract at the club and was never paid for his six weeks&#x27; work, nor was he given a chance to invest money in the club as he had first planned.

Gascoigne came close to being appointed manager of Garforth Town in October 2010. After weeks of talks between his agent and the club, he decided to turn down the offer, though reiterated his desire to return to football management.

==Other projects==
At the height of &quot;Gazzamania&quot; following the 1990 World Cup, he reached number 2 in the UK Top 40 with &quot;Fog on the Tyne&quot;, a collaborative cover with Lindisfarne that earned him a gold disc. He established Paul Gascoigne Promotions. He hired several staff to handle the hundreds of requests from companies wishing to use his likeness and/or endorsement to promote their products. He signed an exclusive deal with &quot;The Sun&quot;, which did not prevent the newspaper from joining its rivals in sensationalising the various scandals he became embroiled in. He promoted two video games: &quot;Gazza&#x27;s Superstar Soccer&quot; and &quot;Gazza II&quot;.

In August 2006, he visited Botswana on behalf of the Football Association&#x27;s international outreach week. He played football with the children from the SOS Children&#x27;s Village there. On 25 July 2009, Gascoigne appeared on a Sporting Heroes edition of the BBC television quiz &quot;The Weakest Link&quot;, where he engaged in banter with host Anne Robinson. The next day, he played in an England versus Germany charity football match to help raise funds for the Sir Bobby Robson Foundation. He took part in the first edition of Soccer Aid in 2006, playing for an England team captained by Robbie Williams.

In August 2014, Gascoigne began playing amateur football after signing for Bournemouth Sunday League Division Four team Abbey. In 2015, he was the subject of a documentary film called &quot;Gascoigne&quot;, and in 2022 he was the subject of a two-part documentary series &quot;Gazza&quot;.

==Style of play==
A creative and technically gifted playmaker who played as an attacking midfielder, Gascoigne was capable both of scoring and setting up goals, due to his passing accuracy, his powerful striking ability, and heading ability. He had pace, physical strength, balance and excellent dribbling skills, which allowed him to protect the ball, beat opponents and withstand physical challenges. He was also an accurate free kick and penalty kick taker. &quot;FourFourTwo&quot; stated: &quot;A central midfielder with Glenn Hoddle&#x27;s eye for a pass and Bryan Robson&#x27;s love of a tackle, Gascoigne could be inconsistent and positionally suspect,&quot; but added: &quot;Gascoigne was no smoke-and-mirrors showboater: his creativity was crucial in deciding deadlocked matches.&quot;

Gary Lineker described Gascoigne as &quot;the most naturally gifted technical footballer that I played with,&quot; who possessed &quot;a sort of impudence&quot; and &quot;great confidence.&quot; Lineker added: &quot;You could see he played completely for the love of the game.&quot; Steven Gerrard named Gascoigne as his &quot;hero&quot;. Gareth Southgate said: &quot;You&#x27;ve got very good players and then there are top players. In my time in the England setup, Paul Gascoigne, Paul Scholes and Wayne Rooney just had that little bit more than all the others. And we are talking high‑level people there, players like Steven Gerrard, Frank Lampard and David Beckham.&quot; Former Newcastle United player Lee Clark added: &quot;Gazza had everything. He could dribble, take on players, thread defence-splitting passes through the eye of a needle to the strikers and score incredible goals.&quot;

&quot;FourFourTwo&quot; described his performances in the 1990 World Cup as being &quot;as close as the English ever got to the sort of bravura brilliance by which Diego Maradona had dragged the &quot;Albiceleste&quot; to World Cup glory four years earlier.&quot; Football writer Brian Glanville said that Gascoigne displayed &quot;a flair, a superlative technique, a tactical sophistication, seldom matched by an England player since the war.&quot; Despite his talent, Gascoigne was also criticised for his erratic behaviour and aggression on the pitch. His turbulent and often unhealthy lifestyle off the pitch, and his tendency to pick up injuries, are thought to have affected his career.

==Personal life==
Gascoigne married his long-time girlfriend Sheryl Failes in Thundridge, Hertfordshire, in July 1996, after they had been together for around six years. He later admitted to violence towards Sheryl during their marriage. They divorced in early 1999. In 2009, Sheryl published a tell-all book entitled &quot;Stronger: My Life Surviving Gazza&quot;. Gascoigne had a son, Regan, with Sheryl and also adopted Sheryl&#x27;s two children from her first marriage, Mason and Bianca. Bianca is a glamour model and television personality, and appeared on reality TV show &quot;Love Island&quot;.

During the 1990s, Gascoigne, Danny Baker and Chris Evans had a much-publicised friendship, and Gascoigne frequently appeared on their radio and television shows on &quot;Talksport&quot; and &quot;TFI Friday&quot;.

In October 2004, Gascoigne announced that he wanted to be referred to as &quot;G8&quot;, a combination of the first letter of his surname and the number he wore on his football shirt because it &quot;stands for great&quot;.

In November 2008, Gascoigne faced a bankruptcy petition over a £200,000 tax bill, having not filed any tax returns for more than two years. On 25 May 2011, he avoided being declared bankrupt by the High Court in London, despite still owing £32,000.

Gascoigne has three autobiographies: &quot;Gazza: My Story&quot; (with Hunter Davies), published in 2004, &quot;Being Gazza: Tackling My Demons&quot; (with Hunter Davies and John McKeown), published in 2006; and &quot;Glorious: My World, Football and Me&quot;, published in 2011. In &quot;Gazza: My Story&quot;, and in &quot;Being Gazza: Tackling My Demons&quot;, he refers to treatment for bulimia, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), bipolar disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and alcoholism. The books also describe his addictive personality, which has led him to develop addictions of varying severity to alcohol, cocaine, chain smoking, gambling, high-caffeine energy drinks, exercise, and junk food. He lives in Poole, Dorset.

===Mental illness, alcoholism and legal troubles===

Gascoigne first entered therapy sessions in October 1998 when he was admitted into Priory Hospital after a drinking session where he drank 32 shots of whisky, which left him at &quot;rock bottom&quot;; then-manager Bryan Robson signed him into the clinic whilst Gascoigne was unconscious. He was released, at his own insistence, two weeks into the suggested minimum stay of 28 days. His subsequent visits to the Priory became more infrequent, and he eventually returned to drinking alcohol. In 2001, Everton&#x27;s then-chairman Bill Kenwright contacted Gascoigne&#x27;s therapist at the Priory, John McKeown, who organised more treatment to help Gascoigne to control his drinking. As part of the treatment he was sent to the United States where he had a stay at a clinic in Cottonwood, Arizona. He was diagnosed with bipolar disorder. He stayed at the clinic in 2003 after he suffered low points working in China, and again in 2004 after retiring from football.

In February 2008, he was sectioned under the Mental Health Act after an incident at the Malmaison Hotel in Newcastle upon Tyne. He was taken into protective custody to prevent self-harm. He was sectioned again in June, and in September he was hospitalised after he overdosed on alcohol and other drugs in an apparent suicide attempt.

Gascoigne was arrested for a disturbance outside a takeaway in February 2010. The following month, he was charged with drink driving, driving without a licence, and driving without insurance. On 9 July 2010 Gascoigne appeared at the scene of the tense stand-off between the police and the fugitive Raoul Moat, claiming to be Moat&#x27;s brother and stating that he had brought him &quot;a can of lager, some chicken, a fishing rod, a Newcastle shirt and a dressing gown&quot;. He was denied access to Moat. In August 2011, Gascoigne sued &quot;The Sun&quot;, claiming that its coverage of him during the Raoul Moat incident interrupted his treatment for alcoholism.

In October 2010, Gascoigne was arrested for drink driving. He subsequently admitted being more than four times over the limit at Newcastle upon Tyne Magistrates Court. One day after being warned he could face a prison sentence for drink driving, Gascoigne was arrested for possession of cocaine. He should have appeared in court on 11 November to be sentenced for the drink driving offence. Instead he went into rehab on the south coast of England and was given an eight-week suspended sentence.

In February 2013, his agent, Terry Baker, told BBC Radio 5 Live that Gascoigne had relapsed again: &quot;He won&#x27;t thank me for saying it but he immediately needs to get help ... His life is always in danger because he is an alcoholic. Maybe no one can save him – I don&#x27;t know. I really don&#x27;t know&quot;. Gascoigne was placed in intensive care in a U.S. hospital while being treated for alcoholism in Arizona in a rehabilitation programme thanks to financial support provided by ex-cricketer Ronnie Irani and broadcaster Chris Evans. He was arrested for assaulting a railway security guard and being drunk and disorderly at Stevenage railway station on 4 July 2013; he was fined £1,000 after admitting the offence, and ordered to pay £100 compensation to the guard.

In January 2014, Gascoigne entered rehab for his alcohol addiction for a seventh time at a £6,000-a-month clinic in Southampton. In August, he was again admitted to hospital in relation to his problems following an incident outside his home. On 23 October 2014, police were called to his home in Poole after he was in a drink binge; he was sectioned under the Mental Health Act the next day and taken to a hospital for a three-day detox.

In October 2015, he was fined and made the subject of a restraining order for harassing an ex-girlfriend and assaulting a photographer. In September 2016, Gascoigne admitted using &quot;threatening or abusive words or behaviour&quot; and was fined £1,000 after telling a racist joke in November 2015 and racially abusing his black bodyguard. On 27 December 2016, Gascoigne was hospitalised with head injuries including broken teeth after being kicked in the back and falling down stairs in a London hotel. His assailant was jailed for 23 weeks and ordered to pay £7,800 compensation.

On 6 January 2017, a spokesman for Gascoigne confirmed that he had entered a rehabilitation centre in a serious effort to stay &quot;alcohol-free&quot; in 2017. On 20 August 2018, Gascoigne was arrested at Durham railway station by British Transport Police for allegedly sexually assaulting a woman on a train. In November 2018, he was charged with sexual assault. The case came to trial at Teesside Crown Court in October 2019, where he was cleared of sexual assault after he called the complainant a &quot;fat lass&quot; and told the court he had only given her a &quot;peck on the lips&quot; to &quot;boost her confidence&quot; and that there was no sexual intention.

===Phone hacking by Mirror Group Newspapers===
Gascoigne&#x27;s mobile telephone was repeatedly hacked by Mirror Group Newspapers (MGN), the publishers of the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot;, &quot;Sunday Mirror&quot; and &quot;The People&quot; newspapers. In a 2015 court appearance, Gascoigne said that the hacking of his phone led to him developing severe paranoia and alcoholism. Gascoigne described the hacking as &quot; ... just horrendous. And people can&#x27;t understand why I became an alcoholic&quot;. At the time of the hacking, Gascoigne&#x27;s therapist had attributed his belief in the hacking to paranoia. Gascoigne said &quot; ... I&#x27;d like to trade my mobile in for a coffin because those guys have ruined my life. Left me in a state&quot;. From 2000 to 2010, 18 articles were published because his phone was hacked in the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot;, &quot;Sunday Mirror&quot;, and &quot;The People&quot; newspapers. Gascoigne had alcoholism during this period and contemplated suicide. Gascoigne received £188,250 in damages from Mirror Group Newspapers in 2015.

==Career statistics==
===Club===
===International===
:&quot;Scores and results list England&#x27;s goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Gascoigne goal&quot;

==Honours==
Newcastle United Youth
*FA Youth Cup: 1984–85

Tottenham Hotspur
*FA Cup: 1990–91
*FA Charity Shield : 1991

Rangers
*Scottish Premier Division: 1995–96, 1996–97
*Scottish Cup: 1995–96
*Scottish League Cup: 1996–97

Middlesbrough
*Football League Cup runner-up: 1997–98

England
*Tournoi de France: 1997

Individual
*PFA Young Player of the Year: 1987–88
*PFA Team of the Year: 1987–88 First Division, 1990–91 First Division
*Newcastle United Player of the Year: 1987–88
* Ballon d&#x27;Or 1990: Fourth place
* FIFA World Cup All-Star Team: 1990
*BBC Sports Personality of the Year: 1990
*EFL Cup top scorer: 1990–91
*BBC Goal of the Season: 1990–91
*PFA Scotland Players&#x27; Player of the Year: 1995–96
*SFWA Footballer of the Year: 1995–96
* SPFA Goal of the Season: 1995–96
*UEFA European Championship Team of the Tournament: 1996
*English Football Hall of Fame Inductee: 2002
*Rangers Hall of Fame Inductee: 2006 

==Bibliography==
* 
* 
*
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13002" start="0" end="19" title="Paul Gascoigne" label="Paul John Gascoigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q13002" start="52" end="57" title="Paul Gascoigne" label="Gazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="93" end="103" title="association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="121" end="141" title="attacking midfielder" label="attacking midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265733" start="283" end="307" title="National Football Museum" label="National Football Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q734264" start="497" end="508" title="Terry Wogan" label="Terry Wogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q216372" start="708" end="717" title="Gateshead" label="Gateshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="757" end="773" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="859" end="876" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="906" end="912" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q765577" start="927" end="931" title="1991 FA Cup final" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609" start="966" end="971" title="SS Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597" start="1021" end="1028" title="Rangers F.C." label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q760711" start="1073" end="1086" title="List of Scottish football champions" label="league titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q308822" start="1090" end="1102" title="Scottish Cup" label="Scottish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q864672" start="1109" end="1128" title="Scottish League Cup" label="Scottish League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="1179" end="1192" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077662" start="1289" end="1319" title="1998 Football League Cup final" label="1998 Football League Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="1336" end="1343" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19458" start="1378" end="1385" title="Burnley F.C." label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13004" start="1387" end="1399" title="Gansu Tianma F.C." label="Gansu Tianma"/>
<link wikidata="Q894605" start="1404" end="1417" title="Boston United F.C." label="Boston United"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="1446" end="1467" title="England national football team" label="England national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="1503" end="1509" title="cap (sport)" label="capped"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="1606" end="1625" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="1688" end="1716" title="West Germany v England (1990 FIFA World Cup)" label="semi-final with West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q180563" start="1845" end="1852" title="UEFA Euro 1996" label="Euro 96"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="1892" end="1900" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444065" start="2048" end="2064" title="goal celebration" label="goal celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="2261" end="2273" title="Orange Order" label="Orange Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q694381" start="2473" end="2482" title="involuntary commitment" label="sectioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513377" start="2806" end="2820" title="Kettering Town F.C." label="Kettering Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q216372" start="2868" end="2877" title="Gateshead" label="Gateshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q23082" start="2879" end="2892" title="County Durham" label="County Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622650" start="2946" end="2957" title="Brick hod" label="hod carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="3050" end="3064" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="3069" end="3080" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="3084" end="3095" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287270" start="3159" end="3189" title="Breckenbeds Junior High School" label="Breckenbeds Junior High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6710114" start="3200" end="3229" title="Heathfield Senior High School" label="Heathfield Senior High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692861" start="3243" end="3251" title="Low Fell" label="Low Fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9653" start="3378" end="3390" title="Ipswich Town F.C." label="Ipswich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="3410" end="3423" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="3428" end="3439" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="3495" end="3511" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q386899" start="3861" end="3872" title="hit and run" label="hit and run"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597877" start="3902" end="3918" title="Stan Seymour Jr." label="Stan Seymour Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q164521" start="3948" end="3959" title="George Best" label="George Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q9687" start="4353" end="4370" title="traffic collision" label="traffic collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="4421" end="4429" title="Epileptic seizure" label="seizures"/>
<link wikidata="Q738538" start="4473" end="4481" title="Tic" label="twitches"/>
<link wikidata="Q33972" start="4645" end="4660" title="Slot machine" label="gaming machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q251895" start="4944" end="4957" title="Brian Tinnion" label="Brian Tinnion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980951" start="5179" end="5188" title="Ian Bogie" label="Ian Bogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576785" start="5704" end="5724" title="Newcastle United F.C. Reserves and Academy" label="Newcastle youth side"/>
<link wikidata="Q313674" start="5726" end="5739" title="Jack Charlton" label="Jack Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q31305" start="5863" end="5872" title="Mars (chocolate bar)" label="Mars bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466284" start="6429" end="6441" title="FA Youth Cup" label="FA Youth Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582095" start="6449" end="6456" title="1984–85 Newcastle United F.C. season" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714" start="6505" end="6512" title="Watford F.C." label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q10626" start="6529" end="6542" title="Vicarage Road" label="Vicarage Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179964" start="6599" end="6608" title="Joe Allon" label="Joe Allon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18721" start="6845" end="6857" title="Norwich City F.C." label="Norwich City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543788" start="7024" end="7037" title="George Reilly" label="George Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q18723" start="7056" end="7075" title="Queens Park Rangers F.C." label="Queens Park Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191774" start="7096" end="7115" title="St James&amp;#x27; Park" label="St James&amp;#x27; Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021676" start="7604" end="7617" title="Willie McFaul" label="Willie McFaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846001" start="7647" end="7654" title="1985–86 Newcastle United F.C. season" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q352878" start="7765" end="7777" title="Chris Waddle" label="Chris Waddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="7800" end="7817" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q48946" start="7869" end="7882" title="Oxford United F.C." label="Oxford United"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="8011" end="8025" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537516" start="8116" end="8142" title="Sky Sports Football Yearbook" label="Rothmans Football Yearbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583459" start="8194" end="8201" title="1986–87 Newcastle United F.C. season" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465835" start="8413" end="8427" title="Football Focus" label="Football Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q726085" start="8478" end="8492" title="Jackie Milburn" label="Jackie Milburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19482" start="8581" end="8590" title="Wimbledon F.C." label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q975681" start="8594" end="8605" title="Plough Lane (1912–98)" label="Plough Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q296822" start="8633" end="8645" title="Vinnie Jones" label="Vinnie Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009646" start="8830" end="8858" title="PFA Young Player of the Year" label="PFA Young Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044044" start="8877" end="8897" title="PFA Team of the Year" label="PFA Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584208" start="8905" end="8912" title="1987–88 Newcastle United F.C. season" label="1987–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q44980" start="9095" end="9108" title="Alex Ferguson" label="Alex Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="9184" end="9189" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444815" start="9718" end="9734" title="1988–89 Football League" label="his first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q186425" start="9738" end="9753" title="White Hart Lane" label="White Hart Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q314039" start="9772" end="9786" title="Terry Venables" label="Terry Venables"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="9794" end="9811" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="9828" end="9842" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q9260067" start="9907" end="9914" title="1989–90 Football League" label="1989–90"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="9958" end="9967" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q19592" start="10032" end="10049" title="Hartlepool United F.C." label="Hartlepool United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690773" start="10077" end="10104" title="1990–91 Football League Cup" label="1990–91 Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572056" start="10122" end="10156" title="BBC Sports Personality of the Year" label="BBC Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044044" start="10468" end="10488" title="PFA Team of the Year" label="PFA Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586620" start="10496" end="10503" title="1990–91 Tottenham Hotspur F.C. season" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q765577" start="10536" end="10548" title="1991 FA Cup Final" label="FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q19449" start="10570" end="10579" title="Blackpool F.C." label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q48946" start="10581" end="10594" title="Oxford United F.C." label="Oxford United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="10596" end="10606" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19598" start="10608" end="10620" title="Notts County F.C." label="Notts County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333687" start="10625" end="10643" title="North London derby" label="North London derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="10651" end="10658" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="10722" end="10729" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609" start="11033" end="11038" title="SS Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="11097" end="11114" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q887533" start="11406" end="11418" title="Gary Charles" label="Gary Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621623" start="11440" end="11457" title="cruciate ligament" label="cruciate ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q356418" start="11495" end="11508" title="Stuart Pearce" label="Stuart Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587450" start="11720" end="11727" title="1991–92 Tottenham Hotspur F.C. season" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578988" start="11835" end="11843" title="Tyneside" label="Tyneside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394220" start="12045" end="12054" title="Early 1990s recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609" start="12280" end="12285" title="SS Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="12409" end="12416" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074" start="12463" end="12468" title="Genoa CFC" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q209789" start="12685" end="12692" title="Burping" label="belched"/>
<link wikidata="Q3956083" start="12810" end="12826" title="Sergio Cragnotti" label="Sergio Cragnotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q843573" start="13014" end="13026" title="1992–93 Serie A" label="first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q159884" start="13034" end="13049" title="Stadio Olimpico" label="Stadio Olimpico"/>
<link wikidata="Q378662" start="13124" end="13135" title="SS Lazio supporters" label="Eagles fans"/>
<link wikidata="Q19390" start="13193" end="13203" title="Derby della Capitale" label="Rome derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739" start="13212" end="13219" title="AS Roma" label="AS Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q843569" start="13605" end="13612" title="1993–94 Serie A" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q180661" start="13644" end="13653" title="Dino Zoff" label="Dino Zoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q759482" start="14203" end="14212" title="U.S. Cremonese" label="Cremonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714696" start="14234" end="14249" title="Roberto Cravero" label="Roberto Cravero"/>
<link wikidata="Q169092" start="14277" end="14289" title="Zdeněk Zeman" label="Zdeněk Zeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464" start="14303" end="14309" title="Foggia" label="Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q378583" start="14545" end="14564" title="Pierluigi Casiraghi" label="Pierluigi Casiraghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q227892" start="14724" end="14740" title="Alessandro Nesta" label="Alessandro Nesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q765118" start="14886" end="14893" title="1994–95 SS Lazio season" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597" start="14964" end="14971" title="Rangers F.C." label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q359387" start="14980" end="14992" title="Walter Smith" label="Walter Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9347961" start="15423" end="15434" title="List of Rangers F.C. records and statistics" label="club record"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591040" start="15545" end="15559" title="1995–96 Rangers F.C. season" label="1995–96 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q643817" start="15565" end="15573" title="Old Firm" label="Old Firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q216037" start="15585" end="15596" title="Celtic Park" label="Celtic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="15773" end="15779" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192597" start="15988" end="15997" title="Hibernian F.C." label="Hibernian"/>
<link wikidata="Q843012" start="16026" end="16051" title="Scottish Premier Division" label="Scottish Premier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q187326" start="16119" end="16127" title="Aberdeen F.C." label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208709" start="16131" end="16144" title="Ibrox Stadium" label="Ibrox Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q308822" start="16247" end="16259" title="Scottish Cup" label="Scottish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q202093" start="16298" end="16317" title="Heart of Midlothian F.C." label="Heart of Midlothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591678" start="16325" end="16334" title="1996 Scottish Cup Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q193651" start="16338" end="16350" title="Hampden Park" label="Hampden Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q786317" start="16432" end="16477" title="PFA Scotland Players&amp;#x27; Player of the Year" label="PFA Scotland Players&amp;#x27; Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543976" start="16482" end="16509" title="SFWA Footballer of the Year" label="SFWA Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592076" start="16609" end="16616" title="1996–97 Rangers F.C. season" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q107105421" start="16624" end="16643" title="Nine in a row" label="ninth in succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q210961" start="16682" end="16692" title="Kilmarnock F.C." label="Kilmarnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q216523" start="16697" end="16707" title="Motherwell F.C." label="Motherwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q357631" start="16822" end="16833" title="Archie Knox" label="Archie Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q864672" start="16967" end="16986" title="Scottish League Cup" label="Scottish League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484683" start="17010" end="17019" title="1996 Scottish League Cup Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q317417" start="17069" end="17081" title="Ally McCoist" label="Ally McCoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q116980" start="17143" end="17158" title="Gennaro Gattuso" label="Gennaro Gattuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q442170" start="17631" end="17647" title="Morten Wieghorst" label="Morten Wieghorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="17768" end="17780" title="Orange Order" label="Orange Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444065" start="17907" end="17923" title="goal celebration" label="goal celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915360" start="18167" end="18179" title="death threat" label="death threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="18188" end="18191" title="Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593228" start="18204" end="18211" title="1997–98 Rangers F.C. season" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593953" start="18404" end="18422" title="1998 Scottish Cup Final" label="Scottish Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="18487" end="18500" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q296583" start="18564" end="18576" title="Bryan Robson" label="Bryan Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077662" start="18614" end="18644" title="1998 Football League Cup Final" label="1998 Football League Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="18655" end="18662" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="18666" end="18673" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="18788" end="18802" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="18820" end="18837" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593193" start="18856" end="18863" title="1997–98 Middlesbrough F.C. season" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594330" start="18884" end="18891" title="1998–99 Middlesbrough F.C. season" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q359099" start="18931" end="18940" title="Blackout (drug-related amnesia)" label="blackouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q152832" start="19412" end="19424" title="Kevin Keegan" label="Kevin Keegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595558" start="19520" end="19529" title="1999–2000 Middlesbrough F.C. season" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q464701" start="19614" end="19628" title="George Boateng" label="George Boateng"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="19683" end="19694" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q822886" start="19702" end="19719" title="Riverside Stadium" label="Riverside Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="19785" end="19809" title="the Football Association" label="the Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="19868" end="19875" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q359387" start="19908" end="19920" title="Walter Smith" label="Walter Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598204" start="19984" end="19991" title="2000–01 Everton F.C. season" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343852" start="20113" end="20123" title="Mental health in association football" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="20237" end="20244" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599463" start="20314" end="20321" title="2001–02 Everton F.C. season" label="2001–02"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="20413" end="20429" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q968420" start="20551" end="20564" title="Goodison Park" label="Goodison Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q297252" start="20641" end="20652" title="David Moyes" label="David Moyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543822" start="20688" end="20703" title="George Reynolds (businessman)" label="George Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q909189" start="20742" end="20752" title="Darlington F.C." label="Darlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="20782" end="20796" title="Football League Third Division" label="Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599425" start="20847" end="20854" title="2001–02 Burnley F.C. season" label="2001–02"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597912" start="20867" end="20879" title="Stan Ternent" label="Stan Ternent"/>
<link wikidata="Q19458" start="20887" end="20894" title="Burnley F.C." label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q683112" start="21014" end="21023" title="Turf Moor" label="Turf Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265733" start="21076" end="21100" title="National Football Museum" label="National Football Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q311171" start="21223" end="21232" title="Paul Ince" label="Paul Ince"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="21404" end="21423" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q238593" start="21429" end="21440" title="D.C. United" label="D.C. United"/>
<link wikidata="Q48943" start="21486" end="21496" title="Gillingham F.C." label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207912" start="21628" end="21644" title="China League One" label="China League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q13004" start="21650" end="21662" title="Gansu Tianma F.C." label="Gansu Tianma"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="21853" end="21866" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="22051" end="22074" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="22215" end="22225" title="EFL League Two" label="League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q894605" start="22231" end="22244" title="Boston United F.C." label="Boston United"/>
<link wikidata="Q726067" start="22523" end="22537" title="Graham Roberts" label="Graham Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059415" start="22606" end="22611" title="Clyde F.C." label="Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q108619856" start="22680" end="22705" title="Sunday league football in England" label="Bournemouth Sunday league"/>
<link wikidata="Q204238" start="22763" end="22779" title="England national under-21 football team" label="England under-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590714" start="22866" end="22873" title="Morocco national under-20 football team" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q735094" start="22925" end="22936" title="Dave Sexton" label="Dave Sexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091471" start="22974" end="22989" title="1988 UEFA European Under-21 Championship" label="UEFA U-21 Euros"/>
<link wikidata="Q517763" start="23011" end="23028" title="Toulon Tournament" label="Toulon Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277549" start="23057" end="23063" title="France national under-21 football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="23116" end="23129" title="England national football team" label="England squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q189587" start="23133" end="23145" title="Bobby Robson" label="Bobby Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="23169" end="23176" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q344989" start="23235" end="23250" title="Peter Beardsley" label="Peter Beardsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q186262" start="23324" end="23331" title="Albania national football team" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="23335" end="23342" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q172025" start="23415" end="23420" title="Chile national football team" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="23489" end="23508" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110944" start="23544" end="23553" title="England national football B team" label="England B"/>
<link wikidata="Q182072" start="23625" end="23639" title="Czechoslovakia national football team" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477595" start="23862" end="23869" title="1990 FIFA World Cup Group F" label="Group F"/>
<link wikidata="Q526694" start="23906" end="23917" title="Mark Wright (footballer, born 1963)" label="Mark Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q28089" start="23940" end="23945" title="Egypt national football team" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="23982" end="23989" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q312143" start="24070" end="24081" title="David Platt (footballer)" label="David Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q175309" start="24194" end="24202" title="Cameroon national football team" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47778" start="24323" end="24335" title="Gary Lineker" label="Gary Lineker"/>
<link wikidata="Q296583" start="24445" end="24457" title="Bryan Robson" label="Bryan Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="24685" end="24697" title="Germany national football team" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="24733" end="24741" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q215493" start="24749" end="24766" title="Stadio delle Alpi" label="Stadio delle Alpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="24770" end="24775" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57433" start="24919" end="24934" title="Thomas Berthold" label="Thomas Berthold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745599" start="24983" end="24988" title="1990 FIFA World Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q356418" start="25253" end="25266" title="Stuart Pearce" label="Stuart Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q352878" start="25271" end="25283" title="Chris Waddle" label="Chris Waddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9486" start="25374" end="25387" title="Graham Taylor" label="Graham Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q923685" start="25431" end="25444" title="Gordon Cowans" label="Gordon Cowans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864356" start="25450" end="25473" title="UEFA Euro 1992 qualifying Group 7" label="Euro &amp;#x27;92 qualifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="25486" end="25505" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161810" start="25769" end="25783" title="UEFA Euro 1992" label="UEFA Euro 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204914" start="25898" end="25908" title="1994 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA)" label="qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="25922" end="25928" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q483856" start="26281" end="26287" title="Turkey national football team" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="26379" end="26390" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="26424" end="26443" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q314039" start="26549" end="26563" title="Terry Venables" label="Terry Venables"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="26588" end="26593" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q180563" start="26658" end="26672" title="UEFA Euro 1996" label="UEFA Euro 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q242119" start="26873" end="26882" title="Hong Kong national football team" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q165141" start="27130" end="27141" title="Switzerland national football team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="27250" end="27258" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q363608" start="27333" end="27348" title="Darren Anderton" label="Darren Anderton"/>
<link wikidata="Q465095" start="27409" end="27421" title="Colin Hendry" label="Colin Hendry"/>
<link wikidata="Q525909" start="27572" end="27582" title="Andy Goram" label="Andy Goram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27635" end="27679" title="Goal celebration#Memorable celebrations" label="&amp;quot;dentist&amp;#x27;s chair&amp;quot; celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110171" start="27843" end="27851" title="Lucozade" label="Lucozade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="27919" end="27923" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="28196" end="28201" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="28224" end="28233" title="Penalty shoot-out (association football)" label="penalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q483583" start="28440" end="28452" title="Alan Shearer" label="Alan Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q316681" start="28567" end="28583" title="Gareth Southgate" label="Gareth Southgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17500" start="28675" end="28679" title="Xavi (footballer, born 1980)" label="Xavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q296666" start="28854" end="28866" title="Glenn Hoddle" label="Glenn Hoddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813633" start="28926" end="28943" title="1997 Tournoi de France" label="Tournoi de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="28961" end="28967" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="28969" end="28975" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="28980" end="28985" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q949455" start="28987" end="29000" title="1998 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA)" label="Qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="29009" end="29028" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q159884" start="29083" end="29098" title="Stadio Olimpico" label="Stadio Olimpico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964710" start="29385" end="29396" title="Chris Evans (presenter)" label="Chris Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q894605" start="29865" end="29878" title="Boston United F.C." label="Boston United"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113852" start="30042" end="30084" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!" label="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!"/>
<link wikidata="Q867876" start="30241" end="30256" title="Greenock Morton F.C." label="Greenock Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q59041" start="30494" end="30510" title="National League North" label="Conference North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513377" start="30516" end="30530" title="Kettering Town F.C." label="Kettering Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397779" start="30660" end="30672" title="Kevin Wilson (footballer, born 1961)" label="Kevin Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130252" start="30690" end="30710" title="director of football" label="director of football"/>
<link wikidata="Q426236" start="30716" end="30726" title="Paul Davis (footballer, born 1961)" label="Paul Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18318" start="31624" end="31637" title="Garforth Town A.F.C." label="Garforth Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="31923" end="31932" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454359" start="31994" end="32005" title="Lindisfarne (band)" label="Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="32024" end="32033" title="Music recording certification" label="gold disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="32263" end="32270" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529219" start="32438" end="32467" title="Gazza&amp;#x27;s Superstar Soccer" label="Gazza&amp;#x27;s Superstar Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844106" start="32484" end="32492" title="Gazza II" label="Gazza II"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="32528" end="32536" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="32550" end="32574" title="the Football Association" label="the Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q462794" start="32657" end="32684" title="SOS Children&amp;#x27;s Villages" label="SOS Children&amp;#x27;s Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956169" start="32790" end="32806" title="The Weakest Link (British game show)" label="The Weakest Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q454347" start="32851" end="32864" title="Anne Robinson" label="Anne Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526133" start="32896" end="32941" title="Sir Bobby Robson Trophy match" label="England versus Germany charity football match"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949936" start="32970" end="32997" title="Sir Bobby Robson Foundation" label="Sir Bobby Robson Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963216" start="33036" end="33046" title="Soccer Aid" label="Soccer Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q47875" start="33097" end="33112" title="Robbie Williams" label="Robbie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649276" start="33305" end="33314" title="Gascoigne (film)" label="Gascoigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q111939072" start="33386" end="33403" title="Gazza (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Gazza&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201458" start="33458" end="33467" title="playmaker" label="playmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="33485" end="33505" title="attacking midfielder" label="attacking midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33702" end="33711" title="Dribbling#Association football" label="dribbling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379266" start="33833" end="33842" title="Free kick (association football)" label="free kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372529" start="33873" end="33884" title="FourFourTwo" label="FourFourTwo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="33907" end="33925" title="central midfielder" label="central midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q296666" start="33931" end="33943" title="Glenn Hoddle" label="Glenn Hoddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q296583" start="33970" end="33982" title="Bryan Robson" label="Bryan Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47778" start="34202" end="34214" title="Gary Lineker" label="Gary Lineker"/>
<link wikidata="Q459830" start="34485" end="34499" title="Steven Gerrard" label="Steven Gerrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q316681" start="34541" end="34557" title="Gareth Southgate" label="Gareth Southgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q45613" start="34685" end="34697" title="Paul Scholes" label="Paul Scholes"/>
<link wikidata="Q266613" start="34702" end="34714" title="Wayne Rooney" label="Wayne Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q41533" start="34839" end="34852" title="Frank Lampard" label="Frank Lampard"/>
<link wikidata="Q10520" start="34857" end="34870" title="David Beckham" label="David Beckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608437" start="34909" end="34918" title="Lee Clark (footballer)" label="Lee Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515" start="35264" end="35278" title="Diego Maradona" label="Diego Maradona"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="35301" end="35312" title="Argentina national football team" label="Albiceleste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644454" start="35380" end="35395" title="Brian Glanville" label="Brian Glanville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6710359" start="35855" end="35868" title="Sheryl Gascoigne" label="Sheryl Failes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799185" start="35872" end="35882" title="Thundridge" label="Thundridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="35884" end="35897" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q110663720" start="36180" end="36185" title="Regan Gascoigne" label="Regan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180472" start="36208" end="36215" title="Adoption" label="adopted"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809818" start="36278" end="36284" title="Bianca Gascoigne" label="Bianca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690861" start="36378" end="36389" title="Love Island (2005 TV series)" label="Love Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220109" start="36427" end="36438" title="Danny Baker" label="Danny Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964710" start="36443" end="36454" title="Chris Evans (presenter)" label="Chris Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679885" start="36568" end="36577" title="Talksport" label="Talksport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670112" start="36594" end="36604" title="TFI Friday" label="TFI Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333094" start="37159" end="37172" title="Hunter Davies" label="Hunter Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q64513386" start="37479" end="37486" title="Bulimia nervosa" label="bulimia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178190" start="37488" end="37517" title="Obsessive–compulsive disorder" label="obsessive-compulsive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="37525" end="37541" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="37543" end="37583" title="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306774" start="37628" end="37649" title="addictive personality" label="addictive personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435005" start="37732" end="37745" title="chain smoking" label="chain smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q748309" start="37747" end="37755" title="Problem gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="37762" end="37770" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q215754" start="37771" end="37783" title="energy drink" label="energy drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245500" start="37975" end="37990" title="Priory Hospital" label="Priory Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="38043" end="38049" title="whisky" label="whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q296583" start="38107" end="38119" title="Bryan Robson" label="Bryan Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q352846" start="38421" end="38435" title="Bill Kenwright" label="Bill Kenwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q79463" start="38667" end="38686" title="Cottonwood, Arizona" label="Cottonwood, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="38710" end="38726" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q694381" start="38881" end="38890" title="Involuntary commitment" label="sectioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817401" start="38901" end="38918" title="Mental Health Act 1983" label="Mental Health Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="38963" end="38982" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q622527" start="39032" end="39041" title="self-harm" label="self-harm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618054" start="39489" end="39499" title="2010 Northumbria Police manhunt" label="Raoul Moat"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="39735" end="39742" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="39987" end="40006" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q986172" start="40007" end="40024" title="Magistrates&amp;#x27; court (England and Wales)" label="Magistrates Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260022" start="40270" end="40275" title="Drug rehabilitation" label="rehab"/>
<link wikidata="Q795588" start="40402" end="40418" title="BBC Radio 5 Live" label="BBC Radio 5 Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264378" start="40783" end="40797" title="Psychiatric rehabilitation" label="rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526913" start="40861" end="40873" title="Ronnie Irani" label="Ronnie Irani"/>
<link wikidata="Q19970" start="40993" end="41018" title="Stevenage railway station" label="Stevenage railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="41252" end="41263" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q203349" start="41432" end="41437" title="Poole" label="Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q694381" start="41476" end="41485" title="Involuntary commitment" label="sectioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817401" start="41496" end="41513" title="Mental Health Act 1983" label="Mental Health Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713265" start="41567" end="41572" title="Alcohol detoxification" label="detox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407800" start="42366" end="42388" title="Durham railway station" label="Durham railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q174588" start="42392" end="42416" title="British Transport Police" label="British Transport Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q116464774" start="42551" end="42571" title="Teesside Crown Court" label="Teesside Crown Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636545" start="42938" end="42961" title="Mirror Group Newspapers" label="Mirror Group Newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="42997" end="43009" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639452" start="43023" end="43036" title="Sunday Mirror" label="Sunday Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253247" start="43053" end="43063" title="The People (newspaper)" label="The People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466284" start="44125" end="44137" title="FA Youth Cup" label="FA Youth Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="44167" end="44173" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q730226" start="44175" end="44182" title="1990–91 FA Cup" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="44184" end="44201" title="FA Charity Shield" label="FA Charity Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736680" start="44204" end="44208" title="1991 FA Charity Shield" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q843012" start="44219" end="44244" title="Scottish Football League Premier Division" label="Scottish Premier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2950232" start="44246" end="44253" title="1995–96 Scottish Premier Division" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132421" start="44255" end="44262" title="1996–97 Scottish Premier Division" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q308822" start="44264" end="44276" title="Scottish Cup" label="Scottish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591056" start="44278" end="44285" title="1995–96 Scottish Cup" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q864672" start="44287" end="44306" title="Scottish League Cup" label="Scottish League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167193" start="44308" end="44315" title="1996–97 Scottish League Cup" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="44332" end="44351" title="Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q717921" start="44363" end="44370" title="1997–98 Football League Cup" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207764" start="44381" end="44398" title="Tournoi de France" label="Tournoi de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813633" start="44400" end="44404" title="1997 Tournoi de France" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009646" start="44418" end="44446" title="PFA Young Player of the Year" label="PFA Young Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44448" end="44455" title="PFA Young Player of the Year#Winners" label="1987–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044044" start="44457" end="44477" title="PFA Team of the Year" label="PFA Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44479" end="44501" title="PFA Team of the Year#1987–88" label="1987–88 First Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44503" end="44525" title="PFA Team of the Year#1990–91" label="1990–91 First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="44527" end="44543" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584208" start="44564" end="44571" title="1987–88 Newcastle United F.C. season" label="1987–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="44574" end="44590" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983575" start="44591" end="44595" title="1990 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44612" end="44640" title="FIFA World Cup awards#All-Star Team" label="FIFA World Cup All-Star Team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44642" end="44646" title="1990 FIFA World Cup#All-star team" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572056" start="44648" end="44682" title="BBC Sports Personality of the Year" label="BBC Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44684" end="44688" title="BBC Sports Personality of the Year Award#Winners" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="44690" end="44697" title="EFL Cup" label="EFL Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690773" start="44710" end="44717" title="1990–91 Football League Cup" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575173" start="44719" end="44741" title="BBC Goal of the Season" label="BBC Goal of the Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q786317" start="44752" end="44797" title="PFA Scotland Players&amp;#x27; Player of the Year" label="PFA Scotland Players&amp;#x27; Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44799" end="44806" title="1995–96 in Scottish football#Individual honours" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543976" start="44808" end="44835" title="SFWA Footballer of the Year" label="SFWA Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44837" end="44844" title="1995–96 in Scottish football#Individual honours" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247970" start="44847" end="44851" title="PFA Scotland" label="SPFA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44881" end="44930" title="UEFA European Championship awards#Team of the Tournament" label="UEFA European Championship Team of the Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44932" end="44936" title="UEFA European Football Championship Teams of the Tournament#England 1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323117" start="44938" end="44967" title="English Football Hall of Fame" label="English Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595486" start="44984" end="45004" title="List of Rangers F.C. players" label="Rangers Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413244" wikidata="Q193625" url="?curid=413244" title="Marcel Desailly">
<text>Marcel Desailly (; born Odenke Abbey; 7 September 1968) is a French former professional footballer, who played as a centre-back or defensive midfielder. During a successful career at club level, lasting from 1986 to 2006, Desailly won several titles, including UEFA Champions League medals with both Marseille and AC Milan, and also played for Nantes and Chelsea, among other teams. At international level, he collected 116 caps between 1993 and 2004, scoring three goals, and was a member of the France international squads that won the 1998 World Cup and Euro 2000.

Desailly is widely regarded as one of the best players of his generation and one of the greatest defenders in the history of the sport.

==Club career==
Marcel Desailly was born as Odenke Abbey on 7 September 1968 in Accra, Ghana, the son of Ghanaian parents. He had his name changed when his mother married the head of the French Consulate in Accra, who adopted all of her children (the former professional footballer Seth Adonkor, seven years his elder, was a half-brother of his). The family relocated to France when Desailly was four years old. Following Adonkor&#x27;s lead, he began his career at Nantes. There, as part of the famed Nantes youth programme, he played alongside a young Didier Deschamps, who became his closest friend. Desailly turned professional in 1986, two years after his half-brother had died in a car accident. In 1992, he moved to Marseille, where he reunited with Deschamps, and won the UEFA Champions League the following year. In 1994, while playing for AC Milan, he again won the Cup (scoring in the final himself), being the first player to win the Cup in consecutive seasons with different clubs. During his time in Milan, he won two Italian league titles, in 1994 and 1996. Although he preferred to be deployed as a sweeper or centre-back, roles which he played during his time in France, he found much success playing as a defensive midfielder for Milan, alongside Demetrio Albertini, due to the presence of several other established centre-backs at the club, such as Franco Baresi, Alessandro Costacurta and Filippo Galli.

Desailly then moved to the English club Chelsea in 1998 for £4.6 million, where he captained the side and played sweeper and centre-back until the end of the 2003–04 season. It was at Chelsea that Desailly formed a formidable partnership with Frank Leboeuf.

He picked up one major trophy in his six seasons with Chelsea, being on the winning side in their FA Cup triumph over Aston Villa in 2000.

Desailly was snapped up by Qatari outfit Al-Gharafa in 2004. He was appointed as the club captain and under the French coach Bruno Metsu they won the Qatar League in 2005. He then joined Qatar S.C., leading them to second place in the league before retiring from professional football.

In 2014, Desailly had met the Football Association of Malaysia and said he was ready and willing to coach the Malaysia national team. He also pointed that it was up to the football association whether to hire him or not.

==International career==
During an interview in Ghana, Desailly stated that he &quot;did not have much choice about which country to play for,&quot; as he was &quot;already established in the French national youth football team.&quot; This stance was restated in his autobiography, published in 2002. He made his international debut in 1993, but was not established as a first choice defender until 1996.

He was an important part of the French team which won the 1998 FIFA World Cup, albeit being sent off in the final match. Like other team members, he was appointed a Knight of the Legion of Honour in 1998.

Two years later, success continued as France won UEFA Euro 2000. After the tournament, Desailly was made captain of the national team, following the retirement of Didier Deschamps. In 2001, he led France to victory in the Confederations Cup.

In April 2003, Desailly surpassed the record for the number of appearances for the French team, a number which eventually reached 116 when he announced his retirement from international football following 2004 UEFA European Football Championship. However, that record was broken during the 2006 FIFA World Cup by Lilian Thuram.

==Style of play==
Nicknamed &quot;The Rock&quot;, due to his consistency, strength, and hard-tackling playing style, Desailly is considered one of the most accomplished players of his generation, and one of the finest defenders ever, who stood out for his charismatic leadership and ability to organise his team&#x27;s back-line and break down opposition plays throughout his career. A quick, hard-working, tenacious and powerful player, who excelled in the air and at anticipating his opponents, he combined his aggression, stamina, and ability to read the game, as well as his physical, mental, and defensive skills, with a notable confidence and good technique on the ball, which also allowed him to play in midfield throughout his career; indeed, after moving to Milan, although he initially started out playing as a centre-back or sweeper, and occasionally even as a full-back, he was later deployed as a defensive midfielder, a position in which he also excelled, successfully filling the void left by the departure of Frank Rijkaard due his ball-winning abilities and capacity to start attacking plays after winning back possession. In addition to his defensive skills, he was also capable of contributing to his team&#x27;s offensive plays with goals by making attacking runs into the box. In 2004, he was named by Pelé in the FIFA 100 as one of the world&#x27;s greatest living players.

==Legacy==

Marcel Desailly is currently residing in Ghana. He is currently a Laureus Academy member and OrphanAid Africa Lifetime ambassador to Ghana and France (since 2005). He was mentioned as a possible candidate for the coaching position of the Ghana national team. He has since pulled out of the race to coach the Ghana national team, although the option is likely to keep coming up. In June 2011, he opened a sports facility in Ghana called Lizzy Sports Complex, in memory of his late mother, geared to young players and children in particular. Many African national teams use the centre as a camp to prepare for international tournaments. Desailly sold his interest in the business to Osei Kwame Despite in October 2019.

==Post-playing career==

Desailly&#x27;s autobiography, &quot;Capitaine&quot;, was published in France by Stock in 2002.

===Media work===
Following retirement, Desailly became a pundit for BBC Sport predominantly giving his opinion from the touchline at both half time and full-time as opposed to residing in the studio with Alan Hansen, Alan Shearer and Martin O&#x27;Neill.

He worked for BBC Sport in the United Kingdom during the 2006 World Cup, as one of their &quot;Match of the Day&quot; analysts.

He also worked for BBC Sport at the 2008 Africa Cup of Nations and Euro 2008 and is a regular commentator for French television channel Canal Plus.

He also became a spokesperson for sports betting website Betclic.

In 2010, Desailly joined the ITV Sport team for their World Cup coverage from South Africa.

===Charity work===
Desailly is a supporter of the 1GOAL Education for All campaign. He is also the UNICEF national Goodwill Ambassador for Ghana. He is the Lifetime Goodwill Ambassador for his personal Charity OrphanAid Africa, that helps abandoned children in Ghana. He is a member of the Laureus Sports for Good Foundation.

===Licensed merchandise===
A mobile video game entitled &quot;Marcel Desailly Pro Soccer&quot;, developed by Gameloft was released for mobile phones in 2003. Desailly is an ICON in &quot;FIFA 21&quot; Ultimate Team and FIFA 22 Ultimate Team with ratings of 87 (base), 88 (mid), 91 (prime), and 92 (Prime Icon Moments)in both games.

==Personal life==
Desailly is a member of the Ga ethnic group. He is married to Virginie Desailly and has four children. His nephew James Édouard Adams is a semi-professional footballer.

==Career statistics==
===Club===
===International===
:&quot;Scores and results list France&#x27;s goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Desailly goal&quot;

==Honours==
Marseille
*UEFA Champions League: 1992–93

AC Milan
*Serie A: 1993–94, 1995–96
*Supercoppa Italiana: 1994
*UEFA Champions League: 1993–94
*European Super Cup: 1994

Chelsea
*FA Cup: 1999–2000
*FA Charity Shield: 2000
*UEFA Super Cup: 1998

Al-Gharafa
*Qatar Stars League: 2004–05

France
*FIFA World Cup: 1998
*UEFA European Championship: 2000
*FIFA Confederations Cup: 2001, 2003

Individual
*Onze de Onze: 1994, 1995, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001
*Overseas Team of the Decade – Premier League 10 Seasons Awards (1992/93 – 2001/02)
*Overall Team of the Decade – Premier League 10 Seasons Awards (1992/93 – 2001/02)
*UEFA Euro 1996 Team of the Tournament
*FIFA XI: 1996
*1998 FIFA World Cup All-Star Team
*UEFA Euro 2000 Team of the Tournament
*FIFA 100: 2004
*Trophée d&#x27;honneur UNFP: 2005
*AC Milan Hall of Fame
*Golden Foot Legends Award: 2017

Orders
*Knight of the Legion of Honour: 1998

==See also==
*List of men&#x27;s footballers with 100 or more international caps

==References==
==External links==
*
*
*Chelsea legend profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193625" start="0" end="15" title="Marcel Desailly" label="Marcel Desailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q193625" start="24" end="36" title="Marcel Desailly" label="Odenke Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="88" end="98" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="116" end="127" title="centre-back" label="centre-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="131" end="151" title="defensive midfielder" label="defensive midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="261" end="282" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q132885" start="300" end="309" title="Olympique de Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="314" end="322" title="AC Milan" label="AC Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192071" start="344" end="350" title="FC Nantes" label="Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="355" end="362" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="497" end="524" title="France national football team" label="France international squads"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="538" end="552" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="557" end="566" title="UEFA Euro 2000" label="Euro 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="786" end="791" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480656" start="988" end="1000" title="Seth Adonkor" label="Seth Adonkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192071" start="1172" end="1178" title="FC Nantes" label="Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q508711" start="1260" end="1276" title="Didier Deschamps" label="Didier Deschamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q132885" start="1429" end="1438" title="Olympique de Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="1486" end="1507" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="1555" end="1563" title="A.C. Milan" label="AC Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q610032" start="1602" end="1607" title="1994 UEFA Champions League Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="1821" end="1828" title="Sweeper (association football)" label="sweeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="1832" end="1843" title="centre-back" label="centre-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="1929" end="1949" title="defensive midfielder" label="defensive midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q245011" start="1971" end="1989" title="Demetrio Albertini" label="Demetrio Albertini"/>
<link wikidata="Q189984" start="2074" end="2087" title="Franco Baresi" label="Franco Baresi"/>
<link wikidata="Q213828" start="2089" end="2110" title="Alessandro Costacurta" label="Alessandro Costacurta"/>
<link wikidata="Q923781" start="2115" end="2128" title="Filippo Galli" label="Filippo Galli"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="2171" end="2178" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q715772" start="2214" end="2223" title="Captain (association football)" label="captained"/>
<link wikidata="Q817262" start="2289" end="2303" title="2003–04 FA Premier League" label="2003–04 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q290769" start="2374" end="2387" title="Frank Leboeuf" label="Frank Leboeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="2444" end="2451" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="2488" end="2494" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="2508" end="2519" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q604772" start="2523" end="2527" title="2000 FA Cup Final" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q428211" start="2571" end="2581" title="Al-Gharafa" label="Al-Gharafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q359405" start="2655" end="2666" title="Bruno Metsu" label="Bruno Metsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q60681" start="2680" end="2692" title="Qatar League" label="Qatar League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051203" start="2717" end="2727" title="Qatar S.C." label="Qatar S.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q622250" start="2847" end="2879" title="Football Association of Malaysia" label="Football Association of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q318922" start="2927" end="2949" title="Malaysia national football team" label="Malaysia national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="3503" end="3522" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q585295" start="3553" end="3564" title="1998 FIFA World Cup Final" label="final match"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="3610" end="3640" title="Knight of the Legion of Honour" label="Knight of the Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="3700" end="3714" title="UEFA Euro 2000" label="UEFA Euro 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q508711" start="3814" end="3830" title="Didier Deschamps" label="Didier Deschamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q493052" start="3873" end="3891" title="2001 FIFA Confederations Cup" label="Confederations Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476248" start="4099" end="4139" title="UEFA Euro 2004 knockout stage" label="2004 UEFA European Football Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="4184" end="4203" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q180326" start="4207" end="4220" title="Lilian Thuram" label="Lilian Thuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="4441" end="4450" title="Defender (association football)" label="defenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="4934" end="4942" title="Midfielder" label="midfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="5095" end="5104" title="Full-back (association football)" label="full-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q169098" start="5248" end="5262" title="Frank Rijkaard" label="Frank Rijkaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="5546" end="5550" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="5558" end="5566" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q172014" start="5870" end="5889" title="Ghana national football team" label="Ghana national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q110817269" start="6313" end="6331" title="Osei Kwame Despite" label="Osei Kwame Despite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642960" start="6529" end="6535" title="pundit (expert)" label="pundit"/>
<link wikidata="Q552359" start="6540" end="6549" title="BBC Sport" label="BBC Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q374189" start="6676" end="6687" title="Alan Hansen" label="Alan Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q483583" start="6689" end="6701" title="Alan Shearer" label="Alan Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q310263" start="6706" end="6725" title="Martin O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Martin O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q552359" start="6742" end="6751" title="BBC Sport" label="BBC Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="6785" end="6799" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908130" start="6823" end="6839" title="Match of the Day" label="Match of the Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q276550" start="6893" end="6919" title="2008 Africa Cup of Nations" label="2008 Africa Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q241864" start="6924" end="6933" title="Euro 2008" label="Euro 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032540" start="6993" end="7003" title="Canal+ (French TV channel)" label="Canal Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987736" start="7102" end="7111" title="ITV Sport" label="ITV Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q176883" start="7127" end="7136" title="2010 FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595882" start="7216" end="7239" title="1GOAL Education for All" label="1GOAL Education for All"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="7265" end="7271" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756081" start="7555" end="7581" title="Marcel Desailly Pro Soccer" label="Marcel Desailly Pro Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q689093" start="7602" end="7610" title="Gameloft" label="Gameloft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7674" end="7707" title="FIFA 21#Ultimate Team" label="&amp;quot;FIFA 21&amp;quot; Ultimate Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q627897" start="7872" end="7887" title="Ga people" label="Ga ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="8214" end="8235" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q275673" start="8237" end="8244" title="1992–93 UEFA Champions League" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="8256" end="8263" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q843569" start="8265" end="8272" title="1993–94 Serie A" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q644108" start="8274" end="8281" title="1995–96 Serie A" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q19618" start="8283" end="8302" title="Supercoppa Italiana" label="Supercoppa Italiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504446" start="8304" end="8308" title="1994 Supercoppa Italiana" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="8310" end="8331" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405" start="8333" end="8340" title="1993–94 UEFA Champions League" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="8342" end="8360" title="European Super Cup" label="European Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q549089" start="8362" end="8366" title="1994 European Super Cup" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="8377" end="8383" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321334" start="8385" end="8394" title="1999–2000 FA Cup" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="8396" end="8413" title="FA Charity Shield" label="FA Charity Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q268898" start="8415" end="8419" title="2000 FA Charity Shield" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="8421" end="8435" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q432279" start="8437" end="8441" title="1998 UEFA Super Cup" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q60681" start="8455" end="8473" title="Qatar Stars League" label="Qatar Stars League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2953667" start="8475" end="8482" title="2004–05 Qatar Stars League" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="8492" end="8506" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="8508" end="8512" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="8514" end="8540" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="8542" end="8546" title="UEFA Euro 2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q171789" start="8548" end="8571" title="FIFA Confederations Cup" label="FIFA Confederations Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q493052" start="8573" end="8577" title="2001 FIFA Confederations Cup" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q647475" start="8579" end="8583" title="2003 FIFA Confederations Cup" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590501" start="8677" end="8709" title="Premier League 10 Seasons Awards" label="Premier League 10 Seasons Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590501" start="8760" end="8792" title="Premier League 10 Seasons Awards" label="Premier League 10 Seasons Awards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8814" end="8851" title="UEFA Euro 1996#Awards" label="UEFA Euro 1996 Team of the Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="8853" end="8860" title="FIFA" label="FIFA XI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8868" end="8901" title="FIFA World Cup awards#All-Star Team" label="1998 FIFA World Cup All-Star Team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8903" end="8940" title="UEFA Euro 2000#Awards" label="UEFA Euro 2000 Team of the Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="8942" end="8950" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8958" end="8985" title="Trophées UNFP du football#Trophée d&amp;#x27;honneur UNFP" label="Trophée d&amp;#x27;honneur UNFP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9016" end="9041" title="Golden Foot#Award legends" label="Golden Foot Legends Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="9057" end="9087" title="Knight of the Legion of Honour" label="Knight of the Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q945035" start="9109" end="9175" title="List of men&amp;#x27;s footballers with 100 or more international caps" label="List of men&amp;#x27;s footballers with 100 or more international caps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413248" wikidata="Q1326207" url="?curid=413248" title="Call box">
<text>A call box or callbox is a box, usually metal, containing a special-purpose direct line telephone or other telecommunications device which has been used by various industries and institutions as a way for employees or clients at a remote location to contact a central dispatch office.

== Uses ==

=== Police and taxicab dispatching ===
Some taxi companies used callboxes before the introduction of two-way radio dispatching as a way for drivers to report to the dispatch office and receive customer requests for service. Taxi callboxes were installed at taxicab stands, where taxis would queue for trips.

Also, before the introduction of two-way radios, some police agencies installed callboxes or &quot;police boxes&quot; at street locations as a way for beat officers to report to their dispatch office. Before the development of emergency telephone numbers and the proliferation of mobile phones, some firefighting agencies installed callboxes at various street locations so that a pedestrian or driver spotting a fire could quickly report it.

===Railroad===
A related device is a trackside telephone, a communication unit that is located along the route of a railroad. These may be wired landline phones or wireless ones. Rail networks have this type of phone installed so that rail operating centres and trackside users can communicate.

=== Retail ===
A growing number of retailers use call boxes in their stores as a way for shoppers to summon service (&quot;Shopper Call Box&quot;) as well as for store employees to summon assistance (&quot;Director Call Box&quot;). Retail call boxes are generally wireless devices that communicate to in-store communication devices via radio frequency (303 MHz) or through 802.11 networks.

=== Motorist aid ===

Call boxes also exist at regular intervals along the sides of many highways and rapid transit lines around the world, where drivers or passengers can use them to contact a control centre in case of an accident or other emergency. These call boxes are often marked by a blue strobe light which flashes briefly every few seconds. Boxes in remote areas often now have solar cells to power them.

US highways with callboxes have included most of the major highways in California, Florida&#x27;s Turnpike and Interstate 185 in Georgia. Rather than a telephone, these devices simply have four buttons to push: blue for accident or other emergency (send police/fire/medical), green for major service (mechanical breakdown, send a tow truck), black for minor service (out-of-gas or flat tire), and yellow for cancel. Roads in other places may have voice call boxes, though these are more expensive and must either be wired long distances, or rely on spotty rural mobile phone service.

Many cellular callboxes in California now include a TTY interface for hearing-impaired users.

Call boxes have the advantage that their location is immediately known, while mobile phone users in trouble do not necessarily know where they are. In California, a cellular call to 911 connects to the California Highway Patrol, whereas a callbox will connect to a dedicated regional answer center. The DTMF automatic number identification (ANI) or caller ID from the callbox will be used to display the callbox sign number and its location on the computer-aided dispatch (CAD) system.

An emergency callbox can also have a secondary function as a remote terminal unit (RTU). Experimental systems deployed around Sacramento, California, were used to connect fog sensors and closed-circuit television using the cellular transceiver within the callbox.

====Decline in usage====
In California, freeway callboxes were used about 98,000 times in 2001. That number dropped by 80 percent to 19,600 times in 2010, or about 1 call per box per month. The cost of callboxes for the Service Authority for Freeways and Expressways (SAFE) program in the San Francisco Bay area is $1.7 million annually. As a result, since 2009 approximately half of the callboxes have been removed from certain California highways, preferentially leaving them only in places where cell phone coverage is poor.

Florida previously had callboxes installed at one-mile intervals along all its Interstate Highways as well as Florida&#x27;s Turnpike. These boxes were all removed by 2014 after a 65-percent decrease in usage over an eight-year period, in line with increased mobile phone usage. The boxes were costing the state roughly $1 million per year to keep operational.

=== Safety ===
On many North American college and university campuses, callboxes are installed at various locations around campus so that students, staff, or visitors can contact campus security in case of an emergency. New York University, for example, hard-wires their call boxes to the university-wide communications system. Other voice call boxes use mobile phone service, and are solar-powered, so no wiring need be extended to the middle of a parking lot or other remote location. As a result, they can function during a power outage if the cell site is still powered.

New York City has a large system of call boxes intended to summon a police or fire department response, where calls are routed to local dispatchers, instead of the general 9-1-1 queue. The New York City Fire Department reports that 2.6 percent of emergency calls they receive originate from call boxes, 88 percent of which are false alarms. City officials have attempted to remove the callboxes, but in 2011 federal judge Robert W. Sweet denied the City&#x27;s request to lift an injunction preventing their removal.

== Wireless call boxes ==
Call boxes may be either wired or wireless. Wireless systems use radio frequencies in the VHF or UHF business band radio spectrum. Many callboxes can be programmed to be compatible with virtually any brand of VHF or UHF business band portable or fixed-base radio. Many in the United States require an FCC license, but some are certified for use on special FCC license-free business frequencies.

If the required distance is greater than the range of the wireless call box, an external antenna can extend the range. In the FCC-licensed frequency range, radio repeaters can extend this range even more.

A wireless call box that runs on solar power can be truly wireless, since no power lines need to be run to it.

== History ==
In the United States, the Gamewell Company of Newton, Massachusetts, manufactured fire alarm call boxes, beginning in the 1880s. These would telegraph a location code to the central fire station when a lever was pulled in the box.

Although it is difficult to determine when and where the earliest highway emergency phones were developed, undoubtedly one of the earliest examples were the freeway phones developed in Western Australia in 1966. This system was developed by Alan Harman, an employee of a Western Australian security firm, Central Station Security Company, Electronic Signals Pty Ltd, who came up with the idea after reading of a pile-up on the Kwinana Freeway. The newspaper article mentioned that assistance had been difficult to provide to those involved in the pile-up. The system Harman envisaged was a series of telephone units in a box on a short post, spaced at along Perth&#x27;s freeways. Picking up the handset would trigger an alarm in the Main Roads control centre and police, fire or ambulance could then be determined by the caller. Harman developed the system with the approval of the main roads commissioner and chief engineer, by adapting the existing design of communication facilities used at the security firm in which he worked.

== See also ==
* Telephone booth

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1326207" start="2" end="10" title="Call box" label="call box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326207" start="14" end="21" title="Call box" label="callbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330575" start="76" end="87" title="Dedicated line" label="direct line"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="107" end="124" title="telecommunication" label="telecommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067263" start="126" end="132" title="Information appliance" label="device"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175004" start="268" end="276" title="Dispatch (logistics)" label="dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="342" end="346" title="taxicab" label="taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313348" start="399" end="412" title="radiotelephone" label="two-way radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395196" start="555" end="568" title="taxicab stand" label="taxicab stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="661" end="667" title="police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q933402" start="706" end="716" title="police box" label="police box"/>
<link wikidata="Q694554" start="834" end="860" title="emergency telephone number" label="emergency telephone number"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="887" end="899" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="1166" end="1174" title="Rail transport" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908111" start="1285" end="1306" title="rail operating centre" label="rail operating centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="1826" end="1833" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="1839" end="1852" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="2124" end="2134" title="solar cell" label="solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2223" end="2233" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q200775" start="2235" end="2258" title="Florida&amp;#x27;s Turnpike" label="Florida&amp;#x27;s Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428636" start="2263" end="2277" title="Interstate 185 (Georgia)" label="Interstate 185"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="2281" end="2288" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q332050" start="2482" end="2491" title="tow truck" label="tow truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="2714" end="2726" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q354147" start="2789" end="2792" title="Telecommunications device for the deaf" label="TTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q941685" start="3135" end="3139" title="Dual-tone multi-frequency signaling" label="DTMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q787179" start="3140" end="3171" title="automatic number identification" label="automatic number identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308807" start="3280" end="3303" title="computer-aided dispatch" label="computer-aided dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q217554" start="3380" end="3400" title="remote terminal unit" label="remote terminal unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="3445" end="3455" title="Sacramento" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q242256" start="3506" end="3531" title="closed-circuit television" label="closed-circuit television"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="4113" end="4120" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="4192" end="4211" title="Interstate Highway System" label="Interstate Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q200775" start="4223" end="4246" title="Florida&amp;#x27;s Turnpike" label="Florida&amp;#x27;s Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="4695" end="4714" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="5051" end="5064" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q533806" start="5223" end="5228" title="9-1-1" label="9-1-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q283207" start="5240" end="5269" title="New York City Fire Department" label="New York City Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350751" start="5473" end="5488" title="Robert W. Sweet" label="Robert W. Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="5685" end="5688" title="Very high frequency" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q628096" start="5692" end="5695" title="Ultra high frequency" label="UHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001849" start="5815" end="5828" title="business band" label="business band"/>
<link wikidata="Q273693" start="6153" end="6161" title="repeater" label="repeater"/>
<link wikidata="Q49196" start="6369" end="6390" title="Newton, Massachusetts" label="Newton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451510" start="6405" end="6424" title="fire alarm call box" label="fire alarm call box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143785" start="7606" end="7621" title="Telephone booth" label="Telephone booth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413249" wikidata="Q898982" url="?curid=413249" title="Grape seed oil">
<text>Grape seed oil (also called grapeseed oil or grape oil) is a vegetable oil derived from the seeds of grapes. Grape seeds are a winemaking by-product, and oil made from the seeds is commonly used as an edible oil.

== Description ==
Grape seed oil has a moderately high smoke point of approximately . The oil has a light taste and a high polyunsaturated fat content, making it suitable for use in salad dressings, mayonnaise and as a base for oil infusions of garlic, rosemary, or other herbs or spices. It is widely used in baked goods, pancakes, and waffles. It is sprayed on raisins to help them retain their flavor.

==Uses==
Grapeseed oil may be used as a salad oil, massage oil, and in manufactured cosmetics or 
haircare products.

== Research ==
A study of 21 grape cultivars showed variation of oil composition, especially for linoleic acid and tocopherols.

Although grape seeds contain polyphenols, such as proanthocyanidins, grape seed oil contains negligible amounts of these compounds. Grape seed oil components are under study for their potential applications in human health, but the scientific quality of clinical research as of 2016 has been inadequate to suggest any effect on lowering disease risk.

== Possible contamination ==
Grapeseed oil has occasionally been found to contain dangerous levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons because of direct contact with combustion gases during the drying process.

== Production ==
Winemaking accounts for 90% of grape cultivation, with the seeds of the plant serving as a by-product that can be pressed for oil. Grapeseed oil production primarily occurs in wine-growing regions, especially around the Mediterranean Sea.

== Composition ==
The following table lists a typical fatty acid composition of grape seed oil:
Grape seed oil also contains 0.8 to 1.5% unsaponifiables rich in phenols (tocopherols) and steroids (campesterol, beta-sitosterol, stigmasterol). Grapeseed oil contains small amounts of vitamin E, but safflower oil, cottonseed oil, or rice bran oil contain greater amounts. Grapeseed oil is high in polyunsaturates and low in saturated fat.

===Comparison to other vegetable oils===
==See also==
* List of grape varieties
* List of grape dishes

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q898982" start="0" end="14" title="Grape seed oil" label="Grape seed oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q898982" start="28" end="41" title="Grape seed oil" label="grapeseed oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q898982" start="45" end="54" title="Grape seed oil" label="grape oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739805" start="61" end="74" title="vegetable oil" label="vegetable oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="92" end="97" title="Seed" label="seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="101" end="107" title="grapes" label="grapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q213376" start="127" end="137" title="winemaking" label="winemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128255" start="138" end="148" title="by-product" label="by-product"/>
<link wikidata="Q427457" start="201" end="211" title="cooking oil" label="edible oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q899802" start="269" end="280" title="smoke point" label="smoke point"/>
<link wikidata="Q124794" start="320" end="325" title="taste" label="taste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604509" start="337" end="356" title="polyunsaturated fat" label="polyunsaturated fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572278" start="396" end="410" title="salad dressing" label="salad dressing"/>
<link wikidata="Q167893" start="413" end="423" title="mayonnaise" label="mayonnaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="459" end="465" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102240169" start="467" end="475" title="rosemary" label="rosemary"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="486" end="490" title="herb" label="herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="495" end="500" title="spice" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13186" start="577" end="584" title="raisins" label="raisins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739805" start="660" end="669" title="salad oil" label="salad oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q179415" start="671" end="682" title="massage oil" label="massage oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q131207" start="704" end="713" title="cosmetics" label="cosmetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633540" start="718" end="726" title="haircare" label="haircare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="773" end="781" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q407426" start="835" end="848" title="linoleic acid" label="linoleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q910277" start="853" end="864" title="tocopherols" label="tocopherols"/>
<link wikidata="Q290439" start="896" end="906" title="polyphenol" label="polyphenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q415265" start="917" end="934" title="proanthocyanidins" label="proanthocyanidins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133849" start="1121" end="1138" title="clinical research" label="clinical research"/>
<link wikidata="Q407212" start="1321" end="1352" title="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon" label="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="1385" end="1399" title="combustion gas" label="combustion gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1667" end="1684" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="1741" end="1751" title="fatty acid" label="fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q429406" start="1824" end="1838" title="unsaponifiable" label="unsaponifiable"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739926" start="1848" end="1855" title="natural phenol" label="phenols"/>
<link wikidata="Q910277" start="1857" end="1867" title="tocopherol" label="tocopherol"/>
<link wikidata="Q177911" start="1874" end="1881" title="steroid" label="steroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756479" start="1884" end="1895" title="campesterol" label="campesterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q121802" start="1897" end="1912" title="beta-sitosterol" label="beta-sitosterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q425004" start="1914" end="1926" title="stigmasterol" label="stigmasterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q141180" start="1969" end="1978" title="vitamin E" label="vitamin E"/>
<link wikidata="Q156625" start="1984" end="1997" title="safflower oil" label="safflower oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q811663" start="1999" end="2013" title="cottonseed oil" label="cottonseed oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q175933" start="2018" end="2031" title="rice bran oil" label="rice bran oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604509" start="2082" end="2097" title="polyunsaturates" label="polyunsaturates"/>
<link wikidata="Q970537" start="2109" end="2122" title="saturated fat" label="saturated fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357585" start="2181" end="2204" title="List of grape varieties" label="List of grape varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518440" start="2207" end="2227" title="List of grape dishes" label="List of grape dishes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413250" wikidata="Q132408" url="?curid=413250" title="CCM (ice hockey)">
<text>CCM Hockey is a Canadian brand of ice hockey equipment owned by Birch Hill Equity Partners through its portfolio company Sport Maska Inc. The history of the brand traces to 1905, when Canada Cycle and Motor Limited, founded in 1899, began manufacturing hockey equipment as a secondary business. After Canada Cycle went bankrupt in 1982, it sold off its cycling and hockey divisions to separate owners. The hockey division was acquired by Sport Maska, a Quebec-based manufacturer of jerseys. 

In 1991, Sport Maska was placed under the ownership of a new holding company called SLM International. By 1998, SLM&#x27;s portfolio of brands had grown to include Canadien, CCM, Heaton, Jofa, Koho, and Titan, and in 1999 SLM changed its name to The Hockey Company. In 2004, Reebok purchased The Hockey Company, but a year later was itself purchased by Adidas. In 2017, Adidas sold all of its hockey operations and brand rights, which remained consolidated under Sport Maska, to the private equity firm Birch Hill Equity Partners. 

CCM&#x27;s range of products for hockey includes sticks, skates, helmets, shoulder pads, elbow pads, goaltender masks, goaltender pads, goaltender gloves, knee pads, throat collars, and team uniforms for the American Hockey League.

== History ==

=== Canada Cycle and Motor era, 1905–1982 ===
CCM was founded in 1899 after the collapse of the bicycle market. Established &quot;when the operations of four major Canadian bicycle manufacturers amalgamated: H. A. Lozier, Massey-Harris, Goold, and Welland Vale Manufacturing.&quot; CCM produced bicycles for many years in the area of Weston, Toronto, Ontario. They also briefly produced the Russell automobile.

By 1905, with saturation in the bicycle market, CCM began producing hockey skates using scrap steel that was left over at the plant from the manufacture of bicycles and automobiles, and subsequently began manufacturing other hockey gear.

In 1937, CCM acquired the Tackaberry brand made by a Manitoban named George Tackaberry and &quot;Tacks&quot; remained the company&#x27;s signature skate until late 2006, when the Tacks line was replaced with the &quot;Vector&quot; line, then the &quot;U+&quot; line, and&quot;RBZ&quot; line, now the &quot;Jetspeed&quot; line. The &quot;Tacks&quot; line was later reintroduced in 2014.

=== Sport Maska era, 1983–present ===
CCM Inc. went bankrupt in 1982, and in January 1983 the company was sold in two parts. The bicycle division was sold to Pro-Cycle Inc. of St. Georges-de-Beauce, Quebec, while the hockey division was sold to Sport Maska Inc., also of Quebec. Sport Maska been founded by Gérard Cóté in 1936 as G. C. Knitting Inc. In 1976, David Zunenshine (1929–2013) purchased the company and in 1979 renamed it after the Seigneurie de Maska.

The company entered the toy industry in 1988 through the acquisition of Coleco Industries and in 1990 when they acquired another financially troubled company, Buddy L Corp., a 70-year-old manufacturer of steel and plastic toy cars and trucks based in the United States.

==== SLM/The Hockey Company ownership, 1991–2004 ====
In 1991, Zunenshine created a Delaware holding company to consolidate his portfolio of businesses. The company was called SLM International Inc., an acronym for St. Lawrence Manufacturing. SLM purchased Kevin Sports Toys International Inc. (the maker of the Wayne Gretzky NHL hockey game), Norca Industries Inc. (a plastic toy manufacturer of such products as swimming pools, sleds, and sandboxes), and Innova-Dex Sports Inc. of Montreal (a bicycle helmet manufacturer).

SLM filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in 1995, selling off Buddy L and the SLM Fitness equipment business. The company emerged from bankruptcy protection in 1997 and reorganized. The company acquired Montreal-based Sports Holdings, Inc, in 1998, and became the world&#x27;s top producer of hockey merchandise adding the brands Koho, Titan, Jofa, Canadien and Heaton. Titan and Canadien were well-known brands of wooden hockey sticks in the 1980s and 1990s, with Wayne Gretzky having used the Titan 2020 while playing with the Edmonton Oilers. Heaton was known for its goaltending equipment, which was used for years by Martin Brodeur as well as many other NHL goaltenders.

In 1999, SLM was renamed The Hockey Company.

==== Reebok and Adidas ownership, 2004–2017 ====
In June 2004, Reebok purchased The Hockey Company. All brands other than the CCM brand were retired and Reebok introduced its own RBK Hockey gear, later to be rebranded as Reebok Hockey. Reebok in turn was acquired by Adidas in 2005.

In the fall of 2013, Adidas created a new goaltending equipment line under the CCM brand name. Beginning in 2015, Adidas began phasing out the Reebok name from their hockey equipment lines, by creating equivalent or similar product lines under the CCM name.

==== Birch Hill ownership, 2017–present ====
In 2017, Adidas sold its hockey operations, where were held by Sport Maska Inc., to a Canadian private equity firm, Birch Hill Equity Partners, for around $100 million. In 2018 CCM hired a new CEO, Rick Blackshaw. Blackshaw told the media that &quot;We have some nice momentum. We&#x27;re seeking to make investment in product and product innovation and the brand.

As of June 2021, the newly appointed CEO by Birch Hill Equity Partners is Marrouane Nabih.

== Products and marketing ==
CCM manufactures a wide range of ice hockey equipment at all price points, from recreational to professional. One major rival is Bauer Hockey. CCM was one of the official licensees, sponsors, and on-ice suppliers of hockey equipment for the National Hockey League (NHL) until 2014. CCM has changed its logo multiple times but use all three.

NHL player George Parsons was forced to retire due to a career-ending eye injury in 1939. He then became involved with CCM hockey, helping to develop helmets and facial protection which would be safer for players. By early 1976, CCM had developed a hockey helmet complete with eye and face shield and lower face protector that was both approved by the Canadian Standards Association and endorsed by the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association.

Main endorsers of CCM players gear include Sidney Crosby, Alexander Ovechkin, Patrice Bergeron, Nathan MacKinnon, and Connor McDavid.

In recent decades, CCM has been one of the most used goalie pads in the NHL. This popularity was in large part due to CCM&#x27;s partnership with Quebec-based goalie equipment company Équipements de gardien de but (EGB) (name stylized as &quot;&#x27;Lefevre&quot; on products and marketing materials), a family business that began making hockey equipment in the 1970s. Some notable goalies that used CCM were Marc-André Fleury and Carey Price. During 2020 CCM and Lefebvre decided to end their partnership. Today CCM offers the Extreme Flex, Axis, and the youth YT Flex goalie products.

==See also==
*Dream Nations Cup

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q132408" start="0" end="10" title="CCM (ice hockey)" label="CCM Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="25" end="30" title="brand" label="brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252192" start="34" end="54" title="ice hockey equipment" label="ice hockey equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q126095025" start="657" end="665" title="Canadien (ice hockey)" label="Canadien"/>
<link wikidata="Q766341" start="680" end="684" title="Jofa" label="Jofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426123" start="686" end="690" title="Koho (ice hockey)" label="Koho"/>
<link wikidata="Q124639501" start="696" end="701" title="Titan (ice hockey)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q466183" start="768" end="774" title="Reebok" label="Reebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="846" end="852" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q476115" start="976" end="990" title="private equity" label="private equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121249" start="1075" end="1081" title="ice hockey stick" label="sticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q108640" start="1083" end="1089" title="ice skate" label="skates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499551" start="1091" end="1098" title="hockey helmet" label="helmets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502722" start="1100" end="1113" title="shoulder pads (sport)" label="shoulder pads"/>
<link wikidata="Q922872" start="1115" end="1124" title="elbow pad" label="elbow pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785680" start="1127" end="1142" title="goaltender mask" label="goaltender mask"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1162" end="1179" title="Glove (ice hockey)#Goaltender&amp;#x27;s gloves" label="goaltender gloves"/>
<link wikidata="Q681515" start="1181" end="1189" title="knee pad" label="knee pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="1234" end="1256" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1354" end="1384" title="Bike boom#1890s" label="collapse of the bicycle market"/>
<link wikidata="Q579509" start="1496" end="1509" title="Massey Ferguson" label="Massey-Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q11442" start="1569" end="1577" title="bicycles" label="bicycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q962866" start="1608" end="1623" title="Weston, Toronto" label="Weston, Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="1625" end="1632" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381699" start="1665" end="1683" title="Russell Motor Car Company" label="Russell automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378670" start="1774" end="1785" title="scrap steel" label="scrap steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="1978" end="1986" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545062" start="1994" end="2011" title="George Tackaberry" label="George Tackaberry"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2755" end="2774" title=":fr:Seigneurie_de_Maska" label="Seigneurie de Maska"/>
<link wikidata="Q954124" start="2849" end="2866" title="Coleco Industries" label="Coleco Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954331" start="2936" end="2943" title="Buddy L" label="Buddy L"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="3360" end="3373" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062835" start="3588" end="3598" title="Chapter 11" label="Chapter 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426123" start="3910" end="3914" title="Koho (company)" label="Koho"/>
<link wikidata="Q124639501" start="3916" end="3921" title="Titan (ice hockey)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q766341" start="3923" end="3927" title="Jofa" label="Jofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="4109" end="4124" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q357465" start="4202" end="4216" title="Martin Brodeur" label="Martin Brodeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q466183" start="4366" end="4372" title="Reebok" label="Reebok"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="4570" end="4576" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q608377" start="5507" end="5519" title="Bauer Hockey" label="Bauer Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543058" start="5549" end="5558" title="licensees" label="licensees"/>
<link wikidata="Q152478" start="5560" end="5568" title="sponsor (commercial)" label="sponsors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="5619" end="5641" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543216" start="5731" end="5745" title="George Parsons (ice hockey)" label="George Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032374" start="6072" end="6102" title="Canadian Standards Association" label="Canadian Standards Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032034" start="6123" end="6158" title="Canadian Amateur Hockey Association" label="Canadian Amateur Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q311280" start="6204" end="6217" title="Sidney Crosby" label="Sidney Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q311374" start="6219" end="6237" title="Alexander Ovechkin" label="Alexander Ovechkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q536741" start="6239" end="6255" title="Patrice Bergeron" label="Patrice Bergeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966594" start="6257" end="6273" title="Nathan MacKinnon" label="Nathan MacKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806736" start="6279" end="6293" title="Connor McDavid" label="Connor McDavid"/>
<link wikidata="Q368554" start="6705" end="6722" title="Marc-André Fleury" label="Marc-André Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q720963" start="6727" end="6738" title="Carey Price" label="Carey Price"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6898" end="6915" title="Dream Nations Cup" label="Dream Nations Cup"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413256" wikidata="Q344556" url="?curid=413256" title="Convex">
<text>Convex or convexity may refer to:

==Science and technology==
* Convex lens, in optics

===Mathematics===
* Convex set, containing the whole line segment that joins points
** Convex polygon, a polygon which encloses a convex set of points
** Convex polytope, a polytope with a convex set of points
** Convex metric space, a generalization of the convexity notion in abstract metric spaces
* Convex function, when the line segment between any two points on the graph of the function lies above or on the graph
* Convex conjugate, of a function
* Convexity (algebraic geometry), a restrictive technical condition for algebraic varieties originally introduced to analyze Kontsevich moduli spaces

==Economics and finance==
* Convexity (finance), second derivatives in financial modeling generally
* Convexity in economics
* Bond convexity, a measure of the sensitivity of the duration of a bond to changes in interest rates
* Convex preferences, an individual&#x27;s ordering of various outcomes

==Other uses==
* Convex Computer, a former company that produced supercomputers

==See also==
* List of convexity topics
* Non-convexity (economics), violations of the convexity assumptions of elementary economics
* Obtuse angle</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q344556" start="0" end="6" title="Convex" label="Convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q344556" start="10" end="19" title="Convex" label="convexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q768575" start="64" end="75" title="Convex lens" label="Convex lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q193657" start="108" end="118" title="Convex set" label="Convex set"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259505" start="175" end="189" title="Convex polygon" label="Convex polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129097" start="242" end="257" title="Convex polytope" label="Convex polytope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966092" start="301" end="320" title="Convex metric space" label="Convex metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q319913" start="391" end="406" title="Convex function" label="Convex function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075186" start="511" end="527" title="Convex conjugate" label="Convex conjugate"/>
<link wikidata="Q96375447" start="545" end="575" title="Convexity (algebraic geometry)" label="Convexity (algebraic geometry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q648995" start="615" end="634" title="algebraic varieties" label="algebraic varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q845677" start="679" end="692" title="Moduli space" label="moduli spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166524" start="722" end="741" title="Convexity (finance)" label="Convexity (finance)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166531" start="796" end="818" title="Convexity in economics" label="Convexity in economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783548" start="821" end="835" title="Bond convexity" label="Bond convexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129100" start="923" end="941" title="Convex preferences" label="Convex preferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166513" start="1011" end="1026" title="Convex Computer" label="Convex Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613646" start="1090" end="1114" title="List of convexity topics" label="List of convexity topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048884" start="1117" end="1142" title="Non-convexity (economics)" label="Non-convexity (economics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="1210" end="1222" title="Obtuse angle" label="Obtuse angle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413257" wikidata="Q296822" url="?curid=413257" title="Vinnie Jones">
<text>Vincent Peter Jones (born 5 January 1965) is a British actor, presenter, and former professional footballer.

Jones played professionally as a defensive midfielder from 1984 to 1999, notably for Wimbledon, Leeds United, Sheffield United, Chelsea, and Queens Park Rangers. He also played for and captained the Welsh national team, having qualified through a Welsh grandparent. Best remembered for his time at Wimbledon as a pivotal member of the famous &quot;Crazy Gang&quot;, he won the 1988 FA Cup final with the London side, a club for which he played over 200 games during two spells between 1986 and 1998. He played 184 games in the Premier League, in which he scored 13 goals. Jones gained a reputation for being one of the hardest footballers in history, with his highly aggressive and physically uncompromising style of play, an image which has often led to him being typecast in his film career as violent criminals and thugs.

As an actor, his film and television career began with &quot;Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels&quot; (1998), for his performance winning an Empire Award for Best Newcomer, then in &quot;Snatch&quot; (2000), he won the Empire Award for Best British Actor. Other notable credits include &quot;Gone in 60 Seconds&quot; (2000), &quot;Mean Machine&quot; (2001), &quot;The Big Bounce&quot; (2004), &quot;Extras&quot; (2005), &quot;X-Men: The Last Stand&quot; (2006), &quot;The Riddle&quot; (2007), &quot;The Midnight Meat Train&quot; (2008), &quot;Year One&quot; (2009), &quot;The Cape&quot; (2011), &quot;Fire with Fire&quot; (2012), &quot;The Musketeers&quot; (2014), &quot;MacGyver&quot; (2016), &quot;&quot; (2019), &quot;Rise of the Footsoldier Origins&quot; (2021) and, against type, &quot;The Gentlemen&quot; (2024).

==Early life==
Vincent Peter Jones was born on 5 January 1965, in Watford, Hertfordshire, the son of Glenda (&quot;née&quot; Harris) and gamekeeper Peter Jones. He attended schools in nearby Bedmond and Abbots Langley, and captained his school&#x27;s football team, and played for his local football team in the village of Bedmond, in the Three Rivers District of Hertfordshire. One of his grandmothers was Irish from Dublin, and the other was Welsh, which later qualified him to play for Wales.

==Football career==
===Club career===
====Wealdstone====
Having begun playing as a teenager in local amateur football, a 19-year-old Jones was signed on semi-professional terms by Wealdstone of the Alliance Premier League in 1984. A young addition to the experienced Wealdstone team, which was soon to become the first ever club to achieve the non-league &quot;double&quot; in the 1984–85 season, he was a non-playing squad member in the club&#x27;s victory at Wembley Stadium in the 1985 FA Trophy final. He combined playing football with working as a hod carrier on construction sites.

====Loan to IFK Holmsund====
He played one season on loan with Swedish club IFK Holmsund in 1986, helping to lead the team to the Division 3 Mellersta Norrland title.

====Wimbledon====
In the autumn of 1986, a 21-year-old Jones became a full-time professional footballer when he was signed by Wimbledon of the First Division, who paid Wealdstone £10,000 for him. He scored in only his second appearance for Wimbledon on 29 November 1986, in a 1–0 win over Manchester United. He was a member of the Wimbledon team which won the FA Cup in 1988, beating league champions Liverpool 1–0 in the final. Wimbledon cemented their status as a formidable First Division side during this time, with Jones making his name as an enthusiastic and uncompromisingly tough midfielder and a leading member of Wimbledon&#x27;s famed Crazy Gang.

====Leeds United====
Jones was transferred from Wimbledon to Leeds United for a fee of £650,000 in June 1989, and played in all but one league games as Leeds finished as champions of the Second Division, winning promotion to the First Division in 1990. Jones proved he could thrive, and under the stewardship of Howard Wilkinson, he received only three yellow cards during the entire season.

====Sheffield United====
Jones left Leeds United early in the 1990–91 season after losing his regular first-team place to youngsters David Batty and Gary Speed. His former Wimbledon manager Dave Bassett signed him for Sheffield United in September 1990 for a transfer fee of £700,000. He played a total of 35 matches for The Blades in the First Division, scoring two goals.

====Chelsea====
Jones was then sold to Chelsea a year later on 30 August 1991, for a fee of £575,000. Jones made his Chelsea debut one day after his signing in the 4–1 win against Luton. On 18 September 1991, Jones scored his first goal for the club in the 2–0 win against Aston Villa. He went on to make 52 total appearances for Chelsea, scoring 7 goals and receiving only 3 yellow cards.

====Return to Wimbledon====
After just one season at Stamford Bridge, he was back with Wimbledon in the early stages of the 1992–93 season, when the Premier League had just been formed. He helped Wimbledon equal their best ever league finish in 1993–94, when they finished sixth in the Premier League. Three seasons later, he contributed to another strong season for the club, who reached the semi-finals of both the FA Cup and the League Cup, and finished eighth in the Premier League. That season he scored the winning goal as Wimbledon won 1–0 against Arsenal at Highbury.

====Queens Park Rangers====
His second exit from Wimbledon came when he became player/coach of QPR in early 1998, scoring on his debut against Huddersfield Town. He announced his retirement from football in late 1998 at the age of 34.

===International career===
In December 1994 Jones was named in the Welsh national squad, qualifying under FIFA rules via his Ruthin-born maternal grandfather. He had previously sought to play for the Republic of Ireland due to eligibility through a grandparent. He made his international debut under Mike Smith for Wales on 14 December 1994, in a 3–0 home defeat to Bulgaria in the Euro 96 qualifiers. When Smith was replaced as Wales manager by Jones&#x27;s former Wimbledon manager Bobby Gould a few months later, he remained a regular member of the Welsh national squad. He was capped nine times for Wales, the last of which came on 29 March 1997 in a 2–1 defeat to Belgium in a World Cup qualifier, also at Cardiff Arms Park.

Jones&#x27; international call-up was however greeted with consternation by some and was even ridiculed by Jimmy Greaves, who said, &quot;Well, stone me! We&#x27;ve had cocaine, bribery and Arsenal scoring two goals at home. But just when you thought there were truly no surprises left in football, Vinnie Jones turns out to be an international player!&quot;.

===Playing style===
Jones was known for his &quot;hard man&quot; image on the pitch. He was sent off 12 times in his career in an era when referees took a more lenient view of his aggressive and mistimed tackles.

He holds the record for the quickest ever booking in a football match, being booked after just five seconds for a foul on the opposition player Dane Whitehouse, in an FA Cup tie between Chelsea and Sheffield United in 1992. In his autobiography, he recalls: &quot;I must have been too high, too wild, too strong or too early, because, after three seconds, I could hardly have been too bloody late!&quot;

In an incident in February 1988, Jones was famously photographed covertly grabbing Paul Gascoigne by his testicles during a league game for Wimbledon against Newcastle United.

===Controversies===
He also was the presenter of the &quot;Soccer&#x27;s Hard Men&quot; video released in 1992, which featured archived footage of him and many other &quot;hard men&quot; of the game, and included advice for budding &quot;hard men&quot;. After the release of the video, Jones was fined £20,000 and given a six-month ban (suspended for three years) for &quot;bringing the game into disrepute&quot;. Wimbledon chairman Sam Hammam branded Jones a &quot;mosquito brain&quot;. After this incident, Jones failed to stay out of trouble. After exceeding 40 disciplinary points that season, he was once again summoned to Lancaster Gate, the headquarters of The Football Association, but failed to appear. The FA banned Jones indefinitely. Jones explained that he had &quot;mixed up&quot; the date of the hearing, for which he received a four-match ban and was told by Football Association officials to &quot;grow up&quot;. Jones commented later: &quot;The FA have given me a pat on the back. I&#x27;ve taken violence off the terracing and onto the pitch&quot; – an obvious reference to the football hooliganism problem which had blighted the English game during the 1970s and 1980s.

===Other football activities===
Jones made an appearance for Carlisle United, coming on as a second-half substitute in 2001 in a friendly against Irish team Shelbourne, teaming up with friend Roddy Collins who was manager at the time. In June 2010, he released a press statement stating that he was donating his 1988 FA Cup winners medal to the fans of AFC Wimbledon, wishing the club the best for the future. The medal is displayed at the club&#x27;s stadium. He briefly served as club president of non-league Soham Town Rangers.

In 2020, Jones appeared on the ITV show &quot;Harry&#x27;s Heroes&quot;, It featured former football manager Harry Redknapp attempting get a squad of former England international footballers back fit and healthy for one last game, vs a Germany Legends team. Despite playing for Wales during his professional career, Jones briefly took part in Season Two and played for the England legends in one of their warm up games against San Marino veterans.

==Acting career==

In 1998, Jones made his film debut in Guy Ritchie&#x27;s crime comedy &quot;Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels&quot;, in which he played a mob enforcer named Big Chris. For his performance, he won the Empire Award for Best Newcomer in 1999.

He has since been typecast in similar roles as criminals or villains, including the dapper gun-for-hire &quot;Bullet-Tooth Tony&quot; in Guy Ritchie&#x27;s 2000 follow up &quot;Snatch&quot;, for which Jones won the Best British Actor at the 6th Empire Awards in 2001. Jones became known to American audiences in the 2000 film remake of &quot;Gone in 60 Seconds&quot;, in which he played Sphinx. Although this was a major role with significant screen time, he only had one line of dialogue because his character was a silent, tough brawler. He teamed up with director Dominic Sena again the following year for the thriller &quot;Swordfish&quot;, in which he played one of John Travolta&#x27;s henchmen.

Jones played Danny Meehan in &quot;Mean Machine&quot;, a 2001 British remake of the Burt Reynolds film &quot;The Longest Yard&quot;. He played a former captain of the England national football team, who is sent to prison and subsequently takes control of a team of inmates who play against the prison guards&#x27; team. In the 2004 Japanese film &quot;Survive Style 5+&quot;, he played a hitman from Britain. He played another football role as Mad Maynard, the leader of a Manchester United football hooligan firm, in the 2004 film &quot;EuroTrip&quot;. His next role was in the 2006 film, &quot;X-Men: The Last Stand&quot;, as the comic book villain Juggernaut, alongside Hugh Jackman and Halle Berry. He said that he would like to play Juggernaut in a spin-off. One of his lines in the film (&quot;I&#x27;m the Juggernaut, bitch!&quot;) was based on a pre-existing Internet parody. The same year, he was featured in another football film, &quot;She&#x27;s the Man&quot;, as the coach of the Illyria team. In 2007, he played McStarley in &quot;The Condemned&quot;, a film about death row inmates forced to fight to the death on a remote island.

Jones was a housemate on the reality television show &quot;Celebrity Big Brother 7&quot; in 2010, and celebrated his 45th birthday while he participated. He received loud cheers as he entered the house and was the favourite to win going into the house, but he did not maintain popularity with the public; the crowd chanted &quot;get Vinnie out&quot; on the final night and booed him as he left the house after he finished in third place. Speaking of his experience on the show, he said: &quot;It was like &quot;One Flew Over the Cuckoo&#x27;s Nest&quot; in there – and I was Jack Nicholson.&quot;

Jones played a professional killer in the Kazakhstani film &quot;Liquidator&quot; in 2011. His character is an elite assassin invited to eliminate the main character. Producers of the film dealt with the Kazakh-to-English language barrier by writing Jones&#x27; character as a mute who does not speak. In the same year, he played Zed in the movie &quot;Blood Out&quot;. He played a role in the Hungarian film &quot;The Magic Boys&quot; in 2012. That same year, he voiced Freddie the Dog in &quot;Madagascar 3: Europe&#x27;s Most Wanted&quot;. He co-starred alongside Sylvester Stallone and Arnold Schwarzenegger in the action-thriller &quot;Escape Plan&quot;, released in 2013, and was featured with Danny Trejo in the 2014 horror-thriller &quot;Reaper&quot;.

In 2021, Jones competed in the third season of the Australian version of &quot;The Masked Singer&quot; as &quot;Volcano&quot;. He was the first contestant eliminated.

===Pro Wrestling===
In December 1998, Jones appeared at WWF Capital Carnage, a UK exclusive pro wrestling pay-per-view promoted by the WWF where he served as a special guest enforcer during the show&#x27;s main event, being noted for his &quot;hard man&quot; image. Jones performed a live interview earlier in the show regarding his role in the main event, when asked if he was ready to get physical with any of the four wrestlers, Jones said &quot;Us British mix it with anybody!&quot; Jones got into a fight with fellow enforcer the Big Boss Man at the beginning of the main event, which saw him get ejected by referee Gerald Brisco, showing him a red card in reference to Jones&#x27; time as a footballer.

==Personal life==
Having met Tanya Terry when they were both 12 years old and next-door neighbours in Watford, Jones later married her in 1994. Tanya had a daughter by her first husband, footballer Steve Terry. Jones has a son, Aaron Elliston-Jones, with his ex-girlfriend Mylene Elliston. Aaron was born in 1991.

In November 2013, Jones received treatment after finding signs of skin cancer below his eye. This was a removal procedure as a precaution. Many years prior his wife was also diagnosed with skin cancer, which then spread to her brain by 2018. Jones and their daughter Kaley were with at her bedside during her death from cancer on 6 July 2019. He discussed her death during an appearance on &quot;Piers Morgan&#x27;s Life Stories&quot; in September 2020, and said that he does not plan to remarry.

Jones penned an autobiography called &quot;Vinnie: The Autobiography&quot;, which was later revised and reprinted to include information on his first film appearance. 

Since 2021, he has divided his time between Los Angeles and Petworth, West Sussex. 

In 2015, he described himself as a supporter of the Conservative Party, saying that he was &quot;very proud of being British, very pro the monarchy, and very Conservative&quot;.

===Criminal charges===
Jones was convicted in June 1998 of assault occasioning actual bodily harm and criminal damage against a neighbour in November 1997.

Jones was convicted in December 2003 of assault and threatening behaviour on an aircraft for an air rage incident, during which he slapped a passenger in the face and threatened to murder the cabin crew while drunk on an aircraft. He was fined £1,100 () and ordered to perform 80 hours of community service. As a result of the conviction, Hertfordshire Constabulary revoked Jones&#x27; firearms licence and seized the weapons listed on the licence.

==Career statistics==

===Club===

==Honours==
Wealdstone
*Alliance Premier League: 1984–85

IFK Holmsund

* Division 3 Mellersta Norrland: 1986

Wimbledon
*FA Cup: 1987–88

Leeds United
*Football League Second Division: 1989–90

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
=== Stage ===
===Music videos===
*Westlife - &quot;Bop Bop Baby&quot; (2002)
** As Duke Vincent, the vilest man in the kingdom for money. The band members serve as Musketeers who are imprisoned in a dungeon by the Duke.
*Steve Aoki &amp; LOOPERS - &quot;Pika Pika&quot; (2018)
**Originally filmed for Steve Aoki &amp; Knife Party - &quot;Piledriver&quot;, but the original video was unreleased and the footage was re-edited and reused

==Discography==

===Studio albums===
* 2002: &quot;Respect&quot;

===Singles===
* &quot;Wooly Bully&quot; (1993)

==Awards and nominations==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q296822" start="0" end="19" title="Vinnie Jones" label="Vincent Peter Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="97" end="107" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="153" end="163" title="midfielder" label="midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q19482" start="195" end="204" title="Wimbledon F.C." label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="206" end="218" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="220" end="236" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="238" end="245" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18723" start="251" end="270" title="Queens Park Rangers F.C." label="Queens Park Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="309" end="328" title="Wales national football team" label="Welsh national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183154" start="458" end="468" title="Crazy Gang (football)" label="Crazy Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584445" start="487" end="504" title="1988 FA Cup final" label="1988 FA Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="637" end="651" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="875" end="883" title="typecasting (acting)" label="typecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q851095" start="997" end="1032" title="Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels" label="Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053233" start="1078" end="1108" title="Empire Award for Best Newcomer" label="Empire Award for Best Newcomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q335160" start="1124" end="1130" title="Snatch (film)" label="Snatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296877" start="1156" end="1191" title="Empire Award for Best British Actor" label="Empire Award for Best British Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q502384" start="1229" end="1247" title="Gone in 60 Seconds (2000 film)" label="Gone in 60 Seconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q376663" start="1268" end="1280" title="Mean Machine (film)" label="Mean Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591605" start="1301" end="1315" title="The Big Bounce (2004 film)" label="The Big Bounce"/>
<link wikidata="Q23826" start="1336" end="1342" title="Extras (TV series)" label="Extras"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1363" end="1384" title="X-Men: The Last Stand" label="X-Men: The Last Stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760679" start="1405" end="1415" title="The Riddle (film)" label="The Riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030471" start="1436" end="1459" title="The Midnight Meat Train" label="The Midnight Meat Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128496" start="1480" end="1488" title="Year One (film)" label="Year One"/>
<link wikidata="Q947319" start="1509" end="1517" title="The Cape (2011 TV series)" label="The Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057433" start="1538" end="1552" title="Fire with Fire (2012 film)" label="Fire with Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15632463" start="1573" end="1587" title="The Musketeers" label="The Musketeers"/>
<link wikidata="Q25397002" start="1608" end="1616" title="MacGyver (2016 TV series)" label="MacGyver"/>
<link wikidata="Q836503" start="1658" end="1689" title="Rise of the Footsoldier" label="Rise of the Footsoldier Origins"/>
<link wikidata="Q115860329" start="1728" end="1741" title="The Gentlemen (2024 TV series)" label="The Gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598" start="1823" end="1830" title="Watford" label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="1832" end="1845" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122164" start="1894" end="1904" title="gamekeeper" label="gamekeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q19174" start="1948" end="1955" title="Bedmond" label="Bedmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q19777" start="1960" end="1974" title="Abbots Langley" label="Abbots Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19174" start="2080" end="2087" title="Bedmond" label="Bedmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386468" start="2096" end="2117" title="Three Rivers District" label="Three Rivers District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="2121" end="2134" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="2175" end="2181" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188353" start="2201" end="2206" title="Welsh people" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="2246" end="2251" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4371047" start="2407" end="2424" title="semi-professional" label="semi-professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q9437" start="2434" end="2444" title="Wealdstone F.C." label="Wealdstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q58916" start="2452" end="2475" title="National League (division)" label="Alliance Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="2715" end="2730" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046509" start="2743" end="2752" title="FA Trophy" label="FA Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622650" start="2807" end="2818" title="Brick hod" label="hod carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="2906" end="2913" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q974457" start="2919" end="2931" title="IFK Holmsund" label="IFK Holmsund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231261" start="2973" end="3002" title="Division 3 (Swedish football)" label="Division 3 Mellersta Norrland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19482" start="3137" end="3146" title="Wimbledon F.C." label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="3154" end="3168" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="3190" end="3191" title="pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="3300" end="3317" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584445" start="3371" end="3385" title="1988 FA Cup final" label="FA Cup in 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="3412" end="3421" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183154" start="3657" end="3667" title="Crazy Gang (football)" label="Crazy Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="3731" end="3743" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q552905" start="3982" end="3998" title="Howard Wilkinson" label="Howard Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14907879" start="4125" end="4139" title="1990-91 in English football" label="1990–91 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q362555" start="4196" end="4207" title="David Batty" label="David Batty"/>
<link wikidata="Q202153" start="4212" end="4222" title="Gary Speed" label="Gary Speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173108" start="4253" end="4265" title="Dave Bassett" label="Dave Bassett"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="4281" end="4297" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="4477" end="4484" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18520" start="4618" end="4623" title="Luton Town F.C." label="Luton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="4711" end="4722" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q171458" start="4882" end="4897" title="Stamford Bridge (stadium)" label="Stamford Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997332" start="4953" end="4967" title="1992-93 in English football" label="1992–93 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="4978" end="4992" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365269" start="5074" end="5081" title="1993-94 in English football" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474922" start="5131" end="5150" title="1996-97 in English football" label="Three seasons later"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="5246" end="5252" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="5261" end="5271" title="EFL Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="5384" end="5391" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q205309" start="5395" end="5403" title="Arsenal Stadium" label="Highbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q18723" start="5501" end="5504" title="Queens Park Rangers F.C." label="QPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q19473" start="5549" end="5566" title="Huddersfield Town A.F.C." label="Huddersfield Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="5709" end="5729" title="Wales national football team" label="Welsh national squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013633" start="5767" end="5773" title="Ruthin" label="Ruthin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848858" start="5942" end="5952" title="Mike Smith (football manager)" label="Mike Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q180845" start="6008" end="6016" title="Bulgaria national football team" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q180563" start="6024" end="6031" title="UEFA Euro 1996" label="Euro 96"/>
<link wikidata="Q779141" start="6126" end="6137" title="Bobby Gould" label="Bobby Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="6311" end="6318" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q949455" start="6324" end="6343" title="1998 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA)" label="World Cup qualifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q432321" start="6353" end="6370" title="Cardiff Arms Park" label="Cardiff Arms Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q297271" start="6480" end="6493" title="Jimmy Greaves" label="Jimmy Greaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="6563" end="6570" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q265777" start="6826" end="6834" title="Fouls and misconduct (association football)" label="sent off"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215857" start="7092" end="7107" title="Dane Whitehouse" label="Dane Whitehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="7115" end="7121" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="7134" end="7141" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="7146" end="7162" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q13002" start="7436" end="7450" title="Paul Gascoigne" label="Paul Gascoigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384" start="7458" end="7466" title="testicle" label="testicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="7511" end="7527" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550277" start="7589" end="7611" title="Soccer&amp;#x27;s Hard Men" label="Soccer&amp;#x27;s Hard Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407565" start="7963" end="7973" title="Sam Hammam" label="Sam Hammam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997332" start="8115" end="8126" title="1992–93 in English football" label="that season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483175" start="8158" end="8172" title="Lancaster Gate" label="Lancaster Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="8194" end="8218" title="The Football Association" label="The Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001756" start="8627" end="8647" title="football hooliganism" label="football hooliganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19575" start="8782" end="8797" title="Carlisle United F.C." label="Carlisle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q394474" start="8878" end="8888" title="Shelbourne F.C." label="Shelbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356475" start="8913" end="8926" title="Roddy Collins" label="Roddy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q48851" start="9074" end="9087" title="AFC Wimbledon" label="AFC Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416377" start="9232" end="9250" title="Soham Town Rangers F.C." label="Soham Town Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="9284" end="9287" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q65084730" start="9299" end="9318" title="Harry&amp;#x27;s Heroes" label="Harry&amp;#x27;s Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q221349" start="9362" end="9376" title="Harry Redknapp" label="Harry Redknapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="9410" end="9417" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="9489" end="9496" title="Germany national football team" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q185350" start="9680" end="9690" title="San Marino national football team" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q192990" start="9759" end="9770" title="Guy Ritchie" label="Guy Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q851095" start="9797" end="9832" title="Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels" label="Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053233" start="9923" end="9953" title="Empire Award for Best Newcomer" label="Empire Award for Best Newcomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="9982" end="9990" title="typecasting (acting)" label="typecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q335160" start="10141" end="10147" title="Snatch (film)" label="Snatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296877" start="10179" end="10197" title="Empire Award for Best British Actor" label="Best British Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818131" start="10205" end="10222" title="6th Empire Awards" label="6th Empire Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q502384" start="10306" end="10324" title="Gone in 60 Seconds (2000 film)" label="Gone in 60 Seconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q728362" start="10531" end="10543" title="Dominic Sena" label="Dominic Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q486954" start="10592" end="10601" title="Swordfish (film)" label="Swordfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q80938" start="10635" end="10648" title="John Travolta" label="John Travolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q376663" start="10702" end="10714" title="Mean Machine (film)" label="Mean Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q202148" start="10751" end="10764" title="Burt Reynolds" label="Burt Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218665" start="10776" end="10792" title="The Longest Yard (1974 film)" label="The Longest Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="10834" end="10864" title="England national football team" label="England national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665450" start="11019" end="11035" title="Survive Style 5+" label="Survive Style 5+"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="11140" end="11157" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q642559" start="11205" end="11213" title="EuroTrip" label="EuroTrip"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11263" end="11284" title="X-Men: The Last Stand" label="X-Men: The Last Stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q841372" start="11318" end="11328" title="Juggernaut (character)" label="Juggernaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q129591" start="11340" end="11352" title="Hugh Jackman" label="Hugh Jackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033016" start="11357" end="11368" title="Halle Berry" label="Halle Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q72925" start="11614" end="11632" title="She&amp;#x27;s the Man" label="She&amp;#x27;s the Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q93876" start="11712" end="11725" title="The Condemned" label="The Condemned"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057690" start="11873" end="11896" title="Celebrity Big Brother (British series 7)" label="Celebrity Big Brother 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q171669" start="12325" end="12361" title="One Flew Over the Cuckoo&amp;#x27;s Nest (film)" label="One Flew Over the Cuckoo&amp;#x27;s Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q39792" start="12389" end="12403" title="Jack Nicholson" label="Jack Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12908" end="12947" title="Madagascar 3: Europe&amp;#x27;s Most Wanted" label="Madagascar 3: Europe&amp;#x27;s Most Wanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q40026" start="12979" end="12997" title="Sylvester Stallone" label="Sylvester Stallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="13002" end="13023" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q196685" start="13053" end="13064" title="Escape Plan (film)" label="Escape Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q223830" start="13112" end="13123" title="Danny Trejo" label="Danny Trejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911384" start="13158" end="13164" title="Reaper (film)" label="Reaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q107404814" start="13204" end="13216" title="The Masked Singer (Australian season 3)" label="third season"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053665" start="13224" end="13275" title="The Masked Singer (Australian TV series)" label="Australian version of &amp;quot;The Masked Singer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316013" start="13397" end="13416" title="WWF Capital Carnage" label="WWF Capital Carnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="13476" end="13479" title="WWE" label="WWF"/>
<link wikidata="Q461317" start="13876" end="13888" title="Big Boss Man" label="Big Boss Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706334" start="13962" end="13975" title="Gerald Brisco" label="Gerald Brisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598" start="14153" end="14160" title="Watford" label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614108" start="14249" end="14260" title="Steve Terry" label="Steve Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192102" start="14432" end="14443" title="skin cancer" label="skin cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620196" start="14579" end="14598" title="Brain metastasis" label="spread to her brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q109229814" start="14762" end="14794" title="Piers Morgan&amp;#x27;s Life Stories" label="Piers Morgan&amp;#x27;s Life Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="15077" end="15088" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526099" start="15093" end="15114" title="Petworth" label="Petworth, West Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="15170" end="15188" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402148" start="15235" end="15242" title="British national identity" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q943197" start="15249" end="15265" title="Royalist" label="pro the monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466570" start="15276" end="15288" title="Traditionalist conservatism" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808585" start="15356" end="15394" title="assault occasioning actual bodily harm" label="assault occasioning actual bodily harm"/>
<link wikidata="Q554774" start="15399" end="15414" title="criminal damage" label="criminal damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698365" start="15550" end="15558" title="air rage" label="air rage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975230" start="15793" end="15819" title="Hertfordshire Constabulary" label="Hertfordshire Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q18504" start="15963" end="15986" title="National League (English football)" label="Alliance Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4063712" start="15988" end="15995" title="1984–85 Alliance Premier League" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231261" start="16013" end="16042" title="Division 3 (Swedish football)" label="Division 3 Mellersta Norrland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="16061" end="16067" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386602" start="16069" end="16076" title="1987–88 FA Cup" label="1987–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="16092" end="16123" title="Football League Second Division" label="Football League Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q9260067" start="16125" end="16132" title="1989–90 Football League" label="1989–90"/>
<link wikidata="Q151241" start="16212" end="16220" title="Westlife" label="Westlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q384868" start="16229" end="16241" title="Bop Bop Baby" label="Bop Bop Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q20615" start="16496" end="16507" title="Knife Party" label="Knife Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593307" start="16702" end="16713" title="Wooly Bully" label="Wooly Bully"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413259" wikidata="Q3968865" url="?curid=413259" title="Lacey Green">
<text>Lacey Green is a village and civil parish in the Buckinghamshire district, south-east of Princes Risborough, in the ceremonial county of Buckinghamshire, England. It is in the Chiltern Hills above the town. In 2021 the parish had a population of 2397.

The settlement was known as Leasy Green in the early 19th century. Hamlets within the parish include Loosley Row, Speen, Wardrobes and Parslow&#x27;s Hillock.

RAF Bomber Command commandeered agricultural land for an airfield during World War II. The land has since reverted to agriculture, the school playing field and the village sports ground.

The church of St John the Evangelist was built in 1822–1825, at first as a chapel of ease; the chancel was added in 1871 to designs of J. P. Seddon, with coloured brick to the interior. The parish is within the area of the Risborough team ministry. Primitive Methodists built a chapel on the main road around 1842, which remained in use until 2001.

The village has a shop, sports club, village hall and a primary school. There are three pubs: the Black Horse in the village, the Whip Inn at Loosley and the Pink and Lily at Parslow&#x27;s Hillock. It is twinned with Hambye, France.

Lacey Green was home to the chef Heston Blumenthal, whose parents used to own amusement arcades in the area.

== Lacey Green windmill ==
Dated to 1650 by leading authority Stanley Freese, Lacey Green windmill is the oldest surviving smock mill in England and was restored in the 1970s, from a state of almost total collapse, by volunteers under the auspices of the Chiltern Society. The octagonal structure has a brick base carrying a weatherboarded timber frame; the sails are modern but the machinery is largely original. The windmill was designated as Grade II* listed in 1985.

Though it is widely believed that the mill was originally sited in nearby Chesham and moved to Lacey Green in 1821, no primary sources have been found to substantiate this and the Chiltern Society has been unable to trace the story beyond 1932. A somewhat speculative theory to perhaps explain the story&#x27;s origin has been advanced by Michael Highfield, author of the Chiltern Society&#x27;s guide to the mill. He recounts a conversation with a 96-year-old lady who had lived in the area all her life and remembered being chased away from &quot;Cheshums Mill&quot; as a child. The Mill had been in the Cheshire family since the 1860s and was sometimes referred to locally as Cheshire&#x27;s mill, applying the Buckinghamshire dialect possessive suffix &#x27;ums&#x27;, Cheshire&#x27;s becomes Cheshums.

==References==
==External links==

*Lacey Green Parish Council
*Lacey Green &amp; Loosley Row – community website
*Walks near, and general details of, Lacey Green at petergoodearl.co.uk</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3968865" start="0" end="11" title="Lacey Green" label="Lacey Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="29" end="41" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q21694636" start="49" end="64" title="Buckinghamshire (district)" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568545" start="89" end="107" title="Princes Risborough" label="Princes Risborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="137" end="152" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19849" start="176" end="190" title="Chiltern Hills" label="Chiltern Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="320" end="327" title="hamlet (place)" label="Hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6676036" start="354" end="365" title="Loosley Row" label="Loosley Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575734" start="367" end="372" title="Speen, Buckinghamshire" label="Speen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968865" start="374" end="383" title="Lacey Green" label="Wardrobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968865" start="388" end="410" title="Lacey Green" label="Parslow&amp;#x27;s Hillock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="413" end="431" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="RAF Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q30671684" start="676" end="690" title="chapel of ease" label="chapel of ease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253111" start="736" end="748" title="J. P. Seddon" label="J. P. Seddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309308" start="850" end="870" title="Primitive Methodists" label="Primitive Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001547" start="1169" end="1175" title="Hambye" label="Hambye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616078" start="1219" end="1236" title="Heston Blumenthal" label="Heston Blumenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534870" start="1419" end="1429" title="smock mill" label="smock mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1741" end="1757" title="Grade II* listed" label="Grade II* listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q962767" start="1842" end="1849" title="Chesham" label="Chesham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413261" wikidata="Q188632" url="?curid=413261" title="Roy Keane">
<text>Roy Maurice Keane (born 10 August 1971) is an Irish football pundit, former coach, and former professional player. He is the joint most decorated Irish footballer of all time alongside Denis Irwin and Ronnie Whelan, having won 19 major trophies in his club career, 17 of which came during his time at English club Manchester United. Regarded as one of the best midfielders of his generation, he was named by Pelé in the FIFA 100 list of the world&#x27;s greatest living players in 2004.

In his 18-year playing career, Keane played for Cobh Ramblers, Nottingham Forest, and Manchester United before ending his career at Celtic. He was a dominating box-to-box midfielder noted for his aggressive and highly competitive style of play, an attitude that helped him excel as captain of Manchester United from 1997 until his departure in 2005. Keane helped United achieve sustained success during his 12 years at the club, winning seven Premier League titles, four FA Cups and the UEFA Champions League. He then signed for Celtic, where he won the Scottish Premier League and Scottish League Cup before retiring as a player in 2006.

Keane played at the international level for the Republic of Ireland over 14 years, most of which he spent as captain. At the 1994 FIFA World Cup, he played in every Republic of Ireland game. He was sent home from the 2002 FIFA World Cup after a dispute with national coach Mick McCarthy over the team&#x27;s training facilities.

Keane began his management career at Sunderland shortly after his retirement as a player and took the club from 23rd position in the Football League Championship, in late August, to winning the division title and gaining promotion to the Premier League. He resigned in December 2008, and from April 2009 to January 2011, he was manager of Championship club Ipswich Town. In November 2013, he was appointed assistant manager of the Republic of Ireland national team by manager Martin O&#x27;Neill, a role he held until 2018. He would also have short assistant manager spells at Aston Villa in 2014 and Nottingham Forest in 2019. Keane has also worked as a studio analyst for football coverage on British channels ITV and Sky Sports. He was inducted into the Premier League Hall of Fame in 2021.

==Early life==
Roy Maurice Keane was born into a working class family in the Ballinderry Park area of Cork&#x27;s Mayfield suburb on 10 August 1971. His father Maurice worked at a local knitwear company and at Murphy&#x27;s Irish Stout brewery, among others. Keane&#x27;s family was keen on sport, especially football, and many of his relatives had played for junior Cork clubs such as Rockmount. Keane took up boxing at age nine and trained for several years, winning all of his four bouts in a novice league. During this period, he was developing as a promising footballer at Rockmount, and his potential was highlighted when he was voted &quot;Player of the Year&quot; in his first season. Many of his teammates were offered trials abroad with English football teams, but Keane was not. He supported Celtic and Tottenham Hotspur as a child, citing Liam Brady and Glenn Hoddle as his favourite players, but Manchester United F.C. player Bryan Robson later became the footballer he most admired.

==Club career==
===Cobh Ramblers===
Initially, Keane was turned down from the Ireland schoolboys squad after a trial in Dublin; one explanation from former Ireland coach and scout Ronan Scally was that the 14-year-old Keane was &quot;just too small&quot; to make it at the required level. Undeterred, he began applying for trials with English clubs, but he was turned down by each one. As his childhood years passed, he took up temporary jobs involving manual work while waiting for a breakthrough in his football prospects. In 1989, he eventually signed for the semi-professional Irish club Cobh Ramblers after persuasion from Ramblers&#x27; youth team manager Eddie O&#x27;Rourke. Keane was one of two Ramblers representatives in the inaugural FAI/FAS scheme in the Dublin suburb of Palmerstown, and it was through this initiative that he got his first taste of full-time training, facilitated by living in nearby Leixlip, County Kildare from Monday-Friday. His rapid progression into a promising footballer was reflected by the fact that he would regularly turn out for Ramblers&#x27; youth side as well as the actual first team, often playing twice in the same weekend as a result.

Keane’s Cobh senior debut came on 13 August 1989 in Buckley Park as the Rams went down 2–0 to Kilkenny City in the Opel League Cup. First-team manager Liam McMahon gave Roy his League of Ireland debut on 5 November that year, in a 2–1 loss at Bray Wanderers. That season he would make 29 senior appearances as Cobh finished seventh. His two goals came against St Francis and Finn Harps.

In an FAI Youth Cup match against Belvedere in February 1990, Keane&#x27;s performance attracted the attention of watching Nottingham Forest scout Noel McCabe, who asked him to travel over to England for a trial. Keane impressed Forest manager Brian Clough, and eventually, a deal for Keane worth £47,000 was struck with Cobh Ramblers in the summer of 1990.

===Nottingham Forest===
Keane initially found life in Nottingham difficult due to the long periods away from his family, and he would often ask the club for a few days&#x27; home leave to return to Cork. Keane expressed his gratitude at Clough&#x27;s generosity when considering his requests, as it helped him get through his early days at the club. Keane&#x27;s first games at Forest came in the Under-21s team during a pre-season tournament in the Netherlands. In the final against Haarlem, he scored the winning penalty in a shootout to decide the competition, and he was soon playing regularly for the reserve team. His professional league debut came against Liverpool at the start of the 1990–91 season, and the resulting performance encouraged Clough to use him more and more as the season progressed.

Keane eventually scored his first professional goal against Sheffield United, and by 1991 he was a regular starter in the side, displacing the England international Steve Hodge. Keane scored three goals during a run to the 1991 FA Cup Final, which Forest ultimately lost to Tottenham Hotspur. In the third round, however, he made a costly error against Crystal Palace, gifting a goal to the opposition and allowing them to draw the game. On returning to the dressing room after the game, Clough punched Keane in the chest in anger, knocking him to the floor. Despite this incident, Keane bore no hard feelings against his manager, later claiming that he sympathized with Clough due to the pressures of management and that he was too grateful to him for giving him his chance in English football. A year later, Keane returned to Wembley with Forest for the Football League Cup final but again finished on the losing side as Manchester United secured a 1–0 win.

Keane was beginning to attract attention from the top clubs in the Premier League, and in 1992, Blackburn Rovers manager Kenny Dalglish spoke to Keane about the possibility of a move to the Lancashire club at the end of the season. With Forest struggling in the league and looking increasingly likely to be relegated, Keane negotiated a new contract with a relegation escape clause. The lengthy negotiations had been much talked about in public, not least by Brian Clough, who described Keane as a &quot;greedy child&quot; due to the high wages demanded by the Irishman. &quot;Keane is the hottest prospect in football right now, but he is not going to bankrupt this club&quot;, Clough stated. Despite the extended contract negotiations, Forest fans voted him the club&#x27;s Player of the Season. Despite his best efforts, Keane could not save Forest from relegation, and the clause in his contract became activated. Blackburn agreed to a £4 million fee for Keane, who soon after agreed to a contract with the club.

A mistake, however, prevented the move to the club: when the contract had been agreed upon, Dalglish realized they did not have the correct paperwork needed to complete the transfer. This was on a Friday afternoon, and the office had been locked up for the weekend. With a verbal agreement in place, they agreed to meet on Monday morning to complete the transfer officially. Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson, hearing about the move, phoned Keane and asked whether he would like to join them instead of Blackburn. Ferguson ensured they had the paperwork ready and met up with Keane on Saturday and signed him for Manchester United for £3.75 million, a British transfer record at the time.

===Manchester United===

==== Early years: 1993–97 ====
Despite the then-record transfer fee, there was no guarantee that Keane would go straight into the first team. Paul Ince and Bryan Robson had established a formidable partnership in the center of midfield, having just inspired Manchester United to their first league title since 1967. Robson, however, was 36 years old and in the final stages of his playing career, and a series of injuries kept him out of action for most of the 1992–93 season and into the 1993–94 season. As a result Keane had an extended run in the team, scoring twice on his home debut in a 3–0 win against Sheffield United, and grabbing the winner in the Manchester derby three months later when United overturned a 2–0 deficit at Maine Road to beat Manchester City 3–2.

Keane had soon established himself as a first-choice selection, and by the end of the season, he had won his first trophy as a professional as United retained their Premier League title. Two weeks later, Keane broke his Wembley losing streak by helping United to a 4–0 victory over Chelsea in the FA Cup Final, sealing the club&#x27;s first-ever &quot;double&quot;.

The following season was less successful, as United were beaten to the league title by Blackburn Rovers and beaten 1–0 in the FA Cup final by Everton. Keane received his first red card as a Manchester United player in a 2–0 FA Cup semi-final replay win against Crystal Palace, after stamping on Gareth Southgate, and was suspended for three matches and fined £5,000. This incident was the first of 11 red cards Keane would accumulate in his United career, and one of the first signs of his indiscipline on the field.

The summer of 1995 saw a period of change at United, with Ince leaving for Internazionale, Mark Hughes moving to Chelsea and Andrei Kanchelskis being sold to Everton. Younger players such as David Beckham, Nicky Butt and Paul Scholes were brought into the team, which left Keane as the most experienced player in midfield. Despite a slow start to the 1995–96 campaign, United pegged back title challengers Newcastle United, who had built a commanding 12-point championship lead by Christmas, to secure another Premier League title. Keane&#x27;s second double in three years was confirmed with a 1–0 win over Liverpool to win the FA Cup for a record ninth time.

The next season saw Keane in and out of the side due to a series of knee injuries and frequent suspensions. He picked up a costly yellow card in the first leg of the Champions League semi-final against Borussia Dortmund, which ruled him out of the return leg at Old Trafford. United lost both legs 1–0, but this was compensated for by winning another league title a few days later.

====Captaincy: 1997–2001====
After Eric Cantona&#x27;s unexpected retirement, Keane took over as club captain, although he missed most of the 1997–98 season because of a cruciate ligament injury caused by an attempt to tackle Leeds United player Alfie Haaland in the ninth Premier League game of the season. As Keane lay prone on the ground, Haaland stood over Keane, accusing the injured United captain of having tried to hurt him and of feigning injury to escape punishment, an allegation which would lead to an infamous incident between the two players four years later.

Keane did not return to competitive football that campaign, and could only watch from the sidelines as United squandered an 11-point lead over Arsenal to miss out on the Premier League title. Many pundits cited Keane&#x27;s absence as a crucial factor in the team&#x27;s surrender of the league trophy.

Keane returned to captain the side the following season, and guided them to a treble of the FA Premier League, FA Cup, and UEFA Champions League. In an inspirational display against Juventus in the second leg of the Champions League semi-final, he helped haul his team back from two goals down to win 3–2, scoring the first United goal. His performance in this game has been described as his finest hour as a footballer. Keane, however, received a yellow card after a trip on Zinedine Zidane that ruled him out of the final. United defeated Bayern Munich 2–1 in the final, but Keane had mixed emotions about the victory due to his suspension. Recalling his thoughts before the game, Keane said, &quot;Although I was putting a brave face on it, this was just about the worst experience I&#x27;d had in football.&quot; Keane sustained an ankle injury during the 1999 FA Cup Final, four days before the Champions League Final, which ruled him out until the following season. Later that year, Keane scored the only goal in the final of the Intercontinental Cup, as United defeated Palmeiras in Tokyo.

The following season saw prolonged contract negotiations between Keane and Manchester United, with Keane turning down an initial £2 million-a-year offer amid rumours of a move to Italy. His higher demands were eventually met midway through the 1999–2000 season, committing him to United until 2004. Keane was angered when club officials explained an increase in season ticket prices was a result of his improved contract and asked for an apology from the club. Days after the contract was signed, Keane celebrated by scoring the winning goal against Valencia in the Champions League, although United&#x27;s defence of the Champions League was ended by Real Madrid in the quarter-finals, partly due to an unfortunate Keane own goal in the second leg. He was voted PFA Players&#x27; Player of the Year and FWA Footballer of the Year at the end of the season after leading United to their sixth Premier League title in eight years.

Keane caused controversy in November 2000, when he criticised sections of United supporters after the Champions League victory over Dynamo Kyiv at Old Trafford. He complained about the lack of vocal support given by some fans when Dynamo was dominating the game, stating, &quot;Away from home our fans are fantastic, I&#x27;d call them the hardcore fans. But at home, they have a few drinks and probably the prawn sandwiches, and they don&#x27;t realise what&#x27;s going on out on the pitch. I don&#x27;t think some of the people who come to Old Trafford can spell &#x27;football&#x27;, never mind understand it.&quot; Keane&#x27;s comments started a debate in England about the changing atmosphere in football grounds, and the term &quot;prawn sandwich brigade&quot; is now part of the English football vocabulary, referring to people who attend football games or claim to be fans of football because it is fashionable rather than due to any genuine interest in the game.

====Alfie Haaland incident====
Keane made headlines again in the 2001 Manchester derby, when five minutes from the final whistle, he was sent off for a knee-high foul on Alfie Haaland in what was seen by many as an act of revenge. He initially received a three-match suspension and a £5,000 fine from The Football Association (FA), but further punishment was to follow after the release of Keane&#x27;s autobiography in August 2002, in which he stated that he intended &quot;to hurt&quot; Haaland. Keane&#x27;s account of the incident was as follows:

I&#x27;d waited long enough. I fucking hit him hard. The ball was there (I think). Take that you cunt. And don&#x27;t ever stand over me sneering about fake injuries.
His admission that the tackle was a premeditated assault led the FA to charge him with bringing the game into disrepute. He was banned for a further five matches and fined £150,000 in the ensuing investigation. Despite widespread condemnation, he later maintained in an interview that he had no regrets about the incident: &quot;My attitude was, fuck him. What goes around comes around. He got his just rewards. He fucked me over and my attitude is an eye for an eye&quot;, and said he would probably do the same thing again.

Haaland never played a full game afterwards. However, Haaland did complete the match and played 68 minutes of the following game. He also played a friendly for Norway in between both matches. It was, in fact, a long-standing injury to his left knee rather than his right, that ended his career.

====Later career: 2001–2005====

United finished the 2001–02 season trophyless for the first time in four years. Domestically, they were eliminated from the FA Cup by Middlesbrough in the fourth round and finished third in the Premier League, their lowest final position in the league since 1991. Progress was made in Europe, however, as United reached the semi-finals of the Champions League, their furthest advance since their successful campaign of 1999. They were eventually knocked out on away goals after a 3–3 aggregate draw with Bayer Leverkusen, despite Keane putting United 3–2 up.

After the defeat, Keane blamed United&#x27;s loss of form on some of his teammates&#x27; fixation with wealth, claiming that they had &quot;forgot about the game, lost the hunger that got you the Rolex, the cars, the mansion&quot;. Earlier in the season, Keane had publicly advocated the breakup of the treble-winning team as he believed the team-mates who had played in United&#x27;s victorious 1999 Champions League final no longer had the motivation to work as hard.

In August 2002, Keane was fined £150,000 by Sir Alex Ferguson and suspended for three matches for elbowing Sunderland&#x27;s Jason McAteer, and this was compounded by an added five-match suspension for the controversial comments about Haaland. Keane used the break to undergo an operation on his hip, which had caused him to take painkillers for a year beforehand. Despite early fears that the injury was career-threatening, and suggestions of a future hip-replacement from his surgeon, he was back in the United team by December.
During his period of rest after the operation, Keane reflected on the cause of his frequent injuries and suspensions. He decided that the cause of these problems was his reckless challenges and angry outbursts which had increasingly blighted his career. As a result, he became more restrained on the field and tended to avoid disputes and confrontations with other players. Some observers felt that the &quot;new&quot; Keane had become less influential in midfield as a consequence of the change in his style of play, possibly brought about by decreased mobility after his hip operation. After his return, however, Keane displayed the tenacity of old, leading the team to another league title in May 2003.

Throughout the 2000s, Keane maintained a fierce rivalry with Arsenal captain Patrick Vieira. The most notable incident between the two took place at Highbury in 2005 at the height of an extreme period of bad blood between United and Arsenal. Vieira was seen confronting United defender Gary Neville in the tunnel before the game over his fouling of José Antonio Reyes in the previous encounter between the two sides, prompting Keane to verbally confront the Arsenal captain.

The incident was broadcast live on Sky Sports, with Keane heard telling match referee Graham Poll to, &quot;Tell him [Vieira] to shut his fucking mouth!&quot; After the game, which United won 4–2, Keane controversially criticised Vieira&#x27;s decision to play internationally for France instead of his country of birth, Senegal. Vieira, however, later suggested that having walked out on his national team in the FIFA World Cup finals, Keane was not in a good position to comment on such matters. Referee Poll later revealed that he should have sent off both players before the match had begun, though was under pressure not to do so.

Overall, Keane led United to nine major honours, making him the most successful captain in the club&#x27;s history. Keane scored his 50th goal for Manchester United on 5 February 2005 in a league game against Birmingham City. His appearance in the 2005 FA Cup final, which United lost to Arsenal in a penalty shoot-out, was his seventh such game, a record in English football at the time.

Keane also jointly holds the record for the most red cards received in English football, being dismissed a total of 13 times in his career. He was inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame in 2004 in recognition of his impact on the English game and became the only Irish player to be selected into the FIFA 100, a list of the greatest living footballers picked by Pelé.

====Departure====
Keane unexpectedly left Manchester United by mutual consent on 18 November 2005, during a protracted absence from the team due to an injury sustained in his last competitive game for the club, caused by a robust challenge from Luis García against Liverpool. His departure marked the climax of increasing tensions between Keane and the United management and players since the club&#x27;s pre-season training camp in Portugal when he argued with Ferguson over the quality of the set-up at the resort. Ferguson was angered further by Keane&#x27;s admission during an MUTV phone-in that he would be &quot;prepared to play elsewhere&quot; after the expiration of his current contract with United at the end of the season.

Another of Keane&#x27;s appearances on MUTV provoked more controversy, when, after a 4–1 defeat at the hands of Middlesbrough in early November, he criticised the performances of John O&#x27;Shea, Alan Smith, Kieran Richardson and Darren Fletcher. Of the club&#x27;s record signing Rio Ferdinand, he said, &quot;Just because you are paid £120,000-a-week and play well for 20 minutes against Tottenham, you think you are a superstar.&quot; The outburst was deemed too damning by the United management and was subsequently pulled from transmission by the club&#x27;s TV station. Keane&#x27;s opinions were described by those present at the interview as &quot;explosive even by his standards&quot;.

Keane scored 33 league goals for Manchester United and a total of 51 in all competitions. The first two of his goals for the club came in the 3–0 home win over Sheffield United in the Premier League on 18 August 1993, the last on 12 March 2005 in a 4–0 away win over Southampton in the FA Cup.

Two weeks later, after another row with Ferguson, Keane reached an agreement with Manchester United allowing him to leave the club immediately to sign a long-term deal with another club. He was offered a testimonial in recognition of his years at Old Trafford, with both Ferguson and United chief executive David Gill wishing him well for the future.

Keane, in an interview with the Irish media company, Off the Ball, in September 2019, stated that Manchester United were pushing to get him out of the club because he was getting old and his strained relationship with then assistant manager Carlos Queiroz and later on with Sir Alex Ferguson, rather than the mere MUTV incident.

Keane&#x27;s testimonial took place at Old Trafford on 9 May 2006 between United and Celtic. The home side won the game 1–0, with Keane playing the first half for Celtic and the second half in his former role as Manchester United captain. The capacity crowd of 69,591 remains the largest crowd ever for a testimonial match in England. All of the revenue generated from the match was given to Keane&#x27;s favourite charity, Irish Guide Dogs for the Blind.

===Celtic===
On 15 December 2005, Keane was announced as a Celtic player, the team he had supported as a child. Initial reports suggested Keane was offered a contract of around £40,000 per week; however, this was rejected by the player himself in his second autobiography, in which he claimed he was only paid £15,000 per week while a Celtic player.
Keane&#x27;s Celtic career began in January 2006, when the Glasgow giants crashed to a 2–1 defeat to Scottish First Division side Clyde in the third round of the Scottish Cup. His abrasive style had not dwindled, as he was seen criticising some of his new team-mates during the match. Keane scored what turned out to be his only Celtic goal a month later, a shot from 20 yards in a 2–1 Scottish Premier League victory over Falkirk. He retained his place the following Sunday in his first Old Firm derby against Rangers, leading Celtic to victory. Celtic went on to complete a double of the Scottish Premier League title and Scottish League Cup, his last honour as a player.

On 12 June 2006, Keane announced his retirement from professional football on medical advice, only six months after joining Celtic. His announcement prompted glowing praise from many of his former colleagues and managers, not least from Sir Alex Ferguson, who opined, &quot;Over the years when they start picking the best teams of all time, he will be in there.&quot;

==International career==
Keane was part of the squad that participated in the 1988 UEFA European Under-16 Football Championship although he did not play. He was man of the match for the Republic of Ireland national under-19 team when they beat hosts Hungary in the 1990 UEFA European Under-18 Football Championship to qualify for the 1991 FIFA World Youth Championship.

When called up for his first game at the international level, an under-21s match against Turkey in 1991, Keane took an immediate dislike to the organisation and preparation surrounding the Irish team, later describing the set-up as &quot;a bit of a joke&quot;. He would continue to hold this view throughout the remainder of his time spent with the national team, which led to numerous confrontations with the Irish management. Keane declared his unavailability to travel with the Irish squad to Algeria, but was surprised when manager Jack Charlton told him that he would never play for Ireland again if he refused to join up with his compatriots. Despite this threat, Keane chose to stay at home on the insistence of Nottingham Forest manager Brian Clough, and was pleased when a year later he was called up to the Irish squad for a friendly at Lansdowne Road. After more appearances, he grew to disapprove of Charlton&#x27;s style of football, which relied less on the players&#x27; skill and more on continuous pressing and direct play. Tensions between the two men peaked during a pre-season tournament in the United States when Charlton berated Keane for returning home late after a drinking session with Steve Staunton.

Keane was included in the Republic of Ireland senior squad for the 1994 FIFA World Cup in the U.S. and played in every game, including a famous 1–0 victory over tournament favourites and eventual runners-up Italy. Despite a second-round exit at the hands of the Netherlands, the tournament was considered a success for the Irish team, and Keane was named the best player of Ireland&#x27;s campaign. Keane, however, was reluctant to join the post-tournament celebrations, later claiming that, as far as he was concerned, Ireland&#x27;s World Cup was a disappointment: &quot;There was nothing to celebrate. We achieved little.&quot;

Keane missed crucial matches during the 1998 World Cup qualification matches due to a severe knee injury but came back to captain the team to within a whisker of qualification for UEFA Euro 2000, losing to Turkey in a play-off. Ireland secured qualification for the 2002 World Cup under new manager Mick McCarthy, greatly assisted by several match-winning performances from Keane. In the process of qualification, Ireland went undefeated, both home and away, against international football heavyweights Portugal and the Netherlands, famously beating the latter 1–0 at Lansdowne Road.

===2002 FIFA World Cup incident===

The Football Association of Ireland (FAI) selected the training base intended for use during Ireland&#x27;s World Cup campaign. During the first training session, Keane expressed serious misgivings about the adequacy of the training facilities and the standard of preparation for the Irish team. He was angered by the late arrival of the squad&#x27;s training equipment, which had disrupted the first training session on a pitch that he described as &quot;like a car park&quot;. After a row with goalkeeping coach Packie Bonner and Alan Kelly Jr. on the second day of training, Keane announced that he was quitting the squad and that he wished to return home to Manchester due to his dissatisfaction with Ireland&#x27;s preparation. The FAI was unable to get Keane an immediate flight home at such short notice, meaning that he remained in Saipan for another night, but they called up Colin Healy as a replacement for him. The following day, however, McCarthy approached Keane and asked him to return to the training camp, and Keane was eventually persuaded to stay.

Despite a temporary cooling of tensions in the Irish camp after Keane&#x27;s change of heart, things soon took a turn for the worse. Keane immediately gave an interview to leading sports journalist Tom Humphries, of the &quot;Irish Times&quot; newspaper, where he expressed his unhappiness with the facilities in Saipan and listed the events and concerns which had led him to leave the team temporarily. McCarthy took offence at Keane&#x27;s interview and decided to confront Keane over the article in front of the entire squad and coaching staff. Keane refused to relent, saying that he had told the newspaper what he considered to be the truth and that the Irish fans deserved to know what was going on inside the camp. He then unleashed a stinging verbal tirade against McCarthy: &quot;Mick, you&#x27;re a liar... you&#x27;re a fucking wanker. I didn&#x27;t rate you as a player, I don&#x27;t rate you as a manager, and I don&#x27;t rate you as a person. You&#x27;re a fucking wanker and you can stick your World Cup up your arse. The only reason I have any dealings with you is that somehow you are the manager of my country! You can stick it up your bollocks.&quot; Niall Quinn observed in his autobiography that &quot;Roy Keane&#x27;s 10-minute oration [against Mick McCarthy, above] ... was clinical, fierce, earth-shattering to the person on the end of it and it ultimately caused a huge controversy in Irish society.&quot; But at the same time, he was also critical of Keane&#x27;s stance, saying that, &quot;[He] left us in Saipan, not the other way round. And he punished himself more than any of us by not coming back.&quot;

None of Keane&#x27;s teammates voiced support for him during the meeting, although some supported him in private afterwards. Veterans Niall Quinn and Steve Staunton backed McCarthy in a press conference after the event. It was here that McCarthy announced that he had dismissed Keane from the squad and sent him home. By this time, the FIFA deadline for naming the World Cup squads had passed, meaning that Colin Healy was unable to be named as Keane&#x27;s replacement and could not play in the tournament.

===Recall===
Mick McCarthy resigned as Ireland manager in November 2002 after defeats to Russia and Switzerland in qualification for Euro 2004. The possibility of Keane returning to the squad for future qualifiers was raised, as Keane had not yet fully retired from international football, insisting that McCarthy&#x27;s presence was the main incentive for staying away from the Irish squad. McCarthy&#x27;s replacement, Brian Kerr, discussed with Keane the possibility of a recall, and in April 2004 he was brought back into the Irish team to face Romania on 27 May. Keane was not reinstated as captain, however, as Kerr decided to keep the armband with Kenny Cunningham. After the team failed to qualify for the 2006 World Cup, he announced his retirement from international football to help prolong his club career.

===Post-retirement===
Keane has reiterated his displeasure with the attitude and selection policy of the FAI. In March 2007, Keane claimed that several Republic of Ireland players get picked solely based on their media exposure and that the organisation was biased towards players originating from Dublin or other regions of Leinster: &quot;Once you keep playing them on the reputation they&#x27;ve built up through the media or because they do lots of interviews, then it&#x27;s wrong. There&#x27;s a fine line between loyalty and stupidity.&quot; Keane claimed that Sunderland player Liam Miller was not picked because he was from Cork and that players with significant potential were failing to get picked for the national team. He also alleged that the FAI were incompetent in the running of their affairs.

Keane was involved in further controversy in the wake of Ireland&#x27;s defeat by France in the qualification 2010 World Cup play-off. During an Ipswich Town press conference on 20 November 2009, Keane was critical of the Irish reaction to the Thierry Henry handball incident. His response included criticisms of the Irish team&#x27;s defence and the FAI authorities.

==Coaching career==
Keane&#x27;s former manager Sir Alex Ferguson had previously said that he wanted Keane to succeed him as Manchester United coach when he retired. In the wake of Keane&#x27;s acrimonious departure from the club, however, Ferguson became evasive regarding Keane&#x27;s prospects as a manager: &quot;Young managers come along and people say this one will be England manager or boss of this club, but two years later they&#x27;re not there. It&#x27;s not an easy environment to come into, I wouldn&#x27;t forecast anything.&quot;

===Sunderland===
During his time at Celtic, Keane was suggested as a potential managerial successor to Gordon Strachan by former Celtic player Charlie Nicholas. However, it was Championship club Sunderland where Keane chose to launch his managerial career, reuniting him with the club&#x27;s chairman and outgoing manager, Niall Quinn. The two men, publicly at least, were on opposing sides during the fall-out from the Saipan incident, but they were on good terms at the time of the managerial appointment, with Quinn urging Sunderland fans to &quot;support and enjoy one of football&#x27;s true greats&quot;.

Keane signed a three-year deal immediately after Sunderland&#x27;s victory over West Bromwich Albion on 28 August, the Mackems&#x27; first win of the 2006–07 season after a dreadful run of four consecutive defeats under Quinn&#x27;s temporary management. With his new club sitting in the relegation zone already, second bottom of the Championship table, Keane chose to enforce changes quickly. His first actions as manager were deciding to keep the existing assistant manager, Bobby Saxton, and to appoint his former Nottingham Forest colleague Tony Loughlan as head coach. He wasted no time in bringing in new additions to the squad, with a total of six players signing on the final day of the August transfer window. The most notable signings were Keane&#x27;s former Manchester United teammates Dwight Yorke and Liam Miller, supported by former Celtic colleagues Ross Wallace and Stanislav Varga,
 as well as Wigan Athletic pair Graham Kavanagh and David Connolly.

Keane&#x27;s first two games as manager could not have gone much better; first coming from behind to beat Derby County 2–1, followed by an easy 3–0 victory over Leeds United. Sunderland began to steadily creep up the league standings under Keane&#x27;s management, and by the turn of the year, they had escaped the bottom half of the league. Five further players were signed during the January 2007 transfer window, three (Anthony Stokes, Carlos Edwards and Stern John) on permanent contracts and two (Jonny Evans and Danny Simpson) on loan from Manchester United, Keane&#x27;s old club. Results continued to improve, and Keane was rewarded with the February and March Manager of the Month awards, while his team began to challenge for the automatic promotion places. Meanwhile, Keane tackled his players&#x27; non-professional approach with a firm hand. When three players were late for the team coach on a trip to Barnsley, in March 2007, he simply left them behind.

Sunderland secured promotion to the Premier League – along with Birmingham City – on 29 April when rivals Derby were beaten by Crystal Palace. A week later, the Championship title was sealed, and Sunderland&#x27;s revival under Keane was complete. His achievements also earned him the Championship Manager of the Year award.

The lowest point of their next season came at Goodison Park, where they were beaten 7–1 by Everton, which Keane described as &quot;one of the lowest points&quot; of his career. In the second half of the season, however, the team&#x27;s form was much improved (especially at home) and survival in the division was guaranteed with two games to go with a home win against Middlesbrough. Meanwhile, Keane carried on his trend of buying ex-Manchester United players with the addition of Kieran Richardson, Paul McShane, Danny Higginbotham and Phil Bardsley. He has also continued his strict disciplinary policy by putting Liam Miller (one of Sunderland&#x27;s more consistent players) on the transfer list for being regularly late for training and other team meetings.

The beginning of the 2008–09 season would prove to be tumultuous. In September 2008 Keane became embroiled in a row with FIFA Vice-President Jack Warner over the withdrawal of Dwight Yorke from the Trinidad and Tobago national team. Warner accused Keane of being disrespectful towards small countries. Keane responded by calling Warner &quot;a clown&quot; and insisted that Yorke was retired from international football. That same month Keane experienced &quot;one of the worst and longest nights&quot; of his career when Sunderland had to come from 2–0 down at home in a League Cup tie against Northampton Town. The game ended 2–2, with Sunderland progressing narrowly on penalties.

Despite some positive performances, including the historic 2–1 home victory against local rivals Newcastle United on 25 October (the first time the club had accomplished this in 28 years), as well as good showings by recent signings like Djibril Cissé and Anton Ferdinand, the team&#x27;s general form remained inconsistent. By the end of November, Sunderland was 18th in the Premier League, having lost five of their six previous games. Keane stood down as manager on 4 December after bringing doubt on his future with comments made in the wake of the 4–1 home defeat by Bolton Wanderers the previous weekend. Keane&#x27;s harsh management style was not appreciated by the Sunderland players, who were reported to have celebrated when they heard he had resigned.

In an interview with &quot;The Irish Times&quot; on 21 February 2009, Keane cited differences with Sunderland&#x27;s 30% shareholder Ellis Short and strains with club chairman Niall Quinn as the factors in his decision to resign as Sunderland manager.

Keane was linked with a return to the club in 2022 following the sacking of Lee Johnson, but turned down the offer after over a week of negotiations.

===Ipswich Town===
On 23 April 2009, Keane was appointed as the new manager of Ipswich Town on a two-year contract, the day after the club had dismissed Jim Magilton. His first game in charge came the following Saturday with a 3–0 away win over Cardiff City, the final league match to be played at Ninian Park. The following week, Ipswich rounded off the season with a 2–1 win over Coventry City. In the 2009–10 season, Keane started to sign some players, some of them from his former club Sunderland. He signed goalkeeper Márton Fülöp, midfielders Carlos Edwards and Grant Leadbitter and brought in Jack Colback, David Healy and Daryl Murphy on loan to the club. Ipswich started without a win in their first 14 matches, making them the last team to record their first win in the whole league, finally winning on 31 October against Derby County and recording their first away win of the season on 29 November against Cardiff City. Their form gradually improved throughout the season, but Ipswich drew far too many games to come anywhere near the promotion race and they finished the season in 15th place. Many inconsistencies in the 2009–10 and the 2010–11 season meant that Keane&#x27;s Ipswich side never really challenged for promotions and as a result of a poor run of form, ending up with his side dropping to as low as 21st in the Championship. Keane was dismissed as Ipswich manager on 7 January 2011.

===National team===
On 5 November 2013, the FAI announced that Martin O&#x27;Neill had been made the Republic of Ireland manager and that Keane had been made the assistant manager. Their first match was against Latvia at the Aviva Stadium in a 3–0 victory on 15 November 2013. After Neil Lennon left Celtic at the end of the 2013–14 season, Keane looked set to become the new manager of the Hoops. Martin O&#x27;Neill admitted he wouldn&#x27;t stand in his way of taking over the reins at Celtic Park. Keane, however, remained as assistant manager of Ireland and asked not to be considered for the job. Keane later stated that he was on the verge of taking the Celtic job and had met with the Celtic owner Dermot Desmond but felt &quot;they didn&#x27;t make him feel wanted enough&quot; and rejected the offer.
Keane later became the new assistant manager of Aston Villa, combining his role with Villa and Ireland.

In October 2014, Keane caused controversy after his book was released before crucial Euro 2016 qualifiers against Gibraltar and Germany. Martin O&#x27;Neill, however, rejected the claims that it was a distraction.

A month later, before Ireland&#x27;s crucial qualifier against Scotland, Keane was involved in an incident with a fan in the team hotel. An ambulance for the fan was called as well as the Garda Síochána, but no arrests or complaints were made. The FAI and Martin O&#x27;Neill came out in support of Keane after the incident. It later emerged that CCTV footage exonerated Keane of any wrongdoing. The man involved in the incident is Brendan Grace&#x27;s son-in-law Frank Gillespie, who is believed to have asked Keane to sign a copy of Keane&#x27;s autobiography &quot;The Second Half&quot;. Keane refused to do so, and Gillespie confronted Keane but then collapsed and an ambulance was called to the hotel. Grace stated that Gillespie and Keane were &quot;old buddies&quot;.

After the Scotland game, Keane claimed that Everton were putting pressure on the Irish players like Séamus Coleman and James McCarthy (who missed the Scotland match through injury) to pull out of international squads; Everton chairman Bill Kenwright refuted this claim, saying Keane says &quot;stupid things&quot;. Then-Everton manager Roberto Martínez also dismissed Keane&#x27;s comments.

Again Keane was in the headlines after a heated press conference with journalists before the United States match. Keane got in a row with a journalist after he was questioned if he was becoming a distraction from the Republic of Ireland cause. Eamon Dunphy called on the FAI and Martin O&#x27;Neill to stop Keane from giving interviews to end the circus of media attention around him.

In November 2018, Keane and O&#x27;Neill left their jobs by &quot;mutual agreement&quot;.

===Aston Villa===
On 1 July 2014, Keane was confirmed as Aston Villa&#x27;s new assistant manager, working alongside manager Paul Lambert. He combined this role with his assistant manager&#x27;s role with the Republic of Ireland. On 28 November 2014, however, Keane quit his role as assistant manager at Aston Villa to concentrate on his assistant manager role with Ireland.

===Nottingham Forest===
In January 2019, Keane became assistant manager to Martin O&#x27;Neill at Nottingham Forest, leaving the role in June 2019.

==Style of play==
Regarded as one of the best midfielders of his generation, Keane was a powerful, dominant, consistent, and highly competitive midfielder. In his prime, Keane was known for his work rate, mobility, energy, physicality, and hard-tackling style of play, which earned him a reputation as one of the best players in the world in his position. His playing style also earned him a degree of notoriety, due to his temper, tendency to pick up cards, confront opponents, and commit rash challenges. Usually operating in either a holding or box-to-box role in the centre of the pitch, his most prominent traits were his stamina, intelligence, positional sense, tenacity, aggression, physical strength, and ball-winning abilities, although he was a complete midfielder, who possessed a wide range of skills; indeed, he was also capable of carrying the ball forward effectively after obtaining possession, and either distributing it to other players, controlling the game and dictating the tempo in midfield, starting attacking plays, or even creating chances for his teammates, courtesy of his composure on the ball, first touch, and precise, efficient passing. He could even score goals himself, due to his attacking drive, eye for goal, a powerful shot from range, and his ability to make late runs into the penalty area, in particular in his early career.

In his later career, however, he modified his playing style and became more cautious in his play, occupying a deeper role, in order to compensate for his physical decline and loss of mobility following his hip operation, and attempted to avoid receiving so many bookings as a result of outbursts or reckless challenges. An influential presence on the pitch, in addition to his playing ability, Keane also stood out for his leadership and determination throughout his career, as well as his strong character. However, he also struggled out with injuries throughout his career. Despite his relatively small frame and short stature, he was also good in the air and an accurate header of the ball. Although he was usually fielded as a defensive midfielder, Keane was also deployed as a defender on occasion, functioning as a centre-back or as a sweeper.

Regarding his work rate, mentality, and influence, his former teammate Gary Neville said of him: &quot;His greatest gift was to create a standard of performance which demanded the very best from the team. You would look at him busting a gut and feel that you&#x27;d be betraying him if you didn&#x27;t give everything yourself.&quot; Steve McClaren, who served as Alex Ferguson&#x27;s assistant manager during Keane&#x27;s time at Manchester United, between 1998 and 2001, instead said of the midfielder&#x27;s competitive spirit: &quot;He mirrors the manager on the pitch. They are winners.&quot; Regarding Keane&#x27;s complex character, despite his intensity on the pitch, Sean O&#x27;Hagan of &quot;The Guardian&quot; wrote in 2002 that he is &quot;...a committed and confident warrior on the field, a shy, socially awkward, and often lonely introvert off it.&quot;

==Career statistics==
===Club===


===International===
:&quot;Scores and results list Republic of Ireland&#x27;s goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Keane goal&quot;

==Managerial statistics==


==Honours==
===As a player===
Nottingham Forest
* Full Members&#x27; Cup: 1991–92

Manchester United
* Premier League: 1993–94, 1995–96, 1996–97, 1998–99, 1999–2000, 2000–01, 2002–03
* FA Cup: 1993–94, 1995–96, 1998–99, 2003–04
* FA Community Shield: 1993, 1996, 1997, 2003
* UEFA Champions League: 1998–99
* Intercontinental Cup: 1999

Celtic
* Scottish Premier League: 2005–06
* Scottish League Cup: 2005–06

Individual

* PFA Team of the Year: 1992–93 Premier League, 1996–97 Premier League, 1999–2000 Premier League, 2000–01 Premier League, 2001–02 Premier League
*PFA Team of the Century: (1907–2007)
**Team of the Century 1997–2007
**Overall Team of the Century
* FAI Young International Player of the Year: 1993, 1994
* FAI Senior International Player of the Year: 1997, 2001
* Premier League Player of the Month: October 1998, December 1999
* Sir Matt Busby Player of the Year: 1999, 2000
* RTÉ Sports Person of the Year: 1999
* FWA Footballer of the Year: 2000
* PFA Players&#x27; Player of the Year: 2000
* ESM Team of the Year: 1999–2000
* Premier League 10 Seasons Awards: (1992–93 to 2001–02)
**Overseas Team of the Decade
* English Football Hall of Fame: 2004
* FIFA 100
* Premier League 20 Seasons Awards: (1992–93 to 2011–12):
**Fantasy Teams of the 20 Seasons (Panel choice)
* Premier League Hall of Fame: 2021

===As a manager===
Sunderland
*Football League Championship: 2006–07

Individual
* Football League Championship Manager of the Month: February 2007, March 2007
* LMA Championship Manager of the Year: 2006–07

===Orders and special awards===
* Cork Person of the Year: 2004
* Honorary Doctorate of Law: 2002

==Outside football==

===Media career===
Keane has done media work but expressed his lack of enthusiasm to do so again in the future when he said in 2008, &quot;I was asked last week by ITV to do the Celtic game. A couple of weeks before that I was asked to do the United game against Celtic at Old Trafford. I think I&#x27;ve done it once for Sky. Never again. I&#x27;d rather go to the dentist. You&#x27;re sitting there with people like Richard Keys and they&#x27;re trying to sell something that&#x27;s not there. Any time I watch a game on television I have to turn the commentators off.&quot;

Keane later had a change of heart. Along with Harry Redknapp and Gareth Southgate (who had previously been stamped on by Keane during an FA Cup semi-final in 1995, leading to a red card), he was a pundit for ITV&#x27;s coverage of the Champions League final between Manchester United and Barcelona. In the 2011–12 season, he became ITV chief football analyst, appearing on nearly every Live ITV match alongside presenter Adrian Chiles and Gareth Southgate. He appeared on ITV in the Champions League including Chelsea&#x27;s victory in the final against Bayern Munich, nearly all FA Cup matches including the final between Chelsea and Liverpool at Wembley, and England&#x27;s competitive internationals and friendlies. He was also involved in the ITV team for Euro 2012 alongside long-time rival Patrick Vieira and they appeared together as pundits in Ireland–Spain match and Czech Republic–Russia match, also appearing with Roberto Martínez and Gordon Strachan. Keane worked for ITV during his time as Republic of Ireland Assistant on UEFA Champions League and UEFA Europa League highlights shows between 2015-2018 but didn&#x27;t appear on International Football apart from on the Final of UEFA Euro 2016, he covered 2018 FIFA World Cup &amp; UEFA Euro 2020 for ITV Sport and appeared again on England Qualifiers from 2018, in 2021-2022 he became ITV chief analyst for FA Cup appearing alongside Ian Wright.

Keane joined Sky Sports to work on &quot;Super Sunday&quot; starting in September 2019.

===Personal life===
Keane married Theresa Doyle in 1997, and they have five children.

When Keane joined Manchester United, the family lived in a modern four-bedroom house in Bowdon, then moved to a mock Tudor mansion in Hale. His family then had a 1930s-built home bulldozed so they could build a new £2.5 million house near Hale.

On 6 June 2009, it was announced that Keane and his family would purchase a house in the Ipswich area, near the training ground of Keane&#x27;s new club, Ipswich Town. He eventually settled in the nearby market town of Woodbridge. They moved out of the property and offered it for sale in 2015.

In October 2014, Keane released the second part of his autobiography &quot;The Second Half&quot;, which was ghostwritten by Roddy Doyle. It is the follow-up to his first autobiography, released in 2002, which was ghostwritten by Eamon Dunphy.

In September 2023, he was allegedly headbutted by a man at Emirates Stadium whilst working as a pundit for Sky Sports. In June 2024, the man was found guilty and given a three-year football banning order and ordered to complete 80 hours of unpaid work. He was also told to pay legal costs of £650 plus a victim surcharge of £114.

===Triggs===
Keane had a Labrador Retriever named Triggs, who died in 2012. Speaking in Dublin at his annual visit to the Irish Guide Dogs for the Blind, he spoke on the loss affecting him, &quot;Triggs was great and went through a lot with me... you will have me crying in a minute, so be careful. She had a good life.&quot; Triggs came to international attention in 2002 during the Saipan incident ahead of that year&#x27;s FIFA World Cup, which saw Keane engage in a public quarrel and leave the squad. He said of Triggs, &quot;Unlike humans, dogs don&#x27;t talk shit.&quot;

&quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;″s Steve Wilson once described Triggs as &quot;the most famous dog in football since Pickles, a mongrel who dug up the stolen Jules Rimet Trophy in 1966, or that dog that relieved itself on Jimmy Greaves at the 1962 World Cup&quot;. Henry Winter, writing in the same paper and noting Keane&#x27;s tendency to go for long walks with his dog in the wake of controversial incidents, called Triggs &quot;the fittest dog in Cheshire&quot; and opined that &quot;if Cruft&#x27;s (sic) held an endurance event, Keane and Triggs would scoop gold&quot;.

Following her rise to fame, Triggs was mentioned by several sources on many occasions, with Keane followed by numerous canine references and dog puns for the remainder of his career. In 2006 when Keane moved house to Sunderland, his reunion with Triggs, who joined him later, came to the notice of the press. In 2007, Keane was reported to have heard of his team&#x27;s promotion to the Premiership while walking Triggs. The following year, Keane was said to have acquired a German Shepherd Dog named Izac to accompany Triggs.

In later life, Triggs was involved in a police investigation when her behaviour caused an argument between Keane and a neighbour. She appeared in an Irish Guide Dogs advertisement in 2009, whereupon the &quot;Irish Examiner&quot; referred to her as &quot;football&#x27;s biggest canine celebrity&quot;, and also received her own profile on Facebook. Triggs was described as a &quot;celebrity&quot; and a &quot;household name&quot; upon erroneous reports of her death from cancer in September 2010. Keane was described as &quot;inconsolable&quot;. The &quot;Irish Examiner&quot;″s obituary noted how &quot;at critical moments when the nation&#x27;s happiness seemed entwined with Roy&#x27;s moods, he turned to his Labrador Triggs and took to the road&quot;.

==In popular culture==
The title refrain of Morrissey’s 1997 single Roy’s Keen is a pun on Keane’s name – as Morrissey acknowledged during live performances of the song by changing the lyrics to &quot;never seen a keener midfielder&quot;. 

In addition, the character of Roy Kent, the irascible footballer featured in the TV series Ted Lasso, is based on Keane. Upon learning this, Keane insisted, &quot;I’m a lot nicer than him.&quot;

==See also==
* List of people on the postage stamps of Ireland

==Notes==
==References==
General
* 
* 
* 
* Roy Keane (2002), &quot;As I See It&quot;, [DVD]

Specific
==External links==
* Career photos on BBC Online
* Roy Keane&#x27;s first day on the job at SAFC – BBC Wear</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188632" start="0" end="17" title="Roy Keane" label="Roy Maurice Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="52" end="60" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642960" start="61" end="67" title="pundit" label="pundit"/>
<link wikidata="Q41583" start="76" end="81" title="Coach (sport)" label="coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q317807" start="185" end="196" title="Denis Irwin" label="Denis Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q544085" start="201" end="214" title="Ronnie Whelan" label="Ronnie Whelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="314" end="331" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="361" end="371" title="midfielder" label="midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="408" end="412" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="420" end="428" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104682" start="536" end="549" title="Cobh Ramblers F.C." label="Cobh Ramblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="551" end="568" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="620" end="626" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="648" end="658" title="box-to-box" label="box-to-box"/>
<link wikidata="Q715772" start="770" end="777" title="Captain (association football)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="931" end="945" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="959" end="965" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="975" end="996" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q187304" start="1042" end="1065" title="Scottish Premier League" label="Scottish Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q864672" start="1070" end="1089" title="Scottish League Cup" label="Scottish League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="1176" end="1195" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="1253" end="1272" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="1345" end="1364" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373020" start="1373" end="1380" title="Saipan incident" label="dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q437925" start="1401" end="1414" title="Mick McCarthy" label="Mick McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="1495" end="1505" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="1591" end="1619" title="EFL Championship" label="Football League Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="1696" end="1710" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9653" start="1815" end="1827" title="Ipswich Town F.C." label="Ipswich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q310263" start="1934" end="1953" title="Martin O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Martin O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="2035" end="2046" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="2059" end="2076" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="2170" end="2173" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340204" start="2178" end="2188" title="Sky Sports" label="Sky Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q106634956" start="2215" end="2242" title="Premier League Hall of Fame" label="Premier League Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="2302" end="2315" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="2355" end="2359" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q4289184" start="2367" end="2375" title="Mayfield, Cork" label="Mayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q830128" start="2439" end="2447" title="Knitted fabric" label="knitwear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546373" start="2463" end="2488" title="Murphy&amp;#x27;s Irish Stout" label="Murphy&amp;#x27;s Irish Stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q28232636" start="2639" end="2648" title="Rockmount A.F.C." label="Rockmount"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="2664" end="2670" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203278" start="2900" end="2918" title="Player of the year award" label="Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="3056" end="3062" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="3067" end="3084" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q356466" start="3104" end="3114" title="Liam Brady" label="Liam Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q296666" start="3119" end="3131" title="Glenn Hoddle" label="Glenn Hoddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="3162" end="3184" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q296583" start="3192" end="3204" title="Bryan Robson" label="Bryan Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="3371" end="3377" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4371047" start="3814" end="3831" title="Semi-professional sports" label="semi-professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q312370" start="3832" end="3837" title="League of Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104682" start="3843" end="3856" title="Cobh Ramblers F.C." label="Cobh Ramblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="4019" end="4025" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668594" start="4036" end="4047" title="Palmerstown" label="Palmerstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q987797" start="4167" end="4174" title="Leixlip" label="Leixlip"/>
<link wikidata="Q173332" start="4176" end="4190" title="County Kildare" label="County Kildare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983362" start="4490" end="4502" title="Buckley Park" label="Buckley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q312370" start="4615" end="4632" title="League of Ireland" label="League of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q24196174" start="4832" end="4845" title="FAI Youth Cup" label="FAI Youth Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884870" start="4860" end="4869" title="Belvedere F.C." label="Belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="4949" end="4966" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q207658" start="5070" end="5082" title="Brian Clough" label="Brian Clough"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="5239" end="5249" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="5848" end="5857" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586581" start="5878" end="5892" title="1990–91 Nottingham Forest F.C. season" label="1990–91 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="6054" end="6070" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="6137" end="6158" title="England national football team" label="England international"/>
<link wikidata="Q166307" start="6159" end="6170" title="Steve Hodge" label="Steve Hodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q765577" start="6217" end="6234" title="1991 FA Cup Final" label="1991 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="6347" end="6361" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810517" start="6850" end="6869" title="1991–92 Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044147" start="6870" end="6875" title="1992 Football League Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="7022" end="7036" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="7051" end="7067" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q187198" start="7076" end="7090" title="Kenny Dalglish" label="Kenny Dalglish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="7145" end="7155" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44980" start="8374" end="8387" title="Alex Ferguson" label="Alex Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248606" start="8631" end="8654" title="Progression of the British football transfer fee record" label="British transfer record"/>
<link wikidata="Q311171" start="8836" end="8845" title="Paul Ince" label="Paul Ince"/>
<link wikidata="Q296583" start="8850" end="8862" title="Bryan Robson" label="Bryan Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4981213" start="8921" end="8929" title="midfield" label="midfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q837731" start="8979" end="8997" title="1992–93 FA Premier League" label="first league title"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844339" start="9004" end="9008" title="1966–67 Manchester United F.C. season" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q4480021" start="9155" end="9169" title="1992–93 Manchester United F.C. season" label="1992–93 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844348" start="9183" end="9197" title="1993–94 Manchester United F.C. season" label="1993–94 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q670390" start="9352" end="9368" title="Manchester derby" label="Manchester derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q865093" start="9428" end="9438" title="Maine Road" label="Maine Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="9447" end="9462" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q841303" start="9634" end="9648" title="1993–94 FA Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="9689" end="9696" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="9751" end="9758" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484521" start="9766" end="9778" title="1994 FA Cup final" label="FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q876065" start="9821" end="9827" title="Double (association football)" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q919901" start="9840" end="9856" title="1994–95 Manchester United F.C. season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q225273" start="9907" end="9919" title="1994–95 FA Premier League" label="league title"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484523" start="9962" end="9974" title="1995 FA Cup Final" label="FA Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="9978" end="9985" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350113" start="10012" end="10020" title="Ejection (sports)" label="red card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386625" start="10060" end="10066" title="1994–95 FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q316681" start="10131" end="10147" title="Gareth Southgate" label="Gareth Southgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q631" start="10429" end="10443" title="Inter Milan" label="Internazionale"/>
<link wikidata="Q214513" start="10445" end="10456" title="Mark Hughes" label="Mark Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q312148" start="10479" end="10497" title="Andrei Kanchelskis" label="Andrei Kanchelskis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10520" start="10545" end="10558" title="David Beckham" label="David Beckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q295506" start="10560" end="10570" title="Nicky Butt" label="Nicky Butt"/>
<link wikidata="Q45613" start="10575" end="10587" title="Paul Scholes" label="Paul Scholes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844350" start="10705" end="10712" title="1995–96 Manchester United F.C. season" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="10760" end="10776" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q841266" start="10864" end="10878" title="1995–96 FA Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484524" start="10949" end="10956" title="1996 FA Cup Final" label="1–0 win"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="10962" end="10971" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386623" start="10983" end="10989" title="1995–96 FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844349" start="11020" end="11031" title="1996–97 Manchester United F.C. season" label="next season"/>
<link wikidata="Q196515" start="11182" end="11198" title="1996–97 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q41420" start="11218" end="11235" title="Borussia Dortmund" label="Borussia Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q83457" start="11278" end="11290" title="Old Trafford" label="Old Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q533191" start="11367" end="11379" title="1996–97 FA Premier League" label="league title"/>
<link wikidata="Q170328" start="11434" end="11446" title="Eric Cantona" label="Eric Cantona"/>
<link wikidata="Q715772" start="11501" end="11508" title="Captain (association football)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844347" start="11541" end="11555" title="1997–98 Manchester United F.C. season" label="1997–98 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621623" start="11569" end="11586" title="cruciate ligament" label="cruciate ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="11625" end="11637" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q719604" start="11645" end="11658" title="Alfie Haaland" label="Alfie Haaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18995" start="11672" end="11686" title="1997–98 FA Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="12117" end="12124" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q939916" start="12317" end="12333" title="1998–99 Manchester United F.C. season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q845101" start="12356" end="12362" title="The Treble" label="treble"/>
<link wikidata="Q628453" start="12370" end="12387" title="1998–99 FA Premier League" label="FA Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386633" start="12389" end="12395" title="1998–99 FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q279736" start="12401" end="12422" title="1998–99 UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="12460" end="12468" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q115825968" start="12476" end="12521" title="Juventus F.C. 2–3 Manchester United F.C." label="second leg of the Champions League semi-final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835" start="12754" end="12769" title="Zinedine Zidane" label="Zinedine Zidane"/>
<link wikidata="Q833096" start="12796" end="12801" title="1999 UEFA Champions League Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="12819" end="12832" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484528" start="13138" end="13155" title="1999 FA Cup Final" label="1999 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097340" start="13314" end="13334" title="1999 Intercontinental Cup" label="Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q80964" start="13355" end="13364" title="Sociedade Esportiva Palmeiras" label="Palmeiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844351" start="13620" end="13636" title="1999–2000 Manchester United F.C. season" label="1999–2000 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q10333" start="13926" end="13934" title="Valencia CF" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q330050" start="13942" end="13958" title="1999–2000 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="14028" end="14039" title="Real Madrid C.F." label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18533" start="14098" end="14106" title="own goal" label="own goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q621867" start="14139" end="14175" title="PFA Players&amp;#x27; Player of the Year" label="PFA Players&amp;#x27; Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750244" start="14180" end="14206" title="FWA Footballer of the Year" label="FWA Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q18991" start="14268" end="14282" title="1999–2000 FA Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14380" end="14397" title="Manchester United F.C.#Support" label="United supporters"/>
<link wikidata="Q456097" start="14408" end="14424" title="2000–01 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q179075" start="14438" end="14449" title="FC Dynamo Kyiv" label="Dynamo Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238916" start="15046" end="15068" title="prawn sandwich brigade" label="prawn sandwich brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="15582" end="15606" title="The Football Association" label="The Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="16687" end="16693" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844352" start="16876" end="16890" title="2001–02 Manchester United F.C. season" label="2001–02 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q784349" start="16980" end="16986" title="2001–02 FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="16990" end="17003" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q727058" start="17199" end="17215" title="2001–02 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q104761" start="17360" end="17376" title="Bayer 04 Leverkusen" label="Bayer Leverkusen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="17994" end="18004" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q703414" start="18012" end="18025" title="Jason McAteer" label="Jason McAteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q46347" start="19202" end="19216" title="Patrick Vieira" label="Patrick Vieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q205309" start="19274" end="19282" title="Arsenal Stadium" label="Highbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q348857" start="19411" end="19423" title="Gary Neville" label="Gary Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q276399" start="19474" end="19492" title="José Antonio Reyes" label="José Antonio Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340204" start="19636" end="19646" title="Sky Sports" label="Sky Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q314352" start="19687" end="19698" title="Graham Poll" label="Graham Poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="19882" end="19888" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q207441" start="19922" end="19929" title="Senegal national football team" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="20015" end="20029" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="20447" end="20462" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584412" start="20486" end="20503" title="2005 FA Cup Final" label="2005 FA Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323117" start="20793" end="20822" title="English Football Hall of Fame" label="English Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="20937" end="20945" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="20999" end="21003" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q295416" start="21251" end="21262" title="Luis García (footballer, born 1978)" label="Luis García"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986336" start="21588" end="21592" title="Manchester United TV" label="MUTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q306351" start="21921" end="21937" title="John O&amp;#x27;Shea" label="John O&amp;#x27;Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q216614" start="21939" end="21949" title="Alan Smith (footballer, born 1980)" label="Alan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q309728" start="21951" end="21968" title="Kieran Richardson" label="Kieran Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q172792" start="21973" end="21988" title="Darren Fletcher" label="Darren Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q483417" start="22024" end="22037" title="Rio Ferdinand" label="Rio Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="22706" end="22717" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12143498" start="22938" end="22949" title="testimonial match" label="testimonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991468" start="23041" end="23051" title="David Gill (executive)" label="David Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814305" start="23139" end="23151" title="Off the Ball (media company)" label="Off the Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q313209" start="23327" end="23341" title="Carlos Queiroz" label="Carlos Queiroz"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="23932" end="23938" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="24282" end="24289" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q177138" start="24324" end="24347" title="Scottish First Division" label="Scottish First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059415" start="24353" end="24358" title="Clyde F.C." label="Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q308822" start="24385" end="24397" title="Scottish Cup" label="Scottish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q187304" start="24609" end="24632" title="Scottish Premier League" label="Scottish Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q219241" start="24646" end="24653" title="Falkirk F.C." label="Falkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q643817" start="24711" end="24719" title="Old Firm" label="Old Firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597" start="24734" end="24741" title="Rangers F.C." label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q864672" start="24847" end="24866" title="Scottish League Cup" label="Scottish League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q476884" start="25345" end="25394" title="1988 UEFA European Under-16 Football Championship" label="1988 UEFA European Under-16 Football Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9306853" start="25453" end="25495" title="Republic of Ireland national under-19 football team" label="Republic of Ireland national under-19 team"/>
<link wikidata="Q738917" start="25517" end="25524" title="Hungary national under-19 football team" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414002" start="25532" end="25581" title="1990 UEFA European Under-18 Football Championship" label="1990 UEFA European Under-18 Football Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081016" start="25601" end="25635" title="1991 FIFA World Youth Championship" label="1991 FIFA World Youth Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672798" start="25703" end="25712" title="Republic of Ireland national under-21 football team" label="under-21s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624749" start="25727" end="25733" title="Turkey national under-21 football team" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q313674" start="26174" end="26187" title="Jack Charlton" label="Jack Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q601162" start="26485" end="26499" title="Lansdowne Road" label="Lansdowne Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q316717" start="26849" end="26863" title="Steve Staunton" label="Steve Staunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="26892" end="26924" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland senior squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="26933" end="26952" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="27073" end="27078" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="27128" end="27139" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q949455" start="27538" end="27566" title="1998 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA)" label="1998 World Cup qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q839757" start="27660" end="27673" title="UEFA Euro 2000 qualifying" label="qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="27678" end="27692" title="UEFA Euro 2000" label="UEFA Euro 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q483856" start="27704" end="27710" title="Turkey national football team" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864380" start="27714" end="27724" title="UEFA Euro 2000 qualifying play-offs" label="a play-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q482656" start="27734" end="27755" title="2002 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA)" label="secured qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="27764" end="27778" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q437925" start="27797" end="27810" title="Mick McCarthy" label="Mick McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27920" end="27935" title="2002 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA)#Group 2" label="went undefeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q267245" start="28001" end="28009" title="Portugal national football team" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q497782" start="28123" end="28154" title="Football Association of Ireland" label="Football Association of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q371002" start="28633" end="28646" title="Packie Bonner" label="Packie Bonner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361959" start="28651" end="28665" title="Alan Kelly Jr." label="Alan Kelly Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2617262" start="29004" end="29015" title="Colin Healy" label="Colin Healy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816271" start="29385" end="29398" title="Tom Humphries" label="Tom Humphries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="29413" end="29424" title="Irish Times" label="Irish Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q335831" start="30358" end="30369" title="Niall Quinn" label="Niall Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="31161" end="31165" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q726080" start="31423" end="31429" title="Russia national football team" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165141" start="31434" end="31445" title="Switzerland national football team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19622" start="31449" end="31462" title="UEFA Euro 2004 qualifying" label="qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q102920" start="31467" end="31476" title="UEFA Euro 2004" label="Euro 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q849630" start="31755" end="31765" title="Brian Kerr (Irish football manager)" label="Brian Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q168397" start="31883" end="31890" title="Romania national football team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q952401" start="31989" end="32005" title="Kenny Cunningham" label="Kenny Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="32048" end="32062" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q159736" start="32479" end="32487" title="Leinster" label="Leinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q464846" start="32740" end="32751" title="Liam Miller" label="Liam Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q374083" start="33062" end="33099" title="2010 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA second round" label="qualification 2010 World Cup play-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q9653" start="33111" end="33123" title="Ipswich Town F.C." label="Ipswich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q45901" start="33210" end="33223" title="Thierry Henry" label="Thierry Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182260" start="33224" end="33241" title="2009 Republic of Ireland v France football matches" label="handball incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q314095" start="33985" end="34000" title="Gordon Strachan" label="Gordon Strachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q939854" start="34025" end="34041" title="Charlie Nicholas" label="Charlie Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="34059" end="34071" title="Football League Championship" label="Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18744" start="34574" end="34594" title="West Bromwich Albion F.C." label="West Bromwich Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607666" start="34644" end="34658" title="2006–07 Sunderland A.F.C. season" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935542" start="34971" end="34983" title="Bobby Saxton" label="Bobby Saxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822819" start="35039" end="35052" title="Tony Loughlan" label="Tony Loughlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q622822" start="35196" end="35211" title="transfer window" label="transfer window"/>
<link wikidata="Q192175" start="35292" end="35304" title="Dwight Yorke" label="Dwight Yorke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442796" start="35360" end="35372" title="Ross Wallace" label="Ross Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q201724" start="35377" end="35392" title="Stanislav Varga" label="Stanislav Varga"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750" start="35406" end="35420" title="Wigan Athletic F.C." label="Wigan Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345728" start="35426" end="35441" title="Graham Kavanagh" label="Graham Kavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q441702" start="35446" end="35460" title="David Connolly" label="David Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q19470" start="35569" end="35581" title="Derby County F.C." label="Derby County"/>
<link wikidata="Q622822" start="35862" end="35877" title="transfer window" label="transfer window"/>
<link wikidata="Q529425" start="35886" end="35900" title="Anthony Stokes (footballer)" label="Anthony Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q707180" start="35902" end="35916" title="Carlos Edwards" label="Carlos Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q445801" start="35921" end="35931" title="Stern John" label="Stern John"/>
<link wikidata="Q29495" start="35965" end="35976" title="Jonny Evans" label="Jonny Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q315294" start="35981" end="35994" title="Danny Simpson" label="Danny Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19442" start="36379" end="36387" title="Barnsley F.C." label="Barnsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="36497" end="36512" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q968420" start="36805" end="36818" title="Goodison Park" label="Goodison Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q309728" start="37241" end="37258" title="Kieran Richardson" label="Kieran Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q316935" start="37260" end="37272" title="Paul McShane (Irish footballer)" label="Paul McShane"/>
<link wikidata="Q437322" start="37274" end="37292" title="Danny Higginbotham" label="Danny Higginbotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q69965" start="37297" end="37310" title="Phil Bardsley" label="Phil Bardsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612941" start="37545" end="37559" title="2008–09 Sunderland A.F.C. season" label="2008–09 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567272" start="37665" end="37676" title="Jack Warner (football executive)" label="Jack Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q192149" start="37722" end="37755" title="Trinidad and Tobago national football team" label="Trinidad and Tobago national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="38096" end="38106" title="EFL Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q48945" start="38119" end="38135" title="Northampton Town F.C." label="Northampton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936" start="38447" end="38460" title="Djibril Cissé" label="Djibril Cissé"/>
<link wikidata="Q298330" start="38465" end="38480" title="Anton Ferdinand" label="Anton Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="38781" end="38797" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="39001" end="39016" title="The Irish Times" label="The Irish Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365995" start="39107" end="39118" title="Ellis Short" label="Ellis Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773767" start="39303" end="39314" title="Lee Johnson (footballer)" label="Lee Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112340" start="39531" end="39543" title="Jim Magilton" label="Jim Magilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18662" start="39623" end="39635" title="Cardiff City F.C." label="Cardiff City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859604" start="39676" end="39687" title="Ninian Park" label="Ninian Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="39760" end="39773" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4615847" start="39782" end="39796" title="2009–10 Ipswich Town F.C. season" label="2009–10 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q460696" start="39901" end="39913" title="Márton Fülöp" label="Márton Fülöp"/>
<link wikidata="Q707180" start="39927" end="39941" title="Carlos Edwards" label="Carlos Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q727714" start="39946" end="39962" title="Grant Leadbitter" label="Grant Leadbitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q126466" start="39978" end="39990" title="Jack Colback" label="Jack Colback"/>
<link wikidata="Q313617" start="39992" end="40003" title="David Healy (footballer)" label="David Healy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447742" start="40008" end="40020" title="Daryl Murphy" label="Daryl Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4619544" start="40527" end="40541" title="2010–11 Ipswich Town F.C. season" label="2010–11 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q310263" start="40851" end="40870" title="Martin O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Martin O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q189322" start="40999" end="41005" title="Latvia national football team" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q244402" start="41013" end="41026" title="Aviva Stadium" label="Aviva Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q437993" start="41071" end="41082" title="Neil Lennon" label="Neil Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15021758" start="41113" end="41127" title="2013–14 Celtic F.C. season" label="2013–14 season"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41268" end="41273" title="Rein#In popular expression" label="reins"/>
<link wikidata="Q216037" start="41277" end="41288" title="Celtic Park" label="Celtic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200272" start="41494" end="41508" title="Dermot Desmond" label="Dermot Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="41647" end="41658" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12342217" start="41789" end="41809" title="UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying" label="Euro 2016 qualifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q583626" start="41818" end="41827" title="Gibraltar national football team" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="41832" end="41839" title="Germany national football team" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="41982" end="41990" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366959" start="42107" end="42121" title="Garda Síochána" label="Garda Síochána"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960899" start="42351" end="42364" title="Brendan Grace" label="Brendan Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q316724" start="42795" end="42809" title="Séamus Coleman" label="Séamus Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q529013" start="42814" end="42828" title="James McCarthy (footballer)" label="James McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q352846" start="42930" end="42944" title="Bill Kenwright" label="Bill Kenwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q357994" start="43031" end="43047" title="Roberto Martínez" label="Roberto Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q164134" start="43180" end="43193" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321079" start="43331" end="43343" title="Eamon Dunphy" label="Eamon Dunphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q246724" start="43689" end="43701" title="Paul Lambert" label="Paul Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44626" end="44633" title="Midfielder#Holding midfielder" label="holding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44637" end="44647" title="Midfielder#Box-to-box midfielder" label="box-to-box"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44660" end="44666" title="Midfielder#Central midfielder" label="centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="46186" end="46206" title="defensive midfielder" label="defensive midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="46276" end="46287" title="centre-back" label="centre-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="46296" end="46303" title="Sweeper (association football)" label="sweeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132569" start="47444" end="47466" title="Full Members&amp;#x27; Cup" label="Full Members&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823487" start="47468" end="47475" title="1991–92 Full Members&amp;#x27; Cup" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="47497" end="47511" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q841303" start="47513" end="47520" title="1993–94 FA Premier League" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q841266" start="47522" end="47529" title="1995–96 FA Premier League" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q533191" start="47531" end="47538" title="1996–97 FA Premier League" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q628453" start="47540" end="47547" title="1998–99 FA Premier League" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q18991" start="47549" end="47558" title="1999–2000 FA Premier League" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q833562" start="47560" end="47567" title="2000–01 FA Premier League" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q817255" start="47569" end="47576" title="2002–03 FA Premier League" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="47579" end="47585" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484521" start="47587" end="47594" title="1994 FA Cup Final" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484524" start="47596" end="47603" title="1996 FA Cup Final" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484528" start="47605" end="47612" title="1999 FA Cup Final" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661161" start="47614" end="47621" title="2004 FA Cup Final" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="47624" end="47643" title="FA Community Shield" label="FA Community Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045538" start="47645" end="47649" title="1993 FA Charity Shield" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045557" start="47651" end="47655" title="1996 FA Charity Shield" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044356" start="47657" end="47661" title="1997 FA Charity Shield" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476008" start="47663" end="47667" title="2003 FA Community Shield" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="47670" end="47691" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q833096" start="47693" end="47700" title="1999 UEFA Champions League Final" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q182473" start="47703" end="47723" title="Intercontinental Cup (1960–2004)" label="Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097340" start="47725" end="47729" title="1999 Intercontinental Cup" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q187304" start="47740" end="47763" title="Scottish Premier League" label="Scottish Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813162" start="47765" end="47772" title="2005–06 Scottish Premier League" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q864672" start="47775" end="47794" title="Scottish League Cup" label="Scottish League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484693" start="47796" end="47803" title="2006 Scottish League Cup Final" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044044" start="47819" end="47839" title="PFA Team of the Year" label="PFA Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47841" end="47863" title="PFA Team of the Year (1990s)#FA Premier League" label="1992–93 Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47865" end="47887" title="PFA Team of the Year (1990s)#FA Premier League 5" label="1996–97 Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47889" end="47913" title="PFA Team of the Year (2000s)#FA Premier League" label="1999–2000 Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47915" end="47937" title="PFA Team of the Year (2000s)#FA Premier League 2" label="2000–01 Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47939" end="47961" title="PFA Team of the Year (2000s)#FA Premier League 3" label="2001–02 Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276089" start="47963" end="47966" title="Professional Footballers&amp;#x27; Association" label="PFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424336" start="48064" end="48106" title="FAI International Football Awards" label="FAI Young International Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424336" start="48121" end="48164" title="FAI International Football Awards" label="FAI Senior International Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q890790" start="48179" end="48213" title="Premier League Player of the Month" label="Premier League Player of the Month"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48215" end="48227" title="1998–99 FA Premier League#Monthly awards" label="October 1998"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48229" end="48242" title="1999–2000 FA Premier League#Monthly awards" label="December 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986505" start="48245" end="48278" title="Sir Matt Busby Player of the Year" label="Sir Matt Busby Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312666" start="48293" end="48322" title="RTÉ Sports Person of the Year" label="RTÉ Sports Person of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750244" start="48331" end="48357" title="FWA Footballer of the Year" label="FWA Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q621867" start="48366" end="48402" title="PFA Players&amp;#x27; Player of the Year" label="PFA Players&amp;#x27; Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48411" end="48431" title="European Sports Media#ESM Team of the Year" label="ESM Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590501" start="48445" end="48477" title="Premier League 10 Seasons Awards" label="Premier League 10 Seasons Awards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48502" end="48529" title="Premier League 10 Seasons Awards#Teams of the Decade" label="Overseas Team of the Decade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323117" start="48532" end="48561" title="English Football Hall of Fame" label="English Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="48570" end="48578" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240312" start="48581" end="48613" title="Premier League 20 Seasons Awards" label="Premier League 20 Seasons Awards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48639" end="48670" title="Premier League 20 Seasons Awards#Fantasy Teams of the 20 Seasons" label="Fantasy Teams of the 20 Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q106634956" start="48688" end="48715" title="Premier League Hall of Fame" label="Premier League Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="48754" end="48782" title="EFL Championship" label="Football League Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976639" start="48784" end="48791" title="2006–07 Football League Championship" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462398" start="48806" end="48855" title="EFL Championship Manager of the Month" label="Football League Championship Manager of the Month"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48857" end="48870" title="EFL Championship Manager of the Month#2006–07" label="February 2007"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48885" end="48921" title="League Managers Association Awards#Divisional Award Winners" label="LMA Championship Manager of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976639" start="48923" end="48930" title="2006–07 Football League Championship" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007832" start="48966" end="48989" title="Cork Person of the Year" label="Cork Person of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="49217" end="49220" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="49375" end="49378" title="Sky (UK and Ireland)" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327063" start="49471" end="49483" title="Richard Keys" label="Richard Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q221349" start="49677" end="49691" title="Harry Redknapp" label="Harry Redknapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q316681" start="49696" end="49712" title="Gareth Southgate" label="Gareth Southgate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49808" end="49816" title="Penalty card#Red card" label="red card"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="49919" end="49928" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="50491" end="50496" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q483868" start="50507" end="50521" title="Czech Republic national football team" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q726080" start="50522" end="50528" title="Russia national football team" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340204" start="51055" end="51065" title="Sky Sports" label="Sky Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467940" start="51083" end="51095" title="Super Sunday (British TV programme)" label="Super Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950774" start="51306" end="51312" title="Bowdon, Greater Manchester" label="Bowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851317" start="51330" end="51348" title="Tudor Revival architecture" label="mock Tudor mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641345" start="51352" end="51356" title="Hale, Greater Manchester" label="Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q184775" start="51553" end="51560" title="Ipswich" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021350" start="51683" end="51693" title="Woodbridge, Suffolk" label="Woodbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q73506" start="51884" end="51895" title="Roddy Doyle" label="Roddy Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321079" start="51989" end="52001" title="Eamon Dunphy" label="Eamon Dunphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q163995" start="52063" end="52079" title="Emirates Stadium" label="Emirates Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340204" start="52111" end="52121" title="Sky Sports" label="Sky Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q38726" start="52360" end="52378" title="Labrador Retriever" label="Labrador Retriever"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373020" start="52719" end="52734" title="Saipan incident" label="Saipan incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="52744" end="52775" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="that year&amp;#x27;s FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="52921" end="52940" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q280571" start="53031" end="53038" title="Pickles (dog)" label="Pickles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777764" start="53054" end="53060" title="1966 theft of the Jules Rimet Trophy" label="dug up"/>
<link wikidata="Q517621" start="53072" end="53090" title="Jules Rimet Trophy" label="Jules Rimet Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q297271" start="53136" end="53149" title="Jimmy Greaves" label="Jimmy Greaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q160813" start="53157" end="53171" title="1962 FIFA World Cup" label="1962 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q600480" start="53179" end="53191" title="Henry Winter" label="Henry Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="53365" end="53373" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q126540" start="53405" end="53417" title="Crufts" label="Cruft&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q188304" start="53708" end="53718" title="Sunderland, Tyne and Wear" label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="53878" end="53889" title="Premier League" label="Premiership"/>
<link wikidata="Q38280" start="53966" end="53985" title="German Shepherd Dog" label="German Shepherd Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520619" start="54228" end="54242" title="Irish Examiner" label="Irish Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="54359" end="54367" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q202246" start="54822" end="54831" title="Morrissey" label="Morrissey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3941995" start="54846" end="54856" title="Roy&amp;#x27;s Keen" label="Roy’s Keen"/>
<link wikidata="Q96407897" start="55110" end="55119" title="Ted Lasso" label="Ted Lasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244413" start="55230" end="55277" title="List of people on the postage stamps of Ireland" label="List of people on the postage stamps of Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413263" wikidata="Q16385799" url="?curid=413263" title="Get Shorty">
<text>Get Shorty is a 1990 novel by American novelist Elmore Leonard. In 1995, the novel was adapted into an eponymous film, and in 2017 it was adapted into a television series of the same name.

==Plot summary==

The story is about Ernesto &quot;Chili&quot; Palmer, a small-time loan shark based in Miami. After learning that his operation has been turned over to an old enemy, Ray &quot;Bones&quot; Barboni, Chili flies to Las Vegas in pursuit of Leo Devoe, a dry cleaner who has scammed an airline out of $300,000 in life insurance by faking his death in a plane crash, and who owes a $10,000 gambling debt to Chili&#x27;s employers.

After relieving Leo of the money in Vegas, Chili impulsively gambles it all away. To avoid returning home empty-handed, he goes to the casino&#x27;s security director and is offered the chance to collect from Harry Zimm, a veteran horror film producer based in Los Angeles. Chili, interested in the movie business, heads for Los Angeles to make Zimm pay.

Chili sneaks into the house of &quot;scream queen&quot; actress Karen Flores, where Harry is staying, in the night. After he warns Harry to pay his Las Vegas markers, he explains that he has an idea for a movie. Harry is immediately taken in by Chili&#x27;s charm and his movie premise. For the movie&#x27;s plot, Chili recounts Leo&#x27;s story to Harry in the third person, as if it were a work of fiction. Karen recognizes the premise as a true story and identifies Chili as the unnamed shylock.

The next morning, Harry asks for Chili&#x27;s help in dealing with a movie script for &quot;Mr. Lovejoy&quot; he wants to buy from his writer&#x27;s widow, Doris Saffron, who wants $500,000 for it and he guaranteed a $200,000 investment from Bo Catlett, a local limo driver and drug dealer, to make another movie, &quot;Freaks&quot;. (Harry gambled Bo&#x27;s $200,000 away in the Vegas in hope of making the $500,000 he needed for &quot;Mr. Lovejoy&quot;). In a meeting with Bo, Harry and Chili tell them that their investment in &quot;Freaks&quot; is sound but they are making another movie first. Bo tells them to move the money into the new picture; Harry says he cannot since the new movie deal is &quot;structured&quot;.

Bo is involved in a Mexican drug deal that falls through. He has left the payment in a locker at the Los Angeles airport but the Colombian sent to receive the money, Yayo, does not feel safe unlocking the locker with so many DEA agents nearby. Bo later meets Yayo at the limo garage and after Yayo threatens to tell the DEA who Bo is, Bo shoots him.

Bo soon offers the locker money to Harry as an investment and tells him to send Chili to get the money. Chili senses something wrong, signs out a nearby locker as a test and is taken for questioning by DEA agents. After the questioning, Chili seeks the interests of Michael Weir, a top-tier Hollywood actor to play the lead in &quot;Mr. Lovejoy&quot;.

Ray Barboni, after learning about Leo&#x27;s money from his wife, comes to Los Angeles looking for the money Chili collected from Leo, only to find the key to the locker from the failed drug deal in one of Chili&#x27;s pockets. Thinking Chili has stashed his cash in a locker, he goes to the airport and is busted by drug officials.

In a final showdown with Bo, Chili is held at gunpoint by Catlett. One of Catlett&#x27;s henchman, known as the Bear, arrives just in time to apprehend Catlett, and in the struggle for the gun, Catlett falls through the railing of his sun deck. As Chili recounts his story to Karen and Harry, it shares some comparisons with Mr. Lovejoy.

==Adaptations==
The novel served as the basis for a &quot;Get Shorty&quot; franchise. This included: the 1995 film adaptation; a sequel titled &quot;Be Cool&quot; was released 2005, which was based on the novel of the same name; and the &quot;Get Shorty&quot; TV series was released through Epix from August 2017 – November 2019. Ray Romano and Chris O&#x27;Dowd star in the series. The first season premiered on August 13, 2017.

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1415729" start="16" end="20" title="1990 in literature" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q336519" start="48" end="62" title="Elmore Leonard" label="Elmore Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q753304" start="67" end="71" title="1995 in film" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q261923" start="103" end="117" title="Get Shorty (film)" label="eponymous film"/>
<link wikidata="Q30329333" start="153" end="187" title="Get Shorty (TV series)" label="television series of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975715" start="274" end="284" title="loan shark" label="loan shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="294" end="299" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="419" end="428" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q626608" start="514" end="528" title="life insurance" label="life insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="893" end="904" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q126720961" start="3644" end="3676" title="Get Shorty (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Get Shorty&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q261923" start="3702" end="3717" title="Get Shorty (film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q572903" start="3741" end="3748" title="Be Cool" label="Be Cool"/>
<link wikidata="Q30329333" start="3829" end="3861" title="Get Shorty (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Get Shorty&amp;quot; TV series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383759" start="3883" end="3887" title="Epix" label="Epix"/>
<link wikidata="Q220836" start="3922" end="3932" title="Ray Romano" label="Ray Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q933129" start="3937" end="3954" title="Chris O&amp;#x27;Dowd" label="Chris O&amp;#x27;Dowd"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413264" wikidata="Q2798656" url="?curid=413264" title="Lane End, Buckinghamshire">
<text>Lane End is a village and civil parish in Buckinghamshire, England. It is just south of the M40 from High Wycombe, about west of Booker. The village is twinned with Saint-Pierre-d&#x27;Oléron in France.

The village is situated in the Chilterns, around above sea level, in rolling hills of farmland, beech woods and footpaths.

The civil parish includes the hamlets of Cadmore End, Ditchfield, Moor Common and Moor End, and had a population of 3,583 at the 2001 Census.

==History==
Lane End was historically on the borders of the parishes of Great Marlow, Hambleden, Fingest and West Wycombe, with a small part (Ackhampstead) belonging to the parish of Lewknor in Oxfordshire until 1895. In 1867, the ecclesiastical parish of Lane End was formed from the neighbouring parishes. The village continued to be divided among the four neighbouring civil parishes until 1934, when the parts within Great Marlow, Hambleden and West Wycombe civil parishes were transferred to Fingest (renamed Fingest and Lane End in 1937). In the 1980s the parish of Fingest and Lane End was abolished, and the civil parish of Lane End was formed.

In addition to working the land to provide wheat and barley to the breweries in Marlow and Henley, the inhabitants traditionally manufactured chairs or worked in a local iron foundry.

During the Second World War, King Zog of Albania lived at Parmoor House in Frieth, a hamlet a mile south of Lane End, and with many Albanians living in Lane End, used to attend village events.

According to local legend, the village is haunted by the ghost of a girl in a red dress, who died two weeks before her wedding day in 1766.

== School ==
The main school in Lane End is Lane End Primary School which is situated on three acres of land. It has a total pupil capacity of 210, and teaches 2-11 year olds. The school is defined as a mixed, community school and has an Ofsted rating of Good.

Lane End Primary School&#x27;s facilities include a nursery for children ages 2-4; seven classrooms which are equipped for teaching students throughout the years; a refurbished learning cafe, which was opened on 15 May 2017; natural areas including a pond. Lane End Community Centre is situated on the school grounds.

The Headteacher is Mrs D Williams.

==Churches==
The oldest church in the village is the Methodist church which started as a congregational church, meeting in a chapel in Marlow Road in 1801. Later this was replaced by a chapel, built in 1835, which is now Lane End Studios. A Wesleyan chapel was built in 1866, but the congregation now meets at the Parish Church.

The parish is served by the church of the Holy Trinity in Ditchfield Common, which was designed by John Oldrid Scott and built in 1878, replacing one built in 1832. The arch brace trusses, purlins and wind braces of the roof are from Marlow&#x27;s medieval Manor Hall, built c.1200 and demolished in 1878. These were rescued by Thomas Somers-Cocks of Thames Bank, Marlow, who bought the roof timbers and paid for their carriage to Lane End where they fit Scott&#x27;s nave perfectly.

A Gospel mission hall dating from 1888 at Moor End now meets as the Elim Christian Centre in the centre of the village near the large estate area.
==Amenities==
Lane End Youth and Community Centre is used for activities including classes, lunches for local elderly residents, band practice, and private functions.

The parish council meets at the village hall, whose other uses include dances and The Lane End Players.

The village has two ponds, one on the High Street, the other approximately 80m away on The Row.

Lane End has been twinned with St Pierre d&#x27;Oleron on the West coast of France since 1999. The Lane End Twinning Association promotes the links between the two communities and celebrates its twentieth anniversary in 2019.

==Industry==
Lane End has two small industrial estates where several companies are based includingthe global operation for ELGA LabWater, part of the Veolia Environment group.

==Transport links==
Lane End is connected by infrequent bus routes to the neighbouring town of High Wycombe, and several small nearby villages. Red Eagle Buses operate routes to High Wycombe and Stokenchurch, while Arriva Shires &amp; Essex operate a route to High Wycombe.

== Media ==
In the fantasy police procedural novel &quot;The Hanging Tree&quot; by Ben Aaronovitch, the first confrontation between the Met police wizards and the main villain (the Faceless Man) is described as occurring just outside Lane End 

== Notable residents ==

Thomas Stapleton, an English paediatrician, retired to The Foundry Cottage in the village, upon his return to England after working in Australia since 1960; he died there in 2007. He is commemorated by a memorial bench there, with a plaque noting that he &quot;Helped improve the health of children around the world&quot;, in English and Chinese.

==References==
==External links==
*Lane End Parish Council website
*Lane End Village
*Lane End Players
*Lane End Conservation Group (LECG)
*Lane End Elim Christian Centre
*Lane End Conference Centre
*Lane End Twinning Association
*Lane End Holy Trinity Church</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2798656" start="0" end="8" title="Lane End, Buckinghamshire" label="Lane End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="26" end="38" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="42" end="57" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541030" start="92" end="95" title="M40 motorway" label="M40"/>
<link wikidata="Q64116" start="101" end="113" title="High Wycombe" label="High Wycombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943173" start="129" end="135" title="Booker, Buckinghamshire" label="Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q694017" start="165" end="191" title="Saint-Pierre-d&amp;#x27;Oléron" label="Saint-Pierre-d&amp;#x27;Oléron"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="195" end="201" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q19849" start="235" end="244" title="Chiltern Hills" label="Chilterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016549" start="369" end="380" title="Cadmore End" label="Cadmore End"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="457" end="468" title="2001 United Kingdom census" label="2001 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914721" start="543" end="555" title="Great Marlow" label="Great Marlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850580" start="557" end="566" title="Hambleden" label="Hambleden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450307" start="568" end="575" title="Fingest" label="Fingest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366839" start="580" end="592" title="West Wycombe" label="West Wycombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674263" start="613" end="625" title="Ackhampstead" label="Ackhampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311884" start="654" end="661" title="Lewknor" label="Lewknor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="665" end="676" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="702" end="723" title="ecclesiastical parish" label="ecclesiastical parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1321" end="1337" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q60699" start="1339" end="1347" title="King Zog" label="King Zog"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1689" end="1712" title="Lane end primary school" label="Lane End Primary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079781" start="1883" end="1889" title="Ofsted" label="Ofsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251206" start="2691" end="2708" title="John Oldrid Scott" label="John Oldrid Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794084" start="2920" end="2939" title="Thomas Somers-Cocks" label="Thomas Somers-Cocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25112003" start="3944" end="3957" title="ELGA LabWater" label="ELGA LabWater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632461" start="3971" end="3977" title="Veolia" label="Veolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796017" start="4213" end="4238" title="Arriva Shires &amp;amp; Essex" label="Arriva Shires &amp;amp; Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q76283894" start="4543" end="4559" title="Thomas Stapleton (paediatrician)" label="Thomas Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140622" start="4747" end="4761" title="memorial bench" label="memorial bench"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413271" wikidata="Q311029" url="?curid=413271" title="Alf Ramsey">
<text>Sir Alfred Ernest Ramsey (22 January 1920 – 28 April 1999) was an English football player and manager. As a player, he represented the England national team and captained the side, but he is best known for his time as England manager from 1963 to 1974, which included guiding them to victory in the 1966 FIFA World Cup. Knighted in 1967 in recognition of the World Cup win, Ramsey also managed his country to third place in the 1968 European Championship and the quarter-finals of the 1970 World Cup and the 1972 European Championship. As a player, Ramsey was a defender and a member of England&#x27;s 1950 World Cup squad.

Ramsey was born and raised in a quiet Essex village. He showed sporting promise from an early age and, after serving in the British Army during the Second World War, embarked on a football career, primarily as a right-back. He was considered a rather slow but accomplished player with a tremendous grasp of the tactical side of the game. Nicknamed &quot;The General&quot;, he played for England 32 times between 1948 and 1953, captaining the side three times, scoring three times and appearing in the 1950 World Cup. He played his club football for Southampton and Tottenham Hotspur and was part of the Tottenham side that won the English League championship in the 1950–51 season.

Ramsey retired from playing aged 35 to become the manager of Ipswich Town, then in the third tier of English football. Ipswich rose through the divisions over the next six years, winning the Third Division South in 1956–57 and the Second Division in 1960–61. In the 1961–62 season, Ipswich&#x27;s first-ever campaign in the top division, Ramsey&#x27;s team defied expectations to become champions of England. Ramsey took charge of the England team a year later. In a distinct break with common practice of the day, he used a narrow formation that led to his England side being dubbed &quot;The Wingless Wonders&quot;. England&#x27;s World Cup victory at Wembley in 1966 made Ramsey a national hero, though he had his critics, both at the time and since. He lost the England job acrimoniously, following the team&#x27;s failure to qualify for the 1974 World Cup.

After managing England, Ramsey briefly held football-related roles at Birmingham City and Panathinaikos, before retiring in 1979–80. He led a somewhat reclusive life in Ipswich over the next two decades and died in 1999, aged 79. A statue of Ramsey was dedicated at the reconstructed Wembley Stadium in 2009, and various honours have been afforded to him in Ipswich. He is the first person to have been inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame twice: an inaugural inductee in 2002, in recognition of his achievements as a manager, and admitted again in 2010 for his achievements as a player. He remains widely regarded as one of British football&#x27;s great managers ever. In 2022, &quot;FourFourTwo&quot; ranked him at No. 26 on its special list of the Top 100 football managers of all time.
==Early life==

===Dagenham===

Alfred Ernest Ramsey was born on 22 January 1920 at 6 Parrish Cottages, Halbutt Street in Dagenham, which was then an agrarian village in Essex, about east of central London. He was the third of five children, four boys and a girl, born to Herbert Ramsey, a manual labourer who worked a smallholding, kept pigs and drove a horse-drawn dustcart, and his wife Florence (&quot;née&quot; Bixby). Parrish Cottages lacked hot running water and electricity, and the only toilet was outside. Such conditions were typical of Dagenham during this period, although Ramsey&#x27;s street gradually became something of an anachronism as he grew up. From 1921, London County Council transformed the area into the Becontree estate, a vast urban community that by 1934 was home to 120,000 people and the Ford Dagenham automobile factory. Parrish Cottages remained largely untouched: electricity was not installed until the 1950s, and even then, only with the reluctant approval of Ramsey&#x27;s mother, who, according to a neighbour, was frightened of it. In the recollection of a childhood contemporary, Phil Cairns, the Ramsey house was &quot;little more than a wooden hut&quot;.

The young Alf Ramsey was described by his friend Fred Tibble as &quot;a very quiet boy who really loved sport&quot;. In his 1952 autobiography &quot;Talking Football&quot;, Ramsey described &quot;liv[ing] for the open air from the moment I could toddle&quot;, spending hours each day in the meadow behind the family cottage, playing ball games with his brothers. He learned skills such as ball control, kicking and heading with a tennis ball. From the age of five, Ramsey attended Becontree Heath School, which had a roll of about 200 pupils aged from four to fourteen. He and his brothers had to walk two hours from their house to get there, and passed a ball between each other on the way to break the monotony. Ramsey was not especially popular socially, nor particularly diligent as a student, but he excelled in sports. In addition to football, he played cricket to a high standard and represented the school in the high jump, the long jump, and both the 100-yard and 200-yard dash. Despite his diminutive stature, he also enjoyed boxing until an incident when he was 10 years old, when a much larger opponent—&quot;as wide as I was tall&quot; in Ramsey&#x27;s recollection—gave him a severe beating in a school tournament. Ramsey carried a noticeable scar above his mouth, a memento of this fight, for the rest of his life.

&quot;He was very withdrawn, almost surly&quot;, Cairns recalled, &quot;but he became animated on the football field&quot;. Ramsey was selected to play for Becontree Heath School when he was only seven years old, playing at inside-left alongside boys as old as fourteen; his nine-year-old brother Len was at inside-right. Alf&#x27;s selection for the school team prompted the purchase of his first pair of football boots. Two years later, aged nine, he became captain of the school team. By this point, he had switched to playing at centre-half—the key position of the &quot;WM&quot; formation then favoured in British football, between the full-backs and the forwards. His main strength was generally perceived to be his extremely accurate passing; his chief shortcoming was a lack of pace, for which Ramsey compensated by learning to read the game and position himself well. Ramsey played for teams representing the schools of Dagenham and Essex County, respectively, and trialled unsuccessfully for the London schools team while at Becontree. While he was at school, his brother Albert took him to see his first Football League match, watching their favourite team, West Ham United, play against Arsenal. This was the only senior match Alf would attend before playing in them himself. He later wrote that his main recollection of it was the performance of one of the Arsenal forwards, the Scotland international Alex James.

On leaving school in 1934, the 14-year-old Ramsey tried to get a job at the Ford plant, then told his family he intended to become a greengrocer. To that end he became an apprentice at a local branch of the Co-op, delivering groceries on a bicycle. The manual work helped to bulk up Ramsey&#x27;s physique, but he found himself unable to play organised football because he had to work on Saturday afternoons. After a two-year hiatus, he returned to the game when he joined Five Elms, a newly formed amateur club whose matches on Thursdays fitted with his work schedule. About a year later, during the 1937–38 season, Ramsey was spotted by Ned Liddell, a scout from Portsmouth, then a well-established top-flight club. Liddell offered a contract as an amateur. Rather than signing on the spot, Ramsey asked to take the forms home to examine first; he signed them that night and sent them to Portsmouth by post. Much to Ramsey&#x27;s disappointment, Portsmouth did not contact him again. He spent the next two years working at the Co-op while playing cricket in the summer and football in the winter.

===Second World War===

====Military service====

After the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, Ramsey was conscripted into the British Army on 24 June 1940. He was assigned to the Duke of Cornwall&#x27;s Light Infantry and underwent his initial training in Truro, where he and other recruits were housed in a hotel commandeered by the army. Ramsey found the experience a thrilling adventure. &quot;Until I travelled to Cornwall, the longest journey I had undertaken was a trip to Brighton by train&quot;, he recalled. &quot;It was the first time I had ever been into a hotel! Even with us sleeping twelve to a room, on straw mattresses, could not end for me the awe of living in a swagger hotel.&quot; &quot;That set the tone for Alf&#x27;s war&quot;, Leo McKinstry suggests in his 2010 biography; attached to his regiment&#x27;s 6th Battalion, Ramsey spent the entire war in Britain on home defence duties. The training was still physically demanding, and in Ramsey&#x27;s words, made him &quot;a fitter young fellow than when I reported for duty as a grocery apprentice from Dagenham.&quot;

Writing in 1952, Ramsey would call joining the army &quot;one of the greatest things which ever happened to me&quot;, adding &quot;I learnt, in a few weeks, more about life in general than I had picked up in years at home.&quot; Military life taught Ramsey about discipline and leadership, and strengthened his social skills: &quot;I have never been very good at mixing with people but you have to in the army or else you are in trouble&quot;, the journalist Nigel Clarke recalled him saying. Ramsey rose to be a company quartermaster sergeant in an anti-aircraft unit.

====Wartime football====
Military service also allowed Ramsey to play football more regularly, and at a higher standard than before. In late 1940 he was posted to St Austell, on the south coast of Cornwall, where he manned beach defences and became captain of the battalion football team, playing at centre-half or centre-forward as circumstances dictated. After three years in various seaside postings, Ramsey was, in 1943, moved to Barton Stacey in Hampshire, where he came under the command of a Colonel Fletcher, himself an accomplished footballer. Ramsey&#x27;s battalion team by this time featured players from a number of Football League clubs, including the Brentford forward Len Townsend and Arsenal&#x27;s Cyril Hodges. Ramsey played at centre-half for his battalion team as Southampton defeated them 10–3 at the Dell in a pre-season friendly on 21 August 1943, and a week later played again as the battalion took on Southampton&#x27;s reserve team. The soldiers won the second match 4–1.
On 8 October 1943, Colonel Fletcher called Ramsey to his office to inform him that Southampton needed a centre-half for their first-team match away to Luton Town the next day and had enquired about the sergeant&#x27;s availability. The 23-year-old Ramsey was cautious, saying he lacked experience, but said he would &quot;give it a try&quot; when the colonel suggested that playing might set him on the way to a professional football career. The next day, while en route to Luton by train, Ramsey signed for Southampton as an amateur, making his debut for the club at Luton&#x27;s Kenilworth Road ground. Ramsey gave away a penalty kick late in the game with Southampton 2–1 ahead, allowing Luton to equalise, but Southampton managed to win 3–2. He played in three more matches for the team during the 1943–44 season before his battalion&#x27;s posting to County Durham forced his absence. After his unit returned to the south coast at the start of the 1944–45 season, Ramsey played in a trial match at Southampton, and performed well enough that the club offered a professional contract on wages of £2 per match. Ramsey was still uncertain about pursuing a football career; he signed the contract only after Southampton assured him that he could leave at the end of the season if he wished.

Ramsey was injured during the 1944–45 pre-season, ironically while playing against Southampton for his battalion team, so he did not make his first appearance as a professional until December. During the match, against Arsenal at White Hart Lane, Ramsey played centre-half opposite the formidable Arsenal centre-forward Ted Drake and according to McKinstry &quot;had the best game of his career to date&quot;. Drake scored twice, but Ramsey still felt that he had proven his ability to play league football. On 3 March 1945, against Luton Town at the Dell, Ramsey was switched to inside-left because of injuries elsewhere in the team; he scored four goals in a 12–3 Southampton win. The &quot;Southern Daily Echo&quot; reported, &quot;he can certainly hammer a ball&quot;. Ramsey finished the season having made 11 League South appearances.

Ramsey remained in the army during 1945–46, the first football season after the war. Starting as a centre-forward, he scored two goals in each of Southampton&#x27;s opening two games, then a hat-trick in a 6–2 victory at Newport County on 6 October 1945. He played in 13 League South matches before military commitments again intervened—in December 1945 he was deployed to Mandatory Palestine, where he accepted an invitation to captain a football team representing the British garrison. This side included Arthur Rowley, who later scored hundreds of goals for Leicester City and Shrewsbury Town, and the future Scotland international forward Jimmy Mason. Ramsey returned to England in June 1946 to find himself entertaining overtures from both the new Southampton manager Bill Dodgin and the Dagenham Co-op, the latter of which offered Ramsey his pre-war job back. Ramsey initially turned Southampton down but accepted after the club offered better terms: £6 per week during the summer, £7 in winter and £8 if he was selected for the league team. He was formally discharged from the army soon after.

==Playing career==

===Southampton===

The regular Football League restarted in time for the 1946–47 season. Ramsey moved into club-owned lodgings in Southampton with a close friend from the army, Alf Freeman, an inside-forward who had also signed for the club. Ramsey started the season in the reserve team, selected at centre-forward, and scored in each of the first three games. After five matches, Dodgin and the club trainer Sydney Cann made a decision that changed the course of Ramsey&#x27;s professional playing career: deciding that neither centre-half nor centre-forward truly suited him, they moved him to right-back. McKinstry calls this &quot;exactly the right place for Alf&quot;, citing Ramsey&#x27;s tactical knowledge and fine passing. A close master-and-pupil relationship developed between Ramsey and Cann, who had played at full-back for Torquay United, Manchester City and Charlton Athletic. During training sessions, the two had long discussions about tactics and individual techniques. wanted to learn about the game from top to bottom&quot;, Cann recalled; &quot;I have never known anyone with the same quickness of learning as Alf Ramsey. He would never accept anything on its face value ... He was the type of player who was a manager&#x27;s dream because you could talk about a decision and he would accept it and there it was, in his game.&quot;

Ramsey made his full league debut on 26 October 1946, in a Second Division match against Plymouth Argyle at the Dell, replacing the injured regular right-back Bill Ellerington. The nervous Ramsey was helped through the match by the calm reassurance and guidance of the experienced Southampton captain Bill Rochford, the team&#x27;s other full-back. Southampton won 5–1, their joint-biggest win of the 1946–47 season, but Ramsey found the pace of the regular peacetime Football League a drastic step-up. &quot;Their reactions to moves were so speedy they had completed a pass, for instance, when I was still thinking things over&quot;, he later wrote. After one more game, Ellerington was reinstated and Ramsey went back to the reserves. Ramsey was kept out of the first team until January 1947, when Ellerington was injured again shortly before an away match against Newcastle United. Southampton lost 3–1, but Ramsey was generally considered to have acquitted himself well. He kept his place for the rest of the season, gradually growing in confidence. Dodgin praised Ramsey in a February 1947 interview as a &quot;player who thinks football, talks football and lives football&quot;.
A formative experience for Ramsey during his first peacetime season was playing for Southampton against Manchester City in April 1947. Playing at full-back for City was the 38-year-old Sam Barkas, a former England international, near the end of his last season. Ramsey was greatly impressed by Barkas&#x27;s positional sense and accurate passing, and adopted him as a role model. The following season, 1947–48, Ramsey firmly established himself ahead of Ellerington in the Southampton team, and was the only player at the club to appear in all 42 League matches.

The consensus on Ramsey&#x27;s playing style among his fellow professionals was that he was rather slow, but possessed an excellent positional sense, read the game better than most, and distributed the ball exceptionally well for a defender. Taking after his Southampton captain Bill Rochford, he preferred to play the ball out of defence rather than simply clearing it as quickly as possible. He became a specialist penalty taker due to his coolness and ability to anticipate the goalkeeper. Ted Bates, one of Ramsey&#x27;s Southampton teammates, described him as &quot;lacking both height and speed&quot;, but credited him with a &quot;razor-sharp brain ... he would never get into a situation that exposed him.&quot;

Southampton failed to win promotion during the 1947–48 season, finishing third behind Birmingham City and Newcastle United, but it was still a successful campaign for them and by its end Ramsey had become one of the club&#x27;s main players, taking on the captain&#x27;s role occasionally. In May 1948, he was selected as part of a 16-man England squad to tour Switzerland and Italy; the flight to Geneva was his first time in an aeroplane. On his return from international duty, he flew to São Paulo to join the rest of the Southampton team on a club tour of Brazil. Southampton had lost every game in Brazil so far, and spirits were low. Ramsey restored morale and contributed to a new plan to counter the Brazilian tactics, which were much more fluid than those favoured by English teams of the time. Ramsey suggested that Southampton could use long diagonal passes to exploit the gaps the Brazilian defenders left behind them as they ran upfield to attack. McKinstry notes the similarity of this thinking to some of the tactics Ramsey later used as manager of Ipswich Town. Southampton beat Corinthians 2–1 in their next game before ending the tour with a draw and a defeat. Ramsey was impressed by the South Americans&#x27; footballing ability, but not by the conduct of their players, pressmen, administrators or fans; McKinstry considers the experience to have &quot;fed Alf&#x27;s nascent xenophobia&quot;.

By the middle of the 1948–49 season Ramsey had made his first appearance for the England national team and made a total of 90 league and 6 FA Cup appearances for Southampton, scoring eight goals. He made what turned out to be his final competitive appearance for Southampton on 8 January 1949, in a 2–1 away defeat to Sheffield Wednesday. In a friendly away at Plymouth Argyle a week later, he slipped as he went into a tackle and injured his knee. Dodgin brought Bill Ellerington back into the side to replace Ramsey while he recovered, and Ellerington performed strongly as Southampton won eight and drew two of the next 10 matches. Dodgin told Ramsey that, given Ellerington&#x27;s good form, Ramsey was &quot;going to find it very hard&quot; to regain his place in the team. Ramsey, not yet in his 30s, was infuriated and considered this a direct insult by Dodgin: he subsequently asked Southampton to place him on the transfer list on 7 March 1949. He obsessed about Dodgin&#x27;s comment. &quot;The world did indeed appear a dark and unfriendly place&quot;, he later said; &quot;... for one fleeting moment I seriously contemplated quitting football.&quot;

Ramsey&#x27;s opinion that Dodgin had treated him unfairly was not shared by the other Southampton players, who respected Ellerington as a player of comparable ability. According to the wing-half Joe Mallett, Ramsey was also motivated to leave by a dressing-room row with his captain Bill Rochford at half-time during that final league match against Sheffield Wednesday: one of the Sheffield Wednesday goals was blamed on Ramsey&#x27;s failure to play an opposing winger offside. The Southampton chairman and board tried to persuade Ramsey to stay, but his mind was made up—he told them that if he played in the reserve team, it would hinder his chances of playing internationally. Liverpool, Luton Town and Burnley were among the clubs who expressed interest in buying him, but by the time of the transfer deadline on 16 March, only Sheffield Wednesday had made an official bid. Tottenham Hotspur came in with a last-minute offer, but there was no time for the transfer to go through, and Ramsey was forced to stay at Southampton for the rest of the season. On 15 May 1949, the new Tottenham manager Arthur Rowe revived the offer, and signed Ramsey in a part-exchange deal for £4,500 and Wales international winger Ernie Jones—the transfer was widely reported as being worth £21,000, then a record for Tottenham.

===Tottenham Hotspur===

====Push-and-run; champions of England====
A good relationship quickly developed between Ramsey and his new manager, who found that they shared similar personalities and views on tactics. Like Ramsey, Rowe believed in a progressive, fast-moving style of play. These ideas evolved into &quot;push-and-run&quot;, a playing style unlike anything previously attempted in British football, based around quick passing. Tottenham pioneered the style to good effect—a Spurs player moving forward would lay the ball off to a teammate, then run past the opposing defender to receive an immediate return pass. &quot;Under Rowe, Alf became far more than a defender&quot;, comments McKinstry. Rowe tasked him with instigating attacks and based much of the Tottenham game plan around Ramsey&#x27;s accurate passing.
Tottenham started the 1949–50 season strongly and soon topped the Second Division: between August 1949 and January 1950 they did not lose in 22 matches. Ramsey was an essential part of the team, having made the right-back position his own; he built effective partnerships with several players, including the wing-half Bill Nicholson, the goalkeeper Ted Ditchburn and the inside-right Sonny Walters. Ramsey greatly appreciated the licence Rowe gave him to move forward and attack and, in November 1949, in an away match against Grimsby Town, he scored what is generally considered the best goal of his career. Shortly after half-time, he intercepted a long pass near the halfway line and, after running 40 yards and dribbling past three Grimsby defenders, smashed the ball past the advancing goalkeeper. The reporter for &quot;The Enfield Gazette&quot; wrote that the goal would &quot;never be forgotten by those privileged to be present&quot;. Tottenham went on to win the match 3–2.

Spurs won the 1949–50 Second Division title with seven games to spare, scoring more goals and conceding fewer than any of their rivals, and were promoted to the First Division for the following season. In August 1950, shortly before Tottenham embarked on their first top-flight season since they had been relegated at the end of the 1934–35 campaign, Rowe told the club&#x27;s annual meeting: &quot;As much as anything else, I would rate our good time last year to the acquisition of Alf Ramsey.&quot; After an uncertain start to the 1950–51 season, Spurs quickly recovered their form of the previous year and by Christmas were top of the table. Ramsey continued to play a key role, according to McKinstry playing &quot;the best football of his life&quot;: &quot;He was the master of strategy, the lynchpin of a side that built its attacks from the back, the scheming practitioner who put Rowe&#x27;s plans into action.&quot; Ramsey&#x27;s understanding of the game and authority on and off the field led to his teammates nicknaming him &quot;The General&quot;. On 28 April 1951, with a 1–0 home victory over Sheffield Wednesday, Tottenham were crowned champions of England only a year after promotion. &quot;I think fortune shone upon me very handsomely during the 1950–51 season&quot;, Ramsey remarked in &quot;Talking Football&quot;—&quot;After all, I was a member of one of the finest club teams in years&quot;.

====Semi-final error; club captain====

Spurs followed their title win with a second-place finish in the 1951–52 season, but then went into a sharp decline, finishing 10th in 1952–53 and 16th in 1953–54. The slump was partly because the players who had formed the spine of the championship-winning side were losing their fitness—push-and-run required players of exceptional physical condition, and Ramsey, Ron Burgess, Nicholson, and others were all past 30. Ramsey was furthermore affected by a recurring abdominal injury. His preference for ball play rather than simply clearing it became unpopular among sections of Tottenham&#x27;s support. A particularly low ebb came in the 1952–53 FA Cup semi-final, against Blackpool at Villa Park on 21 March 1953. Ramsey had played well, keeping the Blackpool left-winger Bill Perry quiet, and with only a minute to spare the game was finely balanced at 1–1. Ramsey then made a fatal error. Having easily beaten Perry to a cross-field pass from a free-kick, he set himself to slide the ball back to the goalkeeper Ditchburn in a situation when most defenders would have cleared it. The ball bounced off Ramsey&#x27;s knee and ran away from him, allowing Blackpool forward Jackie Mudie to score. Blackpool won 2–1, and went on to win what is commonly referred to as the &quot;Matthews Final&quot;.
Ramsey was vilified by the fans and press after the semi-final, with one Spurs director saying: &quot;Ramsey stupidly gave the goal away. He could have easily kicked the ball out of play.&quot; Ramsey was publicly contrite—&quot;I can only say I am terribly sorry&quot;, he told the &quot;Daily Express&quot;—but in the Tottenham dressing room he analysed the move that had led to Mudie&#x27;s goal and attempted to identify others as being at fault. This notwithstanding, &quot;for all his reluctance to accept the blame in front of his colleagues, Alf knew he had made a terrible error&quot;, McKinstry writes. The error haunted him profoundly. It began to be speculated during the 1953–54 season that he might return to Southampton, who had been relegated to the Third Division South, in a role combining playing duties with coaching. He was not yet finished as a Spurs player, though; indeed, in 1954, after Burgess left to join Swansea Town, he was appointed club captain.

Despite their successful collaboration on the pitch, a strong personal rivalry developed between Ramsey and Nicholson, partly because both liked the idea of staying on at Tottenham in a coaching role after retiring. Rowe made clear to Ramsey that he wanted him to do so, but unfortunately for him, Rowe stepped down in February 1955, citing health issues. Another challenge to Ramsey&#x27;s position at Tottenham came in the form of Danny Blanchflower, a Northern Ireland international wing-half signed from Aston Villa to replace Nicholson. Blanchflower was a more attacking player than Nicholson and thus did not provide the necessary cover for Ramsey to advance upfield; Ramsey also resented the idea that Blanchflower might supplant him as Tottenham&#x27;s main strategist.

Rowe&#x27;s illness and Blanchflower&#x27;s arrival together signalled the end of Ramsey&#x27;s playing career. Ramsey missed matches during the 1954–55 season through injury, and in April 1955 suffered what he called &quot;a terrible roasting&quot; at the hands of the Leicester City winger Derek Hogg. After Tottenham ended the season in 16th place, Rowe retired permanently; his deputy Jimmy Anderson took over and appointed Nicholson to his coaching staff. When Ramsey was omitted from a post-season tour of Hungary, despite still being club captain, he realised that his time at Tottenham had come to an end. He had played a total of 250 competitive games for Tottenham in all competitions, across six seasons. &quot;I was 35 years old and obviously concerned about my future&quot;, he later wrote. &quot;I really didn&#x27;t know what was going to happen to me. I knew my days as a player were numbered, and there was only one way things could go for me in this respect — downhill.&quot;

===England international===
Ramsey&#x27;s first taste of playing as an international had come while he was at Southampton, when he played for England B against Switzerland B in May 1948. He made his full England debut in December that year, in a 6–0 win over Switzerland at Highbury. He briefly lost his England place to his Southampton teammate Bill Ellerington, but following strong performances for Tottenham, he returned in England&#x27;s 2–0 home win over Italy on 30 November 1949. Ramsey&#x27;s introduction to the England set-up coincided with the team&#x27;s first ever World Cup campaign, the British Home Nations having rejoined football&#x27;s world governing body FIFA in 1946 after two decades&#x27; absence, therefore being excluded from the first three World Cup tournaments in the 1930s. The Football Association (FA) in London had moved on little since the modern game&#x27;s genesis in the late 19th century, yet remained convinced that English football and the England team were the finest in the world — so superior, indeed, that entering the World Cup was hardly necessary. The evidence presented for this was that England had never lost at home to any team from outside the British Isles. The team was picked by a panel of eight FA selectors, with the role of England manager, held by Walter Winterbottom, combined with that of FA director of coaching.

England&#x27;s selection of Ramsey and three of his Tottenham teammates—Ditchburn, Nicholson and forward Eddie Baily—for the 1950 World Cup in Brazil made them the first Tottenham players ever at a World Cup. England were among the favourites to win the tournament, largely because of their reputation. The team had little preparation, arriving in Brazil only a week before their first game. Ramsey found the South American conditions difficult, noting that &quot;at the conclusion of even an easy kick-around, I felt infinitely more tired than after a hectic league match at home.&quot; Despite this, an England team including Ramsey won their opening match in Rio de Janeiro, against Chile, 2–0.
England&#x27;s next match pitted them against the United States—an opponent they were expected to easily overcome—at the Estádio Independência in Belo Horizonte, inland. The selectors again picked Ramsey, but left star winger Stanley Matthews out on the grounds that England could beat the Americans without him, ignoring Winterbottom&#x27;s protests. England dominated the first half. &quot;I&#x27;m not making excuses when I say that in the first 45 minutes we had a year&#x27;s bad luck&quot;, Ramsey wrote in 1952. &quot;Shots which appeared certain to score missed by the width of a coat of paint. The American goalkeeper, much to his astonishment, found himself stopping the ball with his body, and on occasions his face, without really knowing what it was all about.&quot; The US grabbed a shock lead on 37 minutes when a long shot towards England&#x27;s penalty area flew into the net off the head of American forward Joe Gaetjens.

The score remained 1–0 at half-time, and it was the same story in the second half: England missed a multitude of easy chances, hit the woodwork numerous times and had one effort that appeared to cross the line not given. The England captain Billy Wright recalled that &quot;even Alf Ramsey, who used to be expressionless throughout a game, threw up his arms and looked to the sky when a perfect free kick was somehow saved by their unorthodox keeper&quot;. No England goal came—the United States won 1–0 in what entered English football history as the national team&#x27;s most embarrassing upset. Ramsey, who was fiercely patriotic, took the result as an acute personal humiliation. One journalist recalled that on hearing the match mentioned years later, &quot;his face creased and he looked like a man who had been jabbed in an unhealed wound&quot;. England could remain in the competition if they beat Spain in their last group game, but a 1–0 defeat saw them crash out.

Despite this indifferent performance, the English football establishment made no changes in policy, maintaining that England remained the best in the world and had simply fallen victim to bad luck in Brazil. Ramsey remained a central figure in the team, and captained his country against Wales on 15 November 1950 after Wright was left out due to poor form. Ramsey also captained England in a 2–2 draw against Yugoslavia a week later—the first time a team from outside the British Isles had played away against England and not lost. A year later, on 28 November 1951, England&#x27;s unbeaten home record against overseas sides was challenged by Austria, then one of the most formidable attacking teams in Europe. The Austrians led 1–0 with 25 minutes to play but were pegged back to 1–1 when Ramsey scored a penalty. The match finished 2–2—England&#x27;s unbeaten home record survived. The &quot;Daily Mail&quot; dubbed Ramsey England&#x27;s &quot;ice-cool hero&quot;; he himself identified the Austria match in &quot;Talking Football&quot; as &quot;my greatest international&quot;.

Ramsey remained in the England team throughout 1952, including in England&#x27;s 3–2 win over Austria in Vienna on 25 May. After 29 consecutive international appearances, he was left out of the squad for a match against Wales in October 1953 because of injury. He was reinstated for the following match later that month against a Rest of the World XI, and scored his second international goal to secure a 4–4 draw. His last appearance for England came on 25 November 1953, in what the British press dubbed the &quot;Match of the Century&quot;—England against the 1952 Olympic champions Hungary, the so-called &quot;Golden Team&quot; or &quot;Magical Magyars&quot;, at Wembley Stadium.

What British observers had forecast as a clash between two of world football&#x27;s greatest powers turned into a walkover, as England were beaten easily. The unbeaten home record was obliterated, along with any pretence that England had nothing to learn from overseas rivals — they were totally outplayed by the fluid, fast-paced game of the Hungarians, which McKinstry comments was not dissimilar to Tottenham&#x27;s push-and-run. Ramsey scored a penalty, his third and final international goal, but Hungary, who had scored after less than a minute, won 6–3. He refused to accept that England had been outclassed, saying: &quot;Four of those goals came from outside the penalty area. We should never have lost.&quot; Ramsey never played for England again, having won a total of 32 caps, scored three goals (all penalties), and captained his country three times.

==Managerial career==

===Ipswich Town===
Ramsey had made up his mind that he wanted to remain in football as a coach, but he had no relevant qualifications or managerial experience, bar a part-time coaching spell at London League club Eton Manor. While he spent the 1955 off-season coaching in Southern Rhodesia, Ipswich Town of the Third Division South received permission from Anderson to speak to Ramsey about signing him as player-manager. When Ramsey met the Ipswich hierarchy on his return from Africa, he refused to combine management with playing. &quot;I told them I would only concentrate on one job&quot;, Ramsey later said; &quot;it would be impossible to play with the players I would be coaching.&quot; This settled, Ipswich announced Ramsey&#x27;s appointment as manager on 9 August 1955. Some of those who knew Ramsey had strong opinions about how he would manage. Wilf Grant, a former Southampton teammate of Ramsey&#x27;s who was now on the training staff at Ipswich, commented: &quot;He&#x27;ll be good, but he will be the boss.&quot; Billy Wright, Ramsey&#x27;s England teammate commented, &quot;In appointing Alf to become their manager Ipswich Town paid a tremendous tribute to intelligent football—and footballers who think!&quot;

Ramsey joined Ipswich just after the club&#x27;s relegation from the Second Division at the end of the 1954–55 season, the team&#x27;s only year above the third tier up to that point. To quote McKinstry, Ipswich had neither &quot;glittering pedigree or status&quot; nor &quot;strong footballing tradition&quot;. The club had joined the Football League only in 1938, and its home ground at Portman Road was small and basic. One of the team&#x27;s advantages was the patronage of the aristocratic Cobbold brewing family, to which the chairman and much of the club hierarchy belonged. &quot;I had no plan for Ipswich when I went there&quot;, Ramsey later said. &quot;In fact, the first thing I had to do was to forget my set ideas on how football ought to be played. My experience had been in the First Division. I soon found that what I faced at Ipswich was very different.&quot; Ramsey kept most of the training staff hired by his predecessor Scott Duncan, who had stepped down after eighteen years as Ipswich manager. Duncan stayed on as club secretary, meaning that Ramsey could concentrate on playing matters, leaving administration to Duncan.

A relegated side with a number of players of &quot;mature age&quot;, Ipswich were a tricky proposition for a new manager, especially as there was &quot;no money&quot; to improve the squad, so Ramsey worked to make the most of whatever talent he had inherited. He made tactical innovations, noticed by the local newspaper: as early as his first game in charge, he had his team taking three distinct styles of corner kick, in a game where the side put on &quot;as poor a performance as one can recollect at Portman Road&quot;. In Ramsey&#x27;s first season as manager, he guided the club to third place in the Third Division South, with Ipswich scoring 106 goals in the 46 league games. During Ramsey&#x27;s second season in charge, he led the club to the division title, Ipswich again scoring in excess of 100 goals. It was Ipswich&#x27;s second title at that level, and it meant promotion to the Second Division, and for the following three seasons, Ipswich managed to achieve mid-table finishes.

In the 1960–61 season, Ramsey guided Ipswich to the Second Division title and into the top flight for the first time in the club&#x27;s history. The success was built upon the prowess of Ray Crawford, the division&#x27;s top goalscorer with 39. The following season, Ramsey led his side to become champions of England in their debut season at the top level. The side had been tipped by many contemporary football pundits and journalists for relegation at the start of the season, making the achievement all the more remarkable. Ramsey created a strong side based on a resolute defence and two strikers, Ray Crawford and Ted Phillips, who between them scored more than 60 goals. The key to the side was considered to be left-winger, Jimmy Leadbetter whom Ramsey moved into a deep lying, left of centre midfielder.

The following season started poorly for the league champions: Ramsey&#x27;s former teammate Bill Nicholson changed the formation of his Spurs team to counter Ipswich in the 1962 FA Charity Shield curtain-raiser to the 1962–63 season, a game which Tottenham won 5–1. The same season, Ramsey oversaw Ipswich&#x27;s short-lived inaugural European campaign in the 1962–63 European Cup. Despite despatching Maltese club, Floriana, 14–1 on aggregate, Ipswich lost 4–2 on aggregate in the second round to the eventual winners A.C. Milan, although Ipswich had won the home leg 2–1. In the league, Ipswich finished 17th, just four points above the relegation zone, placing them among the worst-performing defending champions in the English top-flight. Not long into the season, on 25 October 1962, Ramsey agreed to take charge of the England national team, commencing 1 May 1963. He left Ipswich after eight seasons, having guided them from the Third Division South to the top of English football. After Ramsey&#x27;s departure, Ipswich&#x27;s performances declined and, two years after winning the league title, they dropped back into the Second Division.

===England===
England lost to Brazil in the quarter-final of the 1962 World Cup in Chile and, being under attack from the British press, manager Walter Winterbottom resigned five months later. Although Ramsey&#x27;s position as England manager was confirmed in October 1962, he formally took charge in May 1963, because Ramsey felt it would be wrong to walk out on Ipswich, who were struggling at the time. &quot;The Times&quot; reported that Ramsey had taken on &quot;a vulnerable position&quot; out of duty, but that he had delayed taking up his role due to Ipswich being &quot;engaged in the European Cup but also facing a struggle—through injuries and other factors—at the wrong end of the League table&quot;, with hope expressed that he would take up the reins &quot;from the new year&quot;. When Ramsey took over as manager, he demanded complete control over squad selections: previously Winterbottom had been manager, but selections and other decisions were often carried out by board committees. Ramsey&#x27;s appointment and his appropriation of all such responsibilities led to him being referred to as &quot;England&#x27;s first proper manager&quot;.

On appointment, Ramsey immediately caused a stir when he predicted &quot;we will win the World Cup&quot;, which was to be hosted in England in 1966. One of Ramsey&#x27;s first actions as England manager was to name the West Ham United captain Bobby Moore as captain of the national team. Moore came from working-class roots in the East End of London, similar to Ramsey. England had never had a captain so young — Moore was only 22 years and 47 days old when he captained the side for the first time, away against Czechoslovakia in a friendly on 29 May 1963. England won 4–2.

====1964 European Championship====
Ramsey&#x27;s first competitive match as England coach was a preliminary qualification round for the 1964 European Nations&#x27; Cup. England, along with many other national teams, had declined to participate in the inaugural 1960 competition. They had been drawn against France for a two-legged knockout fixture to progress to the last sixteen qualifiers. The home leg, played under Winterbottom, had been drawn 1–1 at Hillsborough. Ramsey insisted that he pick the team himself and included seven players who would feature in the 1966 World Cup squad. He took charge for the away leg in Paris at the Parc des Princes, which they lost 5–2, eliminating England from the competition in Ramsey&#x27;s first game in charge.

====1966 World Cup====
As hosts, England automatically qualified for the 1966 World Cup. The first group game, on 11 July 1966, was against Uruguay and despite attacking talent including Jimmy Greaves and Roger Hunt, playing against a disciplined Uruguayan defence, England were held to a 0–0 draw. This was the first time England had failed to score at Wembley since 1945. Ramsey&#x27;s statement made three years earlier looked doubtful, but he remained calm and continued experimenting when his side faced Mexico in the next game. Ramsey was using the 4–3–3 system and for each of the group games used a winger; John Connelly against Uruguay, Terry Paine against Mexico and Ian Callaghan against France.
Ramsey dropped Alan Ball and John Connelly and brought in Terry Paine and Martin Peters, whose advanced style of play as a midfielder matched the qualities Ramsey looked for in his system. England beat Mexico 2–0. Ramsey replaced Terry Paine with Ian Callaghan for their final group match, against France. England won 2–0, securing qualification to the knockout rounds. Two difficult situations arose from the final group match. After making a vicious tackle and being cautioned, midfielder Nobby Stiles came under fire from senior FIFA officials, who called for Ramsey to drop him from the side. Ramsey strongly disagreed, and told the FA to inform FIFA that either Stiles would remain in his team or Ramsey himself would resign. Another bad tackle was committed during that match, resulting in Tottenham striker (and one of England&#x27;s most prolific goalscorers) Greaves being injured and sidelined for the next few matches. Despite having more experienced strikers in his squad, Ramsey selected young Geoff Hurst as Greaves&#x27;s replacement, seeing potential in the young West Ham forward. The France match also marked Ramsey&#x27;s final game with a winger. After it, he dropped Ian Callaghan from his side and brought back Alan Ball to strengthen the midfield.
For the knockout stages, England&#x27;s first opponents were Argentina. Ramsey decided to switch from 4–3–3 to 4–3–1–2. With Ball and Peters operating on the flanks, the midfield now boasted Nobby Stiles and Bobby Charlton in the centre, indeed Ramsey refused a demand from the FA that he drop Stiles, making it a resignation issue. After a violent quarter-final (where the Argentinian captain Antonio Rattín refused to leave the field after being sent off), England won 1–0 thanks to Hurst latching onto a cross from Martin Peters and heading home a goal. Ramsey came under fire when he stopped his players from the traditional swapping of shirts with the Argentinians in protest at their play, and was then reported to have described Argentinian players as &quot;animals&quot;; &quot;It seemed a pity so much Argentinian talent is wasted. Our best football will come against the right type of opposition — a team who come to play football, and not act as animals.&quot; Jimmy Greaves in his 2009 autobiography, &quot;Greavsie&quot;, claims that Ramsey had said &quot;I&#x27;ve been a little disappointed that the behaviour of some players in this competition reminded me of animals&quot;. The belief that he had referred directly to the Argentinians as animals damaged Ramsey&#x27;s reputation and made successive England teams unpopular abroad, particularly in South America. In the semi-final, England faced a fluent and skilful Portuguese side containing the tournament&#x27;s top goalscorer Eusébio. However, England won a 2–1 victory in a memorable match which saw them concede their first goal of the competition from the penalty spot.

On 30 July 1966, Ramsey&#x27;s promise was fulfilled as England became the World Champions by beating West Germany in the final. A lot of Ramsey&#x27;s tactics and decisions proved their worth in this final. Ramsey came under pressure to restore the fit-again Jimmy Greaves to the side, but his philosophy was &quot;never change a winning team&quot;. He stuck to his guns and kept faith with Greaves&#x27;s replacement, Geoff Hurst, who vindicated Ramsey&#x27;s judgement by scoring a hat-trick in a 4–2 win (after extra time, the game ending 2–2 in normal time) at Wembley. Filling his side with a good balance of experience and youth proved vital when the gruelling final went to extra time. The youth in the team powered England through extra time, in particular Alan Ball, who, at 21, was the youngest player in the England side. Even in extra time, he showed no signs of tiring and never stopped running — famously setting up Hurst&#x27;s controversial second goal, as well as having a few chances himself. Even as the match ended with Hurst scoring England&#x27;s fourth goal, Ball was still running down the pitch in case Hurst needed assistance. Rather than a cross from Hurst, Ball was greeted by a number of England fans running onto the pitch who, thinking that the game was already over, had already started celebrating England&#x27;s victory.

Hurst recalled that at the end of 90 minutes, Ramsey forbade his players to lie down on the pitch to rest before extra time, as their opponents were doing. &quot;Look at them&quot;, Ramsey told the England team, pointing towards the Germans; &quot;They&#x27;re finished. They&#x27;re flat out on their backs.&quot; Ramsey said to his players: &quot;You&#x27;ve won it once. Now you&#x27;ll have to go out there and win it again.&quot;
Ramsey remained his usual self during the celebrations: not joining in, but rather opting to let his players soak up their achievement. He is the only England manager ever to have won the World Cup. Bobby Charlton praised Ramsey and his approach to managing the England team to World Cup victory: &quot;He was professional to his fingertips and as popular with the players as any manager I&#x27;ve ever seen. He was a winner and without Alf Ramsey England would not have won the World Cup in 1966. He gave us our proudest moment.&quot; Nobby Stiles agreed: &quot;You did it, Alf, we&#x27;d have been nothing without you.&quot;

====1968 European Championship====
In 1967, a year after England won the World Cup under his management, Ramsey received a knighthood — the first given to a football manager. England reached the last eight of the 1968 European Championships by amassing the best aggregate record of the four Home Nations over the 1966–67 and 1967–68 seasons (despite a loss to Scotland 3–2 at home in 1967). They subsequently defeated Spain home and away to become one of four teams to progress to the finals in Italy. There England suffered a 1–0 defeat by Yugoslavia in a bad-tempered semi-final: Alan Mullery was dismissed for kicking an opponent in the groin. Mullery subsequently reported that Ramsey had said to him &quot;I&#x27;m glad somebody retaliated against those bastards&quot; and paid Mullery&#x27;s £50 fine levied by the Football Association. England had to settle for third place after beating the Soviet Union.

====1970 World Cup====

England qualified automatically as defending champions for the 1970 World Cup, held in Mexico. They entered the tournament as one of the favourites and many experts suspected that England and Brazil, due to meet in the opening round of matches, would meet again in the final. Ramsey&#x27;s preparations for the tournament had been disrupted by the arrest of Bobby Moore in the Bogotá Bracelet incident with the England squad being labelled &quot;thieves and drunks&quot; by the Mexican press.

In the first round, two 1–0 victories over Romania and Czechoslovakia enabled England to progress, despite a loss by the same scoreline to ultimate champions Brazil (a match which also featured a famous save by Gordon Banks from Pelé&#x27;s header). In the quarter-final they lost to West Germany 3–2, after having been in the lead 2–0 with twenty minutes remaining. At 2–1 Ramsey had substituted Bobby Charlton and Martin Peters, supposedly to rest them for the semi-final, in what was considered a tactical blunder. The blame for the defeat was partly placed on Ramsey&#x27;s cautious tactics and substitutions in searing Mexican heat and partly on the stand-in goalkeeper, Chelsea&#x27;s Peter Bonetti. At 2–0 up Bonetti, who was playing because regular keeper Gordon Banks had been taken ill, had let a seemingly innocuous shot by Franz Beckenbauer slip under his body and was then caught out of position by a looping header by Uwe Seeler. Gerd Müller scored a third in the 108th minute to knock England out. Ramsey blamed Bonetti and his mistakes, but his own tactics were not beyond reproach.

====1972 European Championship====
England reached the last eight of the 1972 European championship by topping their qualification group, which also contained Switzerland, Greece and Malta. They dropped only one point in the qualification, in a 1–1 home draw with Switzerland. England then faced West Germany again in a match to be played over two legs, to determine who would progress to the finals (which would feature only four teams). A 3–1 home defeat at Wembley, followed by a goalless draw in Berlin, meant that England were eliminated. The football played by England against West Germany was described by the journalist Hugh McIlvanney as &quot;cautious joyless football&quot; and as an indicator that the England era under Ramsey had run its course. West Germany went on to win the competition by beating the Soviet Union 3–0 in the final.

====1974 World Cup====

England&#x27;s qualification group for the 1974 World Cup, included just two other teams: Poland and Wales. However the Poles, who had not qualified for a World Cup finals since 1938, were an improved team who would go on to finish third in the tournament. A home draw with Wales, followed by a defeat in Chorzów, meant that England had to win their final match against Poland at Wembley in October 1973. Ramsey had asked for the Football League games to be postponed on the weekend before the game to assist England&#x27;s preparations. This request was refused by Football League secretary Alan Hardaker, who said: &quot;It is a football match, not a war&quot;.

Before the qualifier with Poland at Wembley Stadium, the Derby County manager Brian Clough described Polish goalkeeper Jan Tomaszewski as a &quot;circus clown in gloves&quot;. Errors by Norman Hunter and goalkeeper Peter Shilton and an inspired goalkeeping performance by Tomaszewski, who made many crucial, and sometimes unorthodox saves, meant that the match finished 1–1. Ramsey, always uncomfortable with the substitute rule, was blamed for waiting until the 85th minute before bringing on forward Kevin Hector. The draw meant that England had tried and failed to qualify for a World Cup for the first time in the national team&#x27;s history.

====Sacking====

England, having won the World Cup in 1966, were now perceived to have failed in three successive tournaments. The disappointments of quarter-final exits from major tournaments in 1970 and 1972, had been followed by failing even to qualify for the 1974 World Cup. A few months after the draw with Poland, which had meant failure to progress, Ramsey was sacked by the FA on 1 May 1974.

It is alleged that some of the FA&#x27;s officials had long held grudges against Ramsey. The British journalist and author Leo McKinstry said, &quot;England&#x27;s most successful manager would have had a legacy fit for a hero had it not been for the malevolence of the FA chief Harold Thompson&quot;. Alan Ball described the treatment of Ramsey as &quot;the most incredible thing that ever happened in English football&quot;.

===After England===
Feeling he needed &quot;a period of rest&quot;, Ramsey returned to Ipswich to spend time with his wife. He became a director of sportswear manufacturer Gola Sports and of a local building firm, but kept out of the public eye for eighteen months or so. He then began watching Ipswich Town, and often acted as a television pundit. Speaking on ITV&#x27;s &quot;On the Ball&quot; in February 1977, he was sharply critical of England&#x27;s performance against the Netherlands, describing the players as &quot;poor individually&quot; and the team as &quot;completely disorganised&quot;. Asked if he had any sympathy for his successor, Don Revie, he said that Revie did not want sympathy: &quot;Having accepted the post of England team manager he has to accept the responsibility of his position in exactly the same way as I did.&quot; His attitude to the media mellowed. Interviewed in June ahead of a five-a-side tournament between eight of the 1966 World Cup teams for a trophy named in his honour, Ramsey admitted that, having &quot;met so many more people, I know so much more about the world, and I&#x27;m so much more relaxed than I was three or four years ago&quot;, and said he would consider a return to management.

He had joined the board of First Division club Birmingham City in January 1976. When Willie Bell was sacked as manager in September 1977, Ramsey refused the offer to take his place on a permanent basis, but did agree to act as caretaker until a successor could be found. By early November, he had changed his mind. He resigned his directorship to take on the role of consultant, with a remit that covered not only day-to-day team management but also a wide-ranging responsibility for club affairs, to include the selection of Birmingham&#x27;s next manager. His tenure lasted just four months. In February 1978, star player Trevor Francis was fined for giving newspaper interviews about his desire to leave a club he saw as lacking ambition, and the board accepted Ramsey&#x27;s recommendation to place him on the transfer list. Three days later, when the decision was reversed for fear of a backlash from supporters, Ramsey gave two weeks&#x27; notice to quit. The club announced his resignation before the notice period ended, and reports attributed his departure to the recent 4–0 defeat by Coventry City. Ramsey was quick to deny any such link, insisting that he had &quot;never walked out on anyone&quot;. Francis was sold less than a year later to Nottingham Forest, in what became English football&#x27;s first £1 million transfer.

The team won ten of the matches for which Ramsey was in charge, drew four and lost twelve. Among the ten was a 3–2 away victory at Anfield against the reigning league and European champions Liverpool on 21 January 1978, which featured in a &quot;Birmingham Mail&quot; series on Birmingham City&#x27;s &quot;30 great games&quot;. Aged 58 when he left Birmingham, this was Ramsey&#x27;s last full managerial job, although he did also work as a technical adviser at Greek side Panathinaikos, during the 1979–80 season, which was the first season of professional football in Greece.

===Managerial style===
During his time at Ipswich, Ramsey began experimenting with a new style of play that would eventually lead to success in the World Cup and led to his England team being styled, &quot;The Wingless Wonders&quot;. As natural wingers were not always known for their defensive qualities, Ramsey started dropping them in favour of attacking midfielders who could also drop back into defensive roles. This system proved revolutionary as it often baffled opposing full backs, who would naturally expect to see a winger coming down the flank at them once the ball was kicked off: instead, the attacking midfielders and strikers were taking the ball through the middle of the defence and scoring. This style of play proved successful at Ipswich, but really showed its worth when England travelled to Spain to play a friendly with them before the World Cup. As Bobby Charlton remarked, &quot;The Spanish full backs were just looking at each other while we were going in droves through the middle&quot;. To win in Spain, who were the reigning European champions, was rare for an English team and was evidence that Ramsey&#x27;s techniques were working.

Ramsey earned the respect of his players. He strongly supported Nobby Stiles when the FA leaned on Ramsey to drop Stiles from the 1966 World Cup quarter-final following a tackle on Frenchman Jacques Simon in the previous game. After the final, at the banquet, with the players in one room and their wives forced to sit in an adjoining room, he excused his players early from the banquet to allow the players to join their wives after nearly four weeks apart. In his manner with the players, he was &quot;usually equable&quot;, but when his 1978 Birmingham City team produced a poor defensive display, &quot;he blew his top&quot;; the next game was a &quot;historic victory&quot;.

In 2008, when writing for &quot;The Guardian&quot;, David Lacey likened Ramsey retroactively to Italian manager Fabio Capello for their shared belief in the importance of a solid defensive base, while also praising him for his ability to identify a problem and deal with it in a quick and successful manner, his ability to command respect in the dressing room and maintain a professional attitude with his players, and his ability to manage press conferences effectively.

==Personal life==
Ramsey was very sensitive about his personal background. He strove to mask his working-class Essex origins and to present himself as erudite and worldly, going so far as to adopt an accent that the journalist Brian Glanville called &quot;sergeant-major posh&quot;. A widely held perception that Ramsey&#x27;s accent had become more upper-class during his time as England manager fuelled speculation that he had received elocution lessons, and prompted constant joking from members of the England team who came from similar Essex or East London backgrounds, such as Bobby Moore and Jimmy Greaves. Rodney Marsh, a forward from the East End who played in Ramsey&#x27;s England team from 1971 to 1973, later said:

Alf tended to speak in a very poncey plum-in-the-mouth way. It was all &quot;Oh hello Rodney and how are you?&quot;. To me it was all complete bollocks.

It was rumoured that Ramsey had Romany (or &quot;gypsy&quot;) ancestors. Ramsey was sensitive about the suggestion and, according to one anecdote, seethed with fury when Moore saw some Romany caravans and joked that the manager should &quot;drop in to see his relatives&quot;. The football journalist Ken Jones related that on one occasion, when Ramsey perceived Moore and Greaves to be mocking his accent on the team bus, he said he would &quot;win the World Cup without those two bastards&quot;.

Throughout his career as a professional footballer and for years afterwards, Ramsey claimed to be two years younger than he actually was, including in his ghosted autobiography, &quot;Talking Football&quot;, published in 1952. This began when Ramsey turned professional with Southampton during the Second World War. He told Southampton he was born in 1922 rather than 1920, reasoning that this might improve his career prospects and compensate for the years he had lost to the hostilities. He propagated this false age for over two decades in press articles, his autobiography and &quot;Who&#x27;s Who&quot;, but not on official documents such as his marriage papers, where he listed his true date of birth. Only after his knighthood in 1967 did Ramsey reveal his true age, deciding that he could not lie to Debrett&#x27;s, publisher of &quot;Debrett&#x27;s Peerage &amp; Baronetage&quot;.

Ramsey married Rita Norris (&quot;née&quot; Welch) at Southampton Register Office on 10 December 1951. The union had been delayed for some years because of Rita&#x27;s marriage to another man, Arthur Norris. The law of the period dictated that she could not obtain a legal divorce from Arthur until three years after their separation in 1947 and could not remarry for another year after that. Ramsey kept the relationship secret, to the extent that Tottenham knew nothing of it until days before the wedding. Rita changed her name to Victoria and was generally called &quot;Vic&quot; by Ramsey, who McKinstry records was a good stepfather to her daughter from her first marriage, Tanaya (usually called Tanya). He was a Freemason of Waltham Abbey Lodge from 1953 until he resigned in 1981.

==Retirement and death==
After Ramsey&#x27;s retirement from football management, he continued to live in Ipswich. He was somewhat reclusive but wrote occasional newspaper columns. According to his obituary in &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;, &quot;he concentrated on his golf game and watching his Westerns.&quot; He made regular trips to Wembley, including a visit in 1991 where he and some members of the World Cup-winning team were reunited prior to that season&#x27;s FA Cup Final.

Ramsey suffered a stroke on 9 June 1998, on the eve of the 1998 World Cup. Suffering from Alzheimer&#x27;s disease and prostate cancer, Ramsey spent three months in a general ward in Ipswich Hospital. He died less than a year later, in a nursing home, on 28 April 1999, at the age of 79 from a heart attack. Ramsey&#x27;s funeral was held in St. Mary-le-Tower Church in Ipswich. He was then cremated and his ashes were interred in a private ceremony at Old Ipswich Cemetery on 7 May 1999. The location of the funeral in Ipswich rather than in London was regarded as a snub to the Football Association, whose members Ramsey had never forgiven for his sacking from the England manager post in 1974.

Lady Ramsey died in March 2018 and was interred alongside her husband.

==Legacy==

Ramsey was an inaugural inductee of the English Football Hall of Fame in 2002 in recognition of his impact on the English game as a manager. He became the first person to be inducted twice when, in 2010, he was included in the Hall of Fame as a player as well.

Sir Alf Ramsey Way, formerly Portman&#x27;s Walk, is a street running along the north side of Ipswich&#x27;s Portman Road stadium that was named after Ramsey shortly after his death in honour of his achievements as Ipswich Town manager. In 2000, a statue of Ramsey was erected on the corner of the street named after him and Portman Road, at the North Stand/Cobbold Stand corner of the stadium. The statue was commissioned by the Ipswich Town Supporters&#x27; Club after an initial idea by local fan Seán Salter. On 31 March 2012, the South Stand at Portman Road was renamed to the Sir Alf Ramsey Stand. In 2009, Fabio Capello inaugurated a statue, sculpted by Philip Jackson, of Ramsey at Wembley. It is situated in the player&#x27;s tunnel and, according to George Cohen, &quot;it will remind every player to give their best out on the pitch.&quot;

Ramsey was listed in the ten best British managers ever in &quot;The Independent&quot;, and he is widely regarded as one of British football&#x27;s all-time great managers. Another website ranks him at no. 26. Ramsay&#x27;s managerial style was not universally admired, however. According to historian Frank McLynn, &quot;he was a humourless bore and stifling tactician whose reputation rests on a single undeserved triumph.&quot;

== Honours ==

=== As a player ===
Tottenham Hotspur
* First Division: 1950–51
* Second Division: 1949–50

England
*Home Championship: 1949–50, 1951–52 (shared), 1952–53 (shared)

=== As a manager ===
Ipswich Town
* First Division: 1961–62
* Second Division: 1960–61
* Third Division South: 1956–57
* FA Charity Shield runner-up: 1962

England
* FIFA World Cup: 1966
* UEFA European Championship third place: 1968
* Home Championship: 1963–64 (shared), 1964–65, 1965–66, 1967–68, 1968–69, 1969–70 (shared), 1970–71, 1971–72 (shared), 1972–73

=== Individual ===
* English Football Hall of Fame Inductee: 2002
* Ipswich Town Hall of Fame: Inductee: 2011
* Mussabini Medal: 1998

==Career statistics==

===Club===
===International===
:&quot;Scores and results list England&#x27;s goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Ramsey goal.&quot;

==Managerial statistics==
== See also ==

* List of English football championship-winning managers

==Notes and references==
===Footnotes===
===References===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* 
* Alf Ramsey at England Football Online
* Management career at England Football Online </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q311029" start="0" end="24" title="Alf Ramsey" label="Sir Alfred Ernest Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="74" end="82" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q628099" start="94" end="101" title="Manager (association football)" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="131" end="156" title="England national football team" label="the England national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510642" start="218" end="233" title="England national football team manager" label="England manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q134202" start="299" end="318" title="1966 FIFA World Cup" label="1966 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q182201" start="428" end="454" title="UEFA Euro 1968" label="1968 European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q132664" start="485" end="499" title="1970 FIFA World Cup" label="1970 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q182386" start="508" end="534" title="UEFA Euro 1972" label="1972 European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="562" end="570" title="defender (association football)" label="defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q132515" start="602" end="616" title="1950 FIFA World Cup" label="1950 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="663" end="668" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="773" end="789" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="837" end="847" title="right-back" label="right-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="1174" end="1185" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="1190" end="1207" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q532723" start="1256" end="1283" title="List of English football champions" label="English League championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081461" start="1291" end="1305" title="1950–51 Football League" label="1950–51 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q9653" start="1369" end="1381" title="Ipswich Town F.C." label="Ipswich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559" start="1395" end="1425" title="English football league system" label="third tier of English football"/>
<link wikidata="Q769716" start="1499" end="1519" title="Football League Third Division South" label="Third Division South"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839571" start="1523" end="1530" title="1956–57 Football League" label="1956–57"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="1539" end="1554" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436148" start="1558" end="1565" title="1960–61 Football League" label="1960–61"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153210" start="1574" end="1588" title="1961–62 Football League" label="1961–62 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="1632" end="1644" title="Football League First Division" label="top division"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="1962" end="1969" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q166121" start="2154" end="2168" title="1974 FIFA World Cup" label="1974 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="2241" end="2256" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122219" start="2261" end="2274" title="Panathinaikos F.C." label="Panathinaikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q184775" start="2340" end="2347" title="Ipswich" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="2455" end="2470" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323117" start="2592" end="2621" title="English Football Hall of Fame" label="English Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372529" start="2867" end="2878" title="FourFourTwo" label="FourFourTwo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075299" start="3094" end="3102" title="Dagenham" label="Dagenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="3122" end="3130" title="agriculture" label="agrarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827199" start="3291" end="3303" title="smallholding" label="smallholding"/>
<link wikidata="Q20463" start="3339" end="3347" title="dustcart" label="dustcart"/>
<link wikidata="Q739384" start="3650" end="3671" title="London County Council" label="London County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571762" start="3702" end="3711" title="Becontree" label="Becontree"/>
<link wikidata="Q861504" start="3791" end="3804" title="Ford Dagenham" label="Ford Dagenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q246514" start="4600" end="4611" title="tennis ball" label="tennis ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="5030" end="5037" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q165704" start="5091" end="5100" title="high jump" label="high jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q170737" start="5106" end="5115" title="long jump" label="long jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500855" start="5130" end="5138" title="100-yard dash" label="100-yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="5206" end="5212" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="5725" end="5736" title="Inside forward" label="inside-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="6034" end="6045" title="Defender (association football)" label="centre-half"/>
<link wikidata="Q871403" start="6070" end="6094" title="WM formation" label="&amp;quot;WM&amp;quot; formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="6616" end="6631" title="English Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="6670" end="6685" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="6700" end="6707" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="6893" end="6901" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304069" start="6916" end="6926" title="Alex James (footballer)" label="Alex James"/>
<link wikidata="Q145658" start="7062" end="7073" title="greengrocer" label="greengrocer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277439" start="7136" end="7141" title="Co-op Food" label="Co-op"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986030" start="7568" end="7579" title="Ned Liddell" label="Ned Liddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438308" start="7583" end="7588" title="Scout (association football)" label="scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="7594" end="7604" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8105" end="8121" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="8163" end="8175" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311317" start="8216" end="8254" title="Duke of Cornwall&amp;#x27;s Light Infantry" label="Duke of Cornwall&amp;#x27;s Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q180803" start="8293" end="8298" title="Truro" label="Truro"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="8455" end="8463" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="8516" end="8524" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524049" start="8788" end="8801" title="Leo McKinstry" label="Leo McKinstry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155571" start="9643" end="9673" title="company quartermaster sergeant" label="company quartermaster sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="9680" end="9693" title="Anti-aircraft warfare" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q772614" start="9864" end="9874" title="St Austell" label="St Austell"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="10016" end="10030" title="centre-forward" label="centre-forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075132" start="10135" end="10148" title="Barton Stacey" label="Barton Stacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="10152" end="10161" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571" start="10367" end="10376" title="Brentford F.C." label="Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521998" start="10385" end="10397" title="Len Townsend" label="Len Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200762" start="10417" end="10429" title="Cyril Hodges" label="Cyril Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="10486" end="10497" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q161792" start="10520" end="10528" title="The Dell, Southampton" label="the Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q493386" start="10545" end="10553" title="Exhibition game" label="friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412834" start="10647" end="10659" title="reserve team" label="reserve team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10826" end="10836" title="Glossary of association football terms#F" label="first-team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306907" start="10843" end="10847" title="Road (sports)" label="away"/>
<link wikidata="Q18520" start="10851" end="10861" title="Luton Town F.C." label="Luton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111991" start="11112" end="11140" title="Professionalism in association football" label="professional football career"/>
<link wikidata="Q203889" start="11174" end="11179" title="Luton" label="Luton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613767" start="11281" end="11296" title="Kenilworth Road" label="Kenilworth Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q279532" start="11324" end="11336" title="Penalty kick (association football)" label="penalty kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q23082" start="11556" end="11569" title="County Durham" label="County Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q186425" start="12223" end="12238" title="White Hart Lane" label="White Hart Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q319355" start="12313" end="12322" title="Ted Drake" label="Ted Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569853" start="12686" end="12705" title="Southern Daily Echo" label="Southern Daily Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465867" start="12808" end="12820" title="Football League North and South" label="League South"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565695" start="12870" end="12918" title="1945–46 in English football" label="1945–46, the first football season after the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="13026" end="13035" title="Hat-trick (association football)" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q18523" start="13056" end="13070" title="Newport County A.F.C." label="Newport County"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="13208" end="13227" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Mandatory Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039285" start="13342" end="13355" title="Arthur Rowley" label="Arthur Rowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="13396" end="13410" title="Leicester City F.C." label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19626" start="13415" end="13430" title="Shrewsbury Town F.C." label="Shrewsbury Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200720" start="13478" end="13489" title="Jimmy Mason (footballer, born 1919)" label="Jimmy Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298680" start="13608" end="13619" title="Bill Dodgin Sr." label="Bill Dodgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q843610" start="13899" end="13909" title="Military discharge" label="discharged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753958" start="14030" end="14044" title="1946–47 Football League" label="1946–47 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721674" start="14134" end="14145" title="Alf Freeman (footballer, born 1920)" label="Alf Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3979023" start="14367" end="14378" title="Sydney Cann" label="Sydney Cann"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="14554" end="14564" title="right-back" label="right-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q47965" start="14795" end="14809" title="Torquay United F.C." label="Torquay United"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="14811" end="14826" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462" start="14831" end="14848" title="Charlton Athletic F.C." label="Charlton Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="15371" end="15386" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q48947" start="15401" end="15416" title="Plymouth Argyle F.C." label="Plymouth Argyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10387503" start="15471" end="15487" title="Bill Ellerington" label="Bill Ellerington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910682" start="15613" end="15626" title="Bill Rochford" label="Bill Rochford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="16179" end="16195" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412575" start="16682" end="16692" title="Sam Barkas" label="Sam Barkas"/>
<link wikidata="Q685969" start="16899" end="16906" title="1947–48 Football League" label="1947–48"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17419" end="17427" title="Glossary of association football terms#C" label="clearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q201330" start="17542" end="17552" title="goalkeeper (association football)" label="goalkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692995" start="17554" end="17563" title="Ted Bates (footballer)" label="Ted Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="18180" end="18186" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="18273" end="18282" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9653" start="18846" end="18858" title="Ipswich Town F.C." label="Ipswich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q35933" start="18877" end="18888" title="Sport Club Corinthians Paulista" label="Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="19179" end="19189" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081273" start="19219" end="19233" title="1948–49 Football League" label="1948–49 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="19337" end="19343" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="19516" end="19535" title="Sheffield Wednesday F.C." label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834015" start="20121" end="20134" title="transfer market" label="transfer list"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="20548" end="20557" title="Wing half" label="wing-half"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211092" start="20558" end="20569" title="Joe Mallett" label="Joe Mallett"/>
<link wikidata="Q18531" start="20833" end="20840" title="Offside (association football)" label="offside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="21044" end="21053" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q19458" start="21070" end="21077" title="Burnley F.C." label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="21242" end="21259" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q472350" start="21463" end="21474" title="Arthur Rowe" label="Arthur Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="21551" end="21556" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5394565" start="21578" end="21589" title="Ernie Jones (footballer, born 1920)" label="Ernie Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006008" start="21993" end="22005" title="Push and run" label="push-and-run"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080823" start="22526" end="22540" title="1949–50 Football League" label="1949–50 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q712767" start="22822" end="22836" title="Bill Nicholson (footballer)" label="Bill Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353714" start="22853" end="22866" title="Ted Ditchburn" label="Ted Ditchburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562129" start="22888" end="22901" title="Sonny Walters" label="Sonny Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q18515" start="23031" end="23043" title="Grimsby Town F.C." label="Grimsby Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q778665" start="23634" end="23642" title="promotion and relegation" label="promoted"/>
<link wikidata="Q778665" start="23794" end="23803" title="promotion and relegation" label="relegated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334664" start="23822" end="23829" title="1934–35 Football League" label="1934–35"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081461" start="24023" end="24030" title="1950–51 Football League" label="1950–51"/>
<link wikidata="Q532723" start="24642" end="24662" title="list of English football champions" label="champions of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q946670" start="25011" end="25025" title="1951–52 Football League" label="1951–52 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839557" start="25081" end="25088" title="1952–53 Football League" label="1952–53"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542128" start="25101" end="25108" title="1953–54 Football League" label="1953–54"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441369" start="25312" end="25323" title="Ron Burgess (footballer)" label="Ron Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753223" start="25586" end="25600" title="1952–53 FA Cup" label="1952–53 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19449" start="25621" end="25630" title="Blackpool F.C." label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q175339" start="25634" end="25644" title="Villa Park" label="Villa Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179053" start="25721" end="25731" title="Bill Perry (footballer)" label="Bill Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q466728" start="26121" end="26133" title="Jackie Mudie" label="Jackie Mudie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484493" start="26224" end="26238" title="1953 FA Cup Final" label="Matthews Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="26535" end="26548" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q769716" start="27012" end="27032" title="Football League Third Division South" label="Third Division South"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="27179" end="27191" title="Swansea City A.F.C." label="Swansea Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q262861" start="27658" end="27676" title="Danny Blanchflower" label="Danny Blanchflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q190978" start="27680" end="27696" title="Northern Ireland national football team" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="27733" end="27744" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061416" start="28149" end="28163" title="1954–55 Football League" label="1954–55 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="28274" end="28288" title="Leicester City F.C." label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262045" start="28296" end="28306" title="Derek Hogg" label="Derek Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199522" start="28393" end="28407" title="Jimmy Anderson (football manager)" label="Jimmy Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110944" start="29141" end="29150" title="England national football B team" label="England B"/>
<link wikidata="Q165141" start="29258" end="29269" title="Switzerland national football team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q205309" start="29273" end="29281" title="Arsenal Stadium" label="Highbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="29460" end="29465" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="29578" end="29587" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040745" start="29610" end="29622" title="Home Nations" label="Home Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="29676" end="29680" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="29804" end="29828" title="The Football Association" label="The Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510642" start="30282" end="30297" title="England national football team manager" label="England manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q531168" start="30307" end="30326" title="Walter Winterbottom" label="Walter Winterbottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282685" start="30481" end="30492" title="Eddie Baily" label="Eddie Baily"/>
<link wikidata="Q132515" start="30501" end="30515" title="1950 FIFA World Cup" label="1950 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="31038" end="31052" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q172025" start="31062" end="31067" title="Chile national football team" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q164134" start="31124" end="31137" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q909851" start="31195" end="31216" title="Arena Independência" label="Estádio Independência"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800" start="31220" end="31234" title="Belo Horizonte" label="Belo Horizonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q216140" start="31300" end="31316" title="Stanley Matthews" label="Stanley Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q711269" start="32000" end="32012" title="Joe Gaetjens" label="Joe Gaetjens"/>
<link wikidata="Q18530" start="32150" end="32158" title="Goal post" label="woodwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q223234" start="32256" end="32268" title="Billy Wright (footballer, born 1924)" label="Billy Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q4025998" start="32511" end="32518" title="United States v England (1950 FIFA World Cup)" label="won 1–0"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="32921" end="32926" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q188363" start="33401" end="33411" title="Yugoslavia national football team" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q163534" start="33636" end="33643" title="Austria national football team" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="33887" end="33897" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q469040" start="34591" end="34611" title="Match of the Century (1953 England v Hungary football match)" label="Match of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q581978" start="34638" end="34650" title="Football at the 1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952 Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170561" start="34661" end="34668" title="Hungary national football team" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q775352" start="34690" end="34701" title="Golden Team" label="Golden Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="35544" end="35548" title="Cap (football)" label="caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4311339" start="35843" end="35856" title="London League (football)" label="London League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404793" start="35862" end="35872" title="Eton Manor F.C." label="Eton Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q750583" start="35921" end="35938" title="Southern Rhodesia" label="Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q379533" start="36055" end="36069" title="Player-coach" label="player-manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001658" start="36508" end="36518" title="Wilf Grant" label="Wilf Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q619558" start="37271" end="37283" title="Portman Road" label="Portman Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814416" start="37377" end="37399" title="Tolly Cobbold" label="Cobbold brewing family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370355" start="37824" end="37836" title="Scott Duncan (footballer)" label="Scott Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q242415" start="38437" end="38448" title="corner kick" label="corner kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q30074594" start="38571" end="38583" title="1955–56 in English football" label="first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081287" start="38735" end="38748" title="1956–57 in English football" label="second season"/>
<link wikidata="Q915850" start="39030" end="39048" title="1960–61 in English football" label="the 1960–61 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="39114" end="39124" title="Football League First Division" label="top flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305267" start="39214" end="39226" title="Ray Crawford (footballer)" label="Ray Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q532723" start="39324" end="39344" title="List of English football champions" label="champions of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22097782" start="39354" end="39366" title="1961–62 Ipswich Town F.C. season" label="debut season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642960" start="39440" end="39446" title="pundit" label="pundit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305267" start="39630" end="39642" title="Ray Crawford (footballer)" label="Ray Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693604" start="39647" end="39659" title="Ted Phillips (footballer)" label="Ted Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="39746" end="39757" title="Winger (association football)" label="left-winger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200608" start="39759" end="39775" title="Jimmy Leadbetter" label="Jimmy Leadbetter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="39828" end="39838" title="midfielder" label="midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736641" start="40014" end="40036" title="1962 FA Charity Shield" label="1962 FA Charity Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q500074" start="40201" end="40221" title="1962–63 European Cup" label="1962–63 European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q728557" start="40257" end="40265" title="Floriana F.C." label="Floriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="40360" end="40370" title="A.C. Milan" label="A.C. Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="41020" end="41026" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q160813" start="41055" end="41069" title="1962 FIFA World Cup" label="1962 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q531168" start="41135" end="41154" title="Walter Winterbottom" label="Walter Winterbottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="41403" end="41412" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q191492" start="42396" end="42407" title="Bobby Moore" label="Bobby Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="42484" end="42502" title="East End of London" label="East End of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q182072" start="42666" end="42680" title="Czechoslovakia national football team" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42686" end="42694" title="Exhibition game#Association football" label="friendly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42825" end="42856" title="1964 European Nations&amp;#x27; Cup qualifying#Preliminary round" label="preliminary qualification round"/>
<link wikidata="Q182205" start="42865" end="42896" title="1964 European Nations&amp;#x27; Cup" label="1964 European Nations&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q172831" start="42980" end="43006" title="1960 European Nations&amp;#x27; Cup" label="inaugural 1960 competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="43036" end="43042" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q642557" start="43184" end="43196" title="Hillsborough Stadium" label="Hillsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q193431" start="43366" end="43382" title="Parc des Princes" label="Parc des Princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q134202" start="43559" end="43573" title="1966 FIFA World Cup" label="1966 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q134916" start="43626" end="43633" title="Uruguay national football team" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q297271" start="43673" end="43686" title="Jimmy Greaves" label="Jimmy Greaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q366022" start="43691" end="43701" title="Roger Hunt" label="Roger Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="43995" end="44001" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q871403" start="44041" end="44046" title="4-3-3" label="4–3–3"/>
<link wikidata="Q712408" start="44101" end="44114" title="John Connelly (footballer, born 1938)" label="John Connelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q536930" start="44132" end="44143" title="Terry Paine" label="Terry Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q540463" start="44163" end="44176" title="Ian Callaghan" label="Ian Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q310058" start="44208" end="44217" title="Alan Ball Jr." label="Alan Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q505028" start="44267" end="44280" title="Martin Peters" label="Martin Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q344152" start="44684" end="44696" title="Nobby Stiles" label="Nobby Stiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q212738" start="45200" end="45211" title="Geoff Hurst" label="Geoff Hurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="45525" end="45534" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q871403" start="45566" end="45571" title="Formation (association football)" label="4–3–3"/>
<link wikidata="Q604553" start="45858" end="45872" title="Antonio Rattín" label="Antonio Rattín"/>
<link wikidata="Q267245" start="46897" end="46912" title="Portugal national football team" label="Portuguese side"/>
<link wikidata="Q162043" start="46961" end="46968" title="Eusébio" label="Eusébio"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="47211" end="47223" title="Germany national football team" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065912" start="47231" end="47236" title="1966 FIFA World Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q171583" start="49100" end="49114" title="Bobby Charlton" label="Bobby Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q182201" start="49742" end="49769" title="UEFA Euro 1968" label="1968 European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094025" start="49842" end="49849" title="1966–67 British Home Championship" label="1966–67"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092798" start="49854" end="49869" title="1967–68 British Home Championship" label="1967–68 seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343112" start="50111" end="50123" title="Alan Mullery" label="Alan Mullery"/>
<link wikidata="Q189275" start="50428" end="50440" title="Soviet Union national football team" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q132664" start="50530" end="50544" title="1970 FIFA World Cup" label="1970 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937753" start="50844" end="50859" title="Bogotá Bracelet" label="Bogotá Bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q168397" start="51004" end="51011" title="Romania national football team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q182072" start="51016" end="51030" title="Czechoslovakia national football team" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="51119" end="51125" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q213879" start="51172" end="51184" title="Gordon Banks" label="Gordon Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="51190" end="51194" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q505028" start="51377" end="51390" title="Martin Peters" label="Martin Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="51637" end="51644" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q344902" start="51652" end="51665" title="Peter Bonetti" label="Peter Bonetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4457" start="51796" end="51813" title="Franz Beckenbauer" label="Franz Beckenbauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44470" start="51893" end="51903" title="Uwe Seeler" label="Uwe Seeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q43744" start="51905" end="51916" title="Gerd Müller" label="Gerd Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q182386" start="52134" end="52160" title="UEFA Euro 1972" label="1972 European championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q165141" start="52220" end="52231" title="Switzerland national football team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q134925" start="52233" end="52239" title="Greece national football team" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q188782" start="52244" end="52249" title="Malta national football team" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931811" start="52689" end="52704" title="Hugh McIlvanney" label="Hugh McIlvanney"/>
<link wikidata="Q166121" start="52978" end="52992" title="1974 FIFA World Cup" label="1974 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q166196" start="53025" end="53031" title="Poland national football team" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="53036" end="53041" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q104302" start="53240" end="53247" title="Chorzów" label="Chorzów"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706815" start="53527" end="53540" title="Alan Hardaker" label="Alan Hardaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="53636" end="53651" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q19470" start="53657" end="53669" title="Derby County F.C." label="Derby County"/>
<link wikidata="Q207658" start="53678" end="53690" title="Brian Clough" label="Brian Clough"/>
<link wikidata="Q269275" start="53719" end="53734" title="Jan Tomaszewski" label="Jan Tomaszewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q430746" start="53786" end="53799" title="Norman Hunter (footballer)" label="Norman Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q244799" start="53815" end="53828" title="Peter Shilton" label="Peter Shilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850936" start="54013" end="54028" title="substitute (association football)" label="substitute rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="54094" end="54101" title="forward (association football)" label="forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740179" start="54102" end="54114" title="Kevin Hector" label="Kevin Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524049" start="54774" end="54787" title="Leo McKinstry" label="Leo McKinstry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661942" start="54930" end="54945" title="Harold Warris Thompson" label="Harold Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q310058" start="54953" end="54962" title="Alan Ball Jr." label="Alan Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q184775" start="55166" end="55173" title="Ipswich" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q847119" start="55251" end="55262" title="Gola (manufacturer)" label="Gola Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="55440" end="55443" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091289" start="55457" end="55468" title="On the Ball (UK TV programme)" label="On the Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="55559" end="55570" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q350795" start="55729" end="55738" title="Don Revie" label="Don Revie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250158" start="55996" end="56007" title="five-a-side football" label="five-a-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569385" start="56405" end="56416" title="Willie Bell" label="Willie Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050607" start="56547" end="56556" title="caretaker manager" label="caretaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q345221" start="56944" end="56958" title="Trevor Francis" label="Trevor Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="57414" end="57427" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="57574" end="57591" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q45671" start="57791" end="57798" title="Anfield" label="Anfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="57850" end="57859" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916749" start="57906" end="57921" title="Birmingham Mail" label="Birmingham Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122219" start="58134" end="58147" title="Panathinaikos F.C." label="Panathinaikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q493386" start="59069" end="59077" title="Exhibition game" label="friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q171583" start="59113" end="59127" title="Bobby Charlton" label="Bobby Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q344152" start="59469" end="59481" title="Nobby Stiles" label="Nobby Stiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q762372" start="59596" end="59609" title="Jacques Simon (footballer)" label="Jacques Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="60118" end="60130" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q183108" start="60198" end="60211" title="Fabio Capello" label="Fabio Capello"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="60656" end="60669" title="working-class" label="working-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644454" start="60786" end="60801" title="Brian Glanville" label="Brian Glanville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255221" start="60997" end="61006" title="elocution" label="elocution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179220" start="61173" end="61185" title="Rodney Marsh" label="Rodney Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="61474" end="61480" title="Romani people" label="Romany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567271" start="62528" end="62542" title="Who&amp;#x27;s Who (UK)" label="Who&amp;#x27;s Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248561" start="62749" end="62763" title="Debrett&amp;#x27;s" label="Debrett&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="63552" end="63561" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="63839" end="63858" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q765577" start="64096" end="64108" title="1991 FA Cup Final" label="FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="64170" end="64184" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="64201" end="64225" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="64230" end="64245" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14956760" start="64294" end="64310" title="Ipswich Hospital" label="Ipswich Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q106589763" start="64564" end="64584" title="Old Ipswich Cemetery" label="Old Ipswich Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323117" start="64933" end="64962" title="English Football Hall of Fame" label="English Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q183108" start="65768" end="65781" title="Fabio Capello" label="Fabio Capello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056344" start="65816" end="65830" title="Philip Jackson (sculptor)" label="Philip Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q446908" start="65915" end="65927" title="George Cohen" label="George Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="66072" end="66087" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488350" start="66309" end="66321" title="Frank McLynn" label="Frank McLynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="66494" end="66508" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66510" end="66517" title="1950–51 Football League#First Division" label="1950–51"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="66520" end="66535" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66537" end="66544" title="1949–50 Football League#Second Division" label="1949–50"/>
<link wikidata="Q919472" start="66555" end="66572" title="British Home Championship" label="Home Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q33152" start="66574" end="66581" title="1949–50 British Home Championship" label="1949–50"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094261" start="66583" end="66590" title="1951–52 British Home Championship" label="1951–52"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092769" start="66601" end="66608" title="1952–53 British Home Championship" label="1952–53"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66671" end="66678" title="1961–62 Football League#First Division" label="1961–62"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66698" end="66705" title="1960–61 Football League#Second Division" label="1960–61"/>
<link wikidata="Q769716" start="66708" end="66728" title="Football League Third Division South" label="Third Division South"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081287" start="66730" end="66737" title="1956–57 in English football" label="1956–57"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="66740" end="66757" title="FA Community Shield" label="FA Charity Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736641" start="66769" end="66773" title="1962 FA Charity Shield" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="66785" end="66799" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065912" start="66801" end="66805" title="1966 FIFA World Cup Final" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="66808" end="66834" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q182201" start="66848" end="66852" title="UEFA Euro 1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093175" start="66874" end="66881" title="1963–64 British Home Championship" label="1963–64"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093161" start="66892" end="66899" title="1964–65 British Home Championship" label="1964–65"/>
<link wikidata="Q952318" start="66901" end="66908" title="1965–66 British Home Championship" label="1965–66"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092798" start="66910" end="66917" title="1967–68 British Home Championship" label="1967–68"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094020" start="66919" end="66926" title="1968–69 British Home Championship" label="1968–69"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093934" start="66928" end="66935" title="1969–70 British Home Championship" label="1969–70"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093927" start="66946" end="66953" title="1970–71 British Home Championship" label="1970–71"/>
<link wikidata="Q679922" start="66955" end="66962" title="1971–72 British Home Championship" label="1971–72"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094238" start="66973" end="66980" title="1972-73 British Home Championship" label="1972–73"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323117" start="67003" end="67032" title="English Football Hall of Fame" label="English Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q16224984" start="67050" end="67075" title="Ipswich Town F.C. Hall of Fame" label="Ipswich Town Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943084" start="67094" end="67109" title="Mussabini Medal" label="Mussabini Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570102" start="67339" end="67393" title="List of English football championship-winning managers" label="List of English football championship-winning managers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413274" wikidata="Q1762479" url="?curid=413274" title="Vehicle for hire">
<text>A vehicle for hire is a vehicle providing private transport or shared transport for a fee, in which passengers are generally free to choose their points or approximate points of origin and destination, unlike public transport, and which they do not drive themselves, as in car rental and carsharing. They may be offered via a ridesharing company.

==Vehicles==
Vehicles for hire include taxicabs pulled rickshaws, cycle rickshaws, auto rickshaws, motorcycle taxis, Zémidjans, okadas, boda bodas, sedan services, limousines, party buses, carriages (including hackney carriages, fiacres, and caleches), pet taxis, water taxis, and air charters. Share taxis, paratransit, dollar vans, marshrutkas, dolmuş, nanny vans, demand responsive transport, public light buses, and airport buses operate along fixed routes, but offer some flexibility in the point of origin and/or destination.

==Notable companies==
Some of the largest vehicle for hire companies include Uber, Ola Cabs, Bolt, DiDi, and Grab.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1762479" start="2" end="18" title="Vehicle for hire" label="vehicle for hire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889" start="24" end="31" title="vehicle" label="vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661652" start="42" end="59" title="private transport" label="private transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489559" start="63" end="79" title="shared transport" label="shared transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11765" start="86" end="89" title="fee" label="fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q319604" start="100" end="109" title="passenger" label="passenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="209" end="225" title="public transport" label="public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q291240" start="273" end="283" title="car rental" label="car rental"/>
<link wikidata="Q847201" start="288" end="298" title="carsharing" label="carsharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q27973" start="326" end="345" title="ridesharing company" label="ridesharing company"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="387" end="394" title="taxicab" label="taxicab"/>
<link wikidata="Q16337999" start="396" end="411" title="pulled rickshaw" label="pulled rickshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362895" start="414" end="428" title="cycle rickshaw" label="cycle rickshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q59720" start="431" end="444" title="auto rickshaw" label="auto rickshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233750" start="447" end="462" title="motorcycle taxi" label="motorcycle taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576466" start="465" end="473" title="Zémidjan" label="Zémidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254592" start="476" end="481" title="Okada (motorcycle taxi)" label="okada"/>
<link wikidata="Q30061488" start="484" end="493" title="boda boda" label="boda boda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445125" start="496" end="509" title="sedan service" label="sedan service"/>
<link wikidata="Q188475" start="512" end="521" title="limousine" label="limousine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075954" start="524" end="533" title="party bus" label="party bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q235356" start="537" end="545" title="carriage" label="carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273735" start="558" end="574" title="hackney carriage" label="hackney carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q268508" start="577" end="584" title="Fiacre (carriage)" label="fiacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q741608" start="590" end="597" title="caleche" label="caleche"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907716" start="601" end="609" title="pet taxi" label="pet taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643" start="612" end="622" title="water taxi" label="water taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21074304" start="629" end="640" title="air charter" label="air charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q842389" start="643" end="653" title="Share taxi" label="Share taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564783" start="656" end="667" title="paratransit" label="paratransit"/>
<link wikidata="Q842389" start="669" end="679" title="dollar van" label="dollar van"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711770" start="682" end="692" title="marshrutka" label="marshrutka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236014" start="695" end="701" title="dolmuş" label="dolmuş"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963937" start="703" end="712" title="nanny van" label="nanny van"/>
<link wikidata="Q293849" start="715" end="742" title="demand responsive transport" label="demand responsive transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389972" start="744" end="760" title="public light bus" label="public light bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032774" start="768" end="779" title="airport bus" label="airport bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q780442" start="958" end="962" title="Uber" label="Uber"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059388" start="964" end="972" title="Ola Cabs" label="Ola Cabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q20529164" start="974" end="978" title="Bolt (company)" label="Bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q21190510" start="980" end="984" title="DiDi" label="DiDi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20873932" start="990" end="994" title="Grab (company)" label="Grab"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413276" wikidata="Q6458942" url="?curid=413276" title="LLDC">
<text>LLDC may refer to:

*Landlocked developing countries
*Least developed countries
*London Legacy Development Corporation
*Lancashire Learning Disability Consortium</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q355497" start="21" end="52" title="Landlocked developing countries" label="Landlocked developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="54" end="79" title="Least developed countries" label="Least developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670544" start="81" end="118" title="London Legacy Development Corporation" label="London Legacy Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="120" end="161" title="Lancashire Learning Disability Consortium" label="Lancashire Learning Disability Consortium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413277" wikidata="Q219354" url="?curid=413277" title="Ian Rush">
<text>Ian James Rush (born 20 October 1961) is a Welsh former professional footballer who played as a forward. He is regarded as one of the best strikers of all time and one of the best Welsh players in the history of the sport. At club level Rush played for Liverpool from 1980 to 1987 and 1988–1996. Additionally, he is the club&#x27;s all-time leading goalscorer, having scored a total of 346 goals in all competitions at the club. He also holds the records for being the highest goalscorer in the history of the EFL Cup and the finals of the FA Cup. At international level, Rush made 73 appearances for the Wales national football team and remained the record goalscorer with 28 goals between 1980 and 1996, until the record was broken by Gareth Bale in 2018.

Regarded as one of Liverpool&#x27;s greatest ever players, Rush came 3rd among Liverpool players in an official Liverpool fan poll, 100 Players Who Shook The Kop. He also had short spells with Chester (later Chester City), Juventus, Leeds United, Newcastle United, Sheffield United, Wrexham and Sydney Olympic. Since retiring as a player in 2000, Rush has had a stint as manager of Chester City (2004–05), and has worked as a television football pundit.

==Club career==
===Early life and career===
Born in St Asaph, Denbighshire, Rush&#x27;s reputation was enhanced by scoring for Chester (later Chester City) in a 2–0 FA Cup third round win away to Second Division team Newcastle United in January 1980, with Chester equalling their best run by reaching the last 16 where they narrowly lost to Ipswich Town. His last game for Chester was a 2–1 win over Southend United at Sealand Road on 26 April 1980 in which he did not score.

Despite interest from Manchester United, and in spite of Rush being a boyhood Everton fan, Liverpool won the race to sign the 19-year-old in April 1980, though he had to remain at Chester until the end of the season as the transfer deadline (27 March 1980) had passed. Recommended by chief scout Geoff Twentyman, Liverpool paid a record fee for a teenager of £300,000. It remained Chester&#x27;s record sale until they went bankrupt in March 2010. Rush was managed throughout his time at Chester by Alan Oakes, although much of the credit for his development is given to youth manager Cliff Sear. Nearly 20 years later, Rush and Sear worked together on the coaching staff at Wrexham.

===Liverpool: 1980–1987===
Rush made his international debut, in May 1980, just before he officially became a Liverpool player. His Liverpool début came on 13 December that year in a First Division fixture at Portman Road against Ipswich Town. He was standing in for his future strike-partner, Kenny Dalglish (out with an ankle injury but at the time one of the most highly rated strikers in the world), and wore his No 7 shirt. At this stage, Liverpool were defending the league title and also contending for the European Cup, while Ipswich were emerging as surprise title contenders. Liverpool finished fifth (with Aston Villa winning the title), but they did win the European Cup (for the third time) and the League Cup (for the first time). For the League Cup triumph Rush only made one appearance during the cup run but it was a crucial one; starting the replay in the final where they beat West Ham United. For the European Cup campaign Rush also made one appearance; in the semi-final first leg against Bayern Munich, but he was left out of the squad for the final.

During his first season at Liverpool the young Rush mostly played reserve team football, rather than the first team. His first goal for the club came on 30 September 1981 during a European Cup first round second leg tie at Anfield against Oulun Palloseura. Liverpool had already won the first leg at the Raatti Stadium 1–0. They won the second leg 7–0, with Rush scoring in the 67th minute after coming on three minutes earlier for David Johnson.

His first two league goals came on 10 October 1981 in a 3–0 home win over Leeds United, and a month later he scored in the Merseyside derby at Anfield in a 3–1 win. After Christmas, Rush and Liverpool moved from tenth up to the top of the league. He scored a hat-trick in the 4–0 away league win over Notts County on 26 January 1982, and scored in both of the next two games. He managed eight goals in the League Cup (one of them in the final win over Tottenham Hotspur) and three in the FA Cup campaign which ended in a fifth round defeat by Chelsea. He ended the season as the club&#x27;s top scorer, scoring 30 times in 49 appearances in all competitions, a ratio of 1 goal every 1.6 games. 17 of these goals came in the League as he helped Liverpool reclaim the League championship from Aston Villa. He also scored a goal to help Liverpool win the 1982 Football League Cup Final against Tottenham Hotspur.

He was voted PFA Young Player of the Year in 1983 after helping Liverpool to a second successive First Division/League Cup double, though once again success eluded them in the European Cup. He scored 24 League goals as Liverpool finished 11 points clear of runners-up Watford. On 6 November 1982 Rush scored four goals against Everton in a 5–0 victory, a post-war record for goals by a single player in a Merseyside derby.

Liverpool&#x27;s third successive League Cup triumph was added through a 2–1 win over Manchester United after extra time at Wembley. Rush was voted PFA Player of the Year and BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year in 1984 as Liverpool retained both the League and the League Cup and won the European Cup. Rush also added the Football Writers Footballer of the Year to the PFA award he had already claimed – the same feat that his strike partner Kenny Dalglish had achieved a year earlier.

He scored 47 goals in 65 games (making him the highest goalscorer in all competitions for any professional club that season), a goal every 1.4 matches, as Liverpool finished three points clear of closest rivals Southampton in the League. They beat rivals Everton 1–0 in the replayed final of the League Cup (after a 0–0 draw in the first ever all-Merseyside final). They also won their fourth European Cup by defeating AS Roma 4–2 on penalties (Rush made it 3–2 before Bruce Grobbelaar&#x27;s famous &#x27;jelly legs&#x27; antics) following a 1–1 draw after extra time.

The 1984–85 season was Liverpool&#x27;s first trophyless season in ten years, though they did reach their fifth European Cup final against Juventus in the game of the Heysel Stadium disaster. Before the match kicked off rioting hooligans caused a retaining wall to collapse, killing 39 Juventus supporters. The game ended in a 1–0 win for Juventus. Liverpool were beaten to the title by neighbours Everton, who were crowned champions with four matches to spare. The sequel to the Heysel disaster was an indefinite ban on all English clubs in European competition, with Liverpool set to serve an extra season once the ban was lifted on other English clubs. This meant that Rush and Liverpool were unable to compete in the 1985–86 UEFA Cup.

In the 1985–86 season Rush scored twice as Liverpool beat Southampton 2–0 in the FA Cup semi-final at White Hart Lane, booking a place at Wembley to face Everton in the first all-Merseyside FA Cup final. Liverpool had pipped their city rivals to the League title (which had also been contested with the likes of West Ham United and Manchester United) by beating Chelsea 1–0 at Stamford Bridge. Everton opened the scoring when Gary Lineker outpaced Alan Hansen to shoot past Grobbelaar at the second attempt and held this lead until half-time. In the second half Liverpool drew level in the 57th minute when Rush latched onto a pass from Jan Mølby to round Everton goalkeeper Bobby Mimms and slot the ball into an empty net. Six minutes later, Mølby was again at the heart of another attack. Picking the ball up inside the Everton penalty area, he drilled a cross for Craig Johnston to score. Liverpool were now 2–1 up, but the game was in the balance until the 84th minute, when Ronnie Whelan led another attack. Dalglish made a run across his path into space, but Whelan used it as a dummy and clipped a pass over three Everton defenders into the path of Rush who, from the angle of the six-yard area, scored past Mimms. Liverpool held on to win 3–1 and completed the first League and FA Cup double in the club&#x27;s history. Rush added the Man of the Match award to his winner&#x27;s medal.

Since Dalglish&#x27;s appointment as player-manager in the 1985 close season, Rush had often found himself partnered with Paul Walsh in the Liverpool first team as Dalglish selected himself as a player less frequently.

===Juventus: 1987–1988===
After attracting much interest from top European sides, Rush accepted an offer to sign for Italian club Juventus on 2 July 1986 for a British record transfer fee of £3.2m. However, he continued to play at Liverpool for one season on loan before making his debut for Juventus. He was the second highest goalscorer in the Football League for the 1986–87 season with 30 First Division goals, but failed to win any major trophies as Liverpool finished second to Everton in the league and were defeated by Arsenal in the League Cup final despite Rush&#x27;s opening goal, a result that also ended a long sequence – Liverpool had not lost any of the previous 144 games in which he had scored.

However, it was viewed as a new challenge for Rush who would have the task of unlocking the much tighter defences in Serie A. His time at Juventus was less than successful, as he scored only eight times in 29 games; though this was partly explained by the Italian tradition at this time of tighter defences meaning that strikers tended to score fewer goals in Italy than they did in England.

It has been said that he had a hard time settling in Turin, and that once he remarked &quot;It&#x27;s like living in a foreign country.&quot; However, he has denied both the feeling and the quote, stating as &quot;absolutely untrue&quot; that he was homesick and did not enjoy his time in Turin. &quot;I was homesick at times, but it is one of the best things I&#x27;ve done in my life&quot;. In his autobiography Rush says that the quote was a joke made up by Kenny Dalglish, then in an interview published in &quot;The Irish Times&quot; in 2008, claimed that the quote was fictional.

After just one season at the Stadio Comunale, he returned to Anfield, rejoining Liverpool for £2.7m on 18 August 1988 – a record signing for an English club at the time, which remained unbroken for three years. It was the third time that summer that the national transfer record had been broken.

Rush&#x27;s departure from Liverpool had sparked the acquisition of new strikers John Aldridge (whose physical resemblance to Rush was often remarked upon) and Peter Beardsley, and on his return to the Liverpool side he was partnered alongside these players to form a 4–3–3 formation. Rush&#x27;s former strike partner Kenny Dalglish (who had been appointed player-manager in 1985) was still registered as a player but by then he was in his 37th year and rarely played in the first team, retiring completely in 1990. Rush published a diary of his frustrating time in Italy titled &quot;My Italian Diary, 1989&quot;. In it, he reflected on his struggles to integrate himself in the dressing room at Juventus and adapt to the Italian style of play.

===Liverpool (second spell): 1988–1996===


On his return to Anfield, Rush had serious competition for a place in the new-look Liverpool attack, with John Aldridge having arrived at the club just before Rush&#x27;s move to Juventus and Peter Beardsley having arrived shortly afterwards. It was deemed that Rush and Aldridge were too similar in style to be able to play together. Aldridge started the season in front of Rush and consistently scored goals, thus keeping the Welshman on the bench. As the season progressed, Rush came into some form. Rush again scored twice against Everton in a thrilling 3–2 win in the 1989 FA Cup Final. He came off the bench to replace Aldridge, who had opened the scoring for Liverpool in the fourth minute of the game. The sides were locked at 1–1 after 90 minutes, but Rush put Liverpool ahead in the fourth minute of extra time. Everton midfielder Stuart McCall then brought the scores level for a second time, but Rush scored again in the 103rd minute to win the Cup for Liverpool.

The 1989 FA Cup Final carried even greater significance because of the events of 15 April that year. In the semi-final, Liverpool had been drawn against Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough, home of Sheffield Wednesday. The game was brought to an abrupt end at 3.06 pm due to the unfolding disaster. 94 fans were crushed to death that day, with the final death toll eventually reaching 97. Rush, along with his teammates, attended many of the funerals.

Rush featured in the 1989 League title decider against Arsenal at Anfield. Arsenal needed to win by a two-goal margin to become champions, with a last-minute Michael Thomas goal famously giving them the title. Rush was injured during the first half of the game and had to be replaced by Peter Beardsley.

At the end of that season, UEFA voted for the ban on English teams in European competitions to continue for at least one more season, meaning that Rush and his teammates would be unable to challenge for the Cup Winners&#x27; Cup.

The 1989–90 season saw Rush win another League title, his fifth and last, as Liverpool finished nine points clear of Aston Villa, with Rush scoring 18 times in 36 games. However, another bid for the League–FA Cup double failed as Liverpool suffered a shock FA Cup semi-final defeat to Crystal Palace, even though Rush had given the Liverpool the lead with a goal in the 14th minute. The game ended in a 4–3 defeat, a surprising result considering that Liverpool had crushed the newly promoted South London club 9–0 in a league game earlier in the season.

Although the ban on English clubs in European competition was lifted for the 1990–91 season, Liverpool were unable to compete in the European Cup as UEFA ruled that they would have to serve an extra year&#x27;s suspension.

1990–91 saw Rush continue to score regularly and Liverpool led the table from the start of the season until January, having won their opening eight league games, but they were then overhauled by Arsenal and on 22 February 1991 Dalglish announced his resignation as manager. He was replaced by Graeme Souness but the change of manager was not enough to prevent the league title from slipping away from Anfield. Shortly after Dalglish&#x27;s resignation, Liverpool were eliminated from the FA Cup in the fifth round by neighbours Everton. Liverpool finished second and were finally readmitted to European competition, qualifying for the UEFA Cup and giving Rush and his teammates their first chance of European action since 1984–85.

In 1992, he picked up a third FA Cup winners&#x27; medal, scoring Liverpool&#x27;s second goal, in the 67th minute, in the 2–0 win against Second Division Sunderland at Wembley. This gave Rush and his colleagues another chance of European football, this time in the Cup Winners&#x27; Cup. It was a successful end to a season where Rush had struggled with injuries, and Liverpool had finished sixth in the league. His third goal came in a crucial 2–0 home win over Manchester United on 26 April 1992 which denied their arch-rivals the championship, the title going instead to Leeds United – the conclusion to a campaign where the title challenge had been mostly a two-horse race in which Liverpool had merely been on the fringes. This was the first time he had scored against Manchester United. Liverpool managed only a sixth-place finish in the league that season, the first time since 1981 that they had not finished champions or runners-up.

1992–93 was perhaps Liverpool&#x27;s hardest season since beginning their current top flight tenure in 1962. They failed to mount a challenge for the new Premier League title, and as late as March they stood 15th in the table. Dismal form in the league had seen Rush dropped from the starting line-up, having scoring only three league goals by the beginning of March, with Souness favouring the likes of Ronny Rosenthal and Paul Stewart, but Rush returned to his peak during the final weeks of the season with 11 goals during the final two months, and he finished the season as the club&#x27;s top scorer with 14 league goals, 22 overall. He topped the goalscoring charts once again in 1993–94 with 19 goals, beginning the season with Nigel Clough as his strike partner until the brilliant young Robbie Fowler broke into the first team. It was another disappointing season for Liverpool as they continued to perform unremarkably in the Premier League and Souness stepped down in late January following a shock FA Cup exit at the hands of Bristol City. Long-serving coach Roy Evans took over as manager. Liverpool finished eighth in the league, once again missing out on European competition.

Rush picked up his fifth League Cup winner&#x27;s medal in 1995, when two goals from Steve McManaman saw off a spirited challenge from outsiders Bolton Wanderers, as Liverpool triumphed 2–1. Earlier in the competition Rush scored a hat-trick as Liverpool beat Blackburn Rovers at Ewood Park, the team who would go on to win the Premier League that season. Liverpool themselves achieved their best league finish since 1991, as they finished fourth in the Premier League.

The 1995 close season saw Liverpool pay a national record fee of £8.4million for Nottingham Forest striker Stan Collymore, putting Rush&#x27;s future at Anfield in doubt. He began the season as Liverpool&#x27;s first choice striker alongside Collymore, only to be replaced by Robbie Fowler as Collymore&#x27;s regular partner after a few games.

His loss of a regular place in the first team sparked rumours of a transfer during the season. Peter Reid made an offer to Liverpool to sign Rush on loan for Division One promotion challengers Sunderland in January 1996, but Liverpool manager Roy Evans rejected this offer, despite having not fielded Rush in his first eleven for two months, saying that he needed Rush as cover for Fowler and Collymore, as Liverpool began their quest for the FA Cup and were distant challengers in the league title race.

In late February 1996, it was announced that Rush would be leaving Anfield on a free transfer when his contract expired on 1 June. Numerous clubs were quick to express an interest in signing him. These included Everton, Sunderland, Oldham Athletic, Swansea City, Leeds United and Tranmere Rovers.

His long association with Liverpool ended with a substitute appearance in the 1996 FA Cup Final against Manchester United. A hugely disappointing game looked to be heading for extra time and even a replay until Eric Cantona scored a late winner to give Manchester United a 1–0 victory.

===Later career: 1996–2000===
Rush bid farewell to Anfield on 20 May 1996 when he agreed to sign for Leeds United. Rush spent a season with Leeds and scored three times in 36 Premier League games and was given a free transfer at the end of the 1996–97 campaign.

He had been brought to Elland Road by manager Howard Wilkinson, who was sacked only a month into the season to be replaced by George Graham.

He then linked up with Kenny Dalglish at Newcastle United on a one-year contract but lost his place in the side after Christmas, when Alan Shearer returned from a long-term injury. However, Rush did score an important goal in a 1–0 win over Everton in the third round of the FA Cup, his 44th in the competition (a 20th-century record), helping Newcastle on their way to their first FA Cup Final in 24 years. He scored one other goal for Newcastle in a League Cup tie with Hull City.

He went on loan to Sheffield United later in the season, before leaving St James&#x27;s Park in the summer of the year 1998 to sign, amid much fanfare, for Wrexham. The 37-year-old less athletic Rush failed to score in 17 Division Two starts for the North Wales club, and was moved into midfield near the end of the season. He made a brief playing comeback with Sydney Olympic in Australia, scoring one goal in two games, before finally retiring, aged 38, in 2000 ending an illustrious career.

==International career==
Rush made his Welsh debut before he had been handed his first start for Liverpool, playing his first match on 21 May 1980 against Scotland in Glasgow, a 0–1 loss. He played his last international match on 24 January 1996 – a friendly match against Italy in Terni which Wales lost 0–3. Rush played regularly for the Welsh national team for more than 15 years, scoring 28 goals in 73 games.

He scored in a friendly against Italy in Brescia on 4 June 1988, the only goal in a shock win. During his career the team never qualified for a major tournament, although in 1991 he scored the winning goal in a memorable Euro 1992 qualifier against Germany on 5 June 1991. On 9 October 1992, he netted a hat-trick in a 6–0 win over the Faroe Islands at Cardiff Arms Park in 1994 FIFA World Cup qualification, the first Welsh hat-trick in over 13 years, and one of only 14 in the nation&#x27;s history. Rush was Wales&#x27; record goalscorer until 2018 when his record of 28 goals was surpassed by Gareth Bale.

==Management and coaching career==
After working as a part-time striker&#x27;s coach for Liverpool under Gerard Houllier in 2003, he was appointed manager of his first professional club, Chester City (by this time in Football League Two), in August 2004. Chester had made a dreadful start to their first season back in the Football League and Rush had a hard time at the helm. After losing 3–1 at Boston United in their first game in charge, they strung together a two-month unbeaten run and he led the club to the FA Cup third round. Rush seemed to be answering his critics, including former Liverpool teammate Mark Lawrenson, who doubted whether his tactical and coaching abilities could match his striking history.

But after Rush ruled himself out of the running for the vacant Welsh manager&#x27;s job on 1 November 2004 things never seemed to go as well. Several heavy defeats were inflicted and Rush was criticised for long-ball tactics his managerial team opted to use. Despite pressure from chairman Stephen Vaughan, Rush refused to resign after a humiliating 5–0 loss to neighbours Shrewsbury Town in February 2005. But when Vaughan sacked Rush&#x27;s assistant Mark Aizlewood in April, after a 1–0 defeat at Darlington, without his knowledge, Rush resigned on principle. By the point of his resignation, Chester were virtually safe from relegation. His spell in charge saw youngsters such as Robbie Booth, Michael Walsh and Shaun Whalley all given their Football League debuts, while players including Michael Brown, George Elokobi and Robbie Foy all spent time on loan at the club.

Rush was interviewed for the Peterborough United manager&#x27;s job shortly after this but lost out to Mark Wright, who had played in the same Liverpool team as Rush from 1991 to 1996, and had preceded Rush as Chester manager.

==Media career and other activities, 2005 to present==
In 2005, at the age of 43, Rush considered coming out of retirement to play for Total Network Solutions, after the Welsh side were drawn against Liverpool for their opening round UEFA Champions League qualifying match, but later decided against this.

Since November 2005, Rush has been involved in media work within the game, including a stint as an analyst with ESPN. He also appears as a pundit and reporter for Sky Sports and Sky Sports News. He has also done work on LFC TV.

On 27 April 2006, Rush was involved in the Marina Dalglish charity match, which pitted the 1986 FA Cup final teams of Liverpool and Everton against each other in aid of Breast Cancer Research, as Kenny Dalglish&#x27;s wife Marina had been suffering from breast cancer and the proceeds from the match were being donated to the charity.

Rush was inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame in 2006 due to his achievements in the game.

On 7 September 2007 it was announced that Rush had been appointed Elite Performance Director for the Welsh Football Trust, a part-time role in which he would help develop the next generation of players for Wales&#x27; national teams.

Rush released his autobiography on 21 August 2008, &quot;Rush: The Autobiography&quot;, through Ebury Press.

On 26 April 2010, it was announced that Rush had returned to work with Liverpool FC, becoming the club&#x27;s new Soccer Schools Ambassador and it was announced he would also work with the club&#x27;s commercial team to help develop and support partnerships with other global sponsors and brands. Rush can still be seen wearing the red of Liverpool as he is one of Liverpool&#x27;s ambassadors on public relations tours for the club.

In summer 2010, as part of an outdoor installation in Chester that featured seventy life sized fibreglass rhinos each with unique artwork, one rhino was in honour of Ian Rush. The rhino was painted with a black moustache and wearing a Chester City football kit and boots.

In August 2014, Rush was one of 200 public figures who were signatories to a letter to &quot;The Guardian&quot; opposing Scottish independence in the run-up to September&#x27;s referendum on that issue.

Rush was one of the pundits in first season (2014) of Indian Super League.

In August 2016, Rush was named as ambassador for the 2017 UEFA Champions League Final, which took place in Cardiff, Wales.

== In popular culture ==
Rush is referenced in the Milk Marketing Board television advert Accrington Stanley, Who Are They?, which ran in the late 1980s and early 1990s.

Rush made a brief cameo appearance as himself in the BBC drama series Hustle.

==Personal life==
Ian Rush was the ninth of ten children born to Francis and Doris Rush, who lived in Flint, North Wales. Francis Rush, who worked in the steel industry for many years, died in July 2003 at the age of 78. Doris Rush died almost seven years later at the age of 82. He is of partial Irish descent.

Rush married Tracy in 1987. The marriage ended in 2015. They had two sons together: Jonathan and Daniel.

He is the great-uncle of footballer Owen Beck, who made his debut for Liverpool in 2021.

Rush was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire in the 1996 New Year Honours for services to association football.

==Career statistics==
===Club===


===International===


===Manager===
==Honours==
:Source:

Liverpool
* Football League First Division: 1981–82, 1982–83, 1983–84, 1985–86, 1989–90
* FA Cup: 1985–86, 1988–89, 1991–92
* Football League Cup: 1980–81, 1981–82, 1982–83, 1983–84, 1994–95
* Football League Super Cup: 1985–86
* FA Charity Shield: 1982, 1986 (shared), 1989, 1990 (shared)
* European Cup: 1980–81, 1983–84

Individual
* PFA Young Player of the Year: 1983
* PFA Players&#x27; Player of the Year: 1984
* FWA Footballer of the Year: 1984
* BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year: 1984
* PFA First Division Team of the Year: 1983, 1984, 1985, 1987, 1991
* PFA Team of the Century (1977–1996): 2007
* European Golden Boot: 1984
* First Division Golden Boot: 1984
* Liverpool Top Goalscorer: 1981–82, 1982–83, 1983–84, 1985–86, 1986–87, 1990–91, 1992–93, 1993–94
* FAI International Football Awards – International Personality: 2010

==Bibliography==
** Paperback (2009): 

==References==
==External links==

* Profile at the Liverpool F.C. website
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q219354" start="0" end="14" title="Ian Rush" label="Ian James Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="69" end="79" title="association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="96" end="103" title="Forward (association football)" label="forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="253" end="262" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="332" end="359" title="List of Liverpool F.C. records and statistics#Top goalscorers" label="all-time leading goalscorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="510" end="517" title="EFL Cup" label="EFL Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="540" end="546" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="605" end="633" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales national football team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="651" end="668" title="Wales national football team#Top goalscorers" label="record goalscorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q184586" start="737" end="748" title="Gareth Bale" label="Gareth Bale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070732" start="952" end="959" title="Chester City F.C." label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="982" end="990" title="Juventus" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="992" end="1004" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="1006" end="1022" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="1024" end="1040" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529" start="1042" end="1049" title="Wrexham A.F.C." label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q782658" start="1054" end="1068" title="Sydney Olympic FC" label="Sydney Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q548248" start="1266" end="1274" title="St Asaph" label="St Asaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070732" start="1341" end="1348" title="Chester City F.C." label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="1379" end="1385" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="1410" end="1425" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="1431" end="1447" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q9653" start="1555" end="1567" title="Ipswich Town F.C." label="Ipswich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q48951" start="1614" end="1629" title="Southend United F.C." label="Southend United"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440602" start="1633" end="1645" title="Sealand Road" label="Sealand Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="1769" end="1776" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534350" start="1987" end="2002" title="Geoff Twentyman" label="Geoff Twentyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015015" start="2190" end="2200" title="Alan Oakes" label="Alan Oakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132760" start="2276" end="2286" title="Cliff Sear" label="Cliff Sear"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="2559" end="2573" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q619558" start="2585" end="2597" title="Portman Road" label="Portman Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q9653" start="2606" end="2618" title="Ipswich Town F.C." label="Ipswich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="2890" end="2902" title="European Cup" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="2993" end="3004" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579831" start="3250" end="3255" title="1981 Football League Cup final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="3272" end="3287" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="3386" end="3399" title="Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068925" start="3442" end="3447" title="1981 European Cup final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="3630" end="3642" title="European Cup" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354228" start="3689" end="3705" title="Oulun Palloseura" label="Oulun Palloseura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278440" start="3754" end="3768" title="Raatti Stadion" label="Raatti Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q124853" start="3882" end="3895" title="David Johnson (footballer, born 1951)" label="David Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q726186" start="4021" end="4037" title="Merseyside derby" label="Merseyside derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q19598" start="4199" end="4211" title="Notts County F.C." label="Notts County"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="4350" end="4367" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="4386" end="4392" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="4441" end="4448" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580453" start="4750" end="4780" title="1982 Football League Cup Final" label="1982 Football League Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009646" start="4822" end="4850" title="PFA Young Player of the Year" label="PFA Young Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="4921" end="4931" title="Football League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="4985" end="4997" title="European Cup" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714" start="5077" end="5084" title="Watford F.C." label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q726186" start="5214" end="5230" title="Merseyside derby" label="Merseyside derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="5319" end="5336" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q621867" start="5381" end="5403" title="PFA Player of the Year" label="PFA Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400865" start="5408" end="5448" title="BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year" label="BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750244" start="5560" end="5599" title="Football Writers&amp;#x27; Association Footballer of the Year" label="Football Writers Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q187198" start="5680" end="5694" title="Kenny Dalglish" label="Kenny Dalglish"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="5936" end="5947" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739" start="6144" end="6151" title="AS Roma" label="AS Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q444295" start="6194" end="6210" title="Bruce Grobbelaar" label="Bruce Grobbelaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q167074" start="6300" end="6307" title="1984–85 in English football" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="6435" end="6443" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q323888" start="6463" end="6486" title="Heysel Stadium disaster" label="Heysel Stadium disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="6694" end="6701" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q754140" start="7017" end="7033" title="1985–86 UEFA Cup" label="1985–86 UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436256" start="7043" end="7057" title="1985–86 in English football" label="1985–86 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q186425" start="7138" end="7153" title="White Hart Lane" label="White Hart Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484515" start="7226" end="7238" title="1986 FA Cup Final" label="FA Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="7368" end="7385" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="7398" end="7405" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q171458" start="7413" end="7428" title="Stamford Bridge (stadium)" label="Stamford Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q47778" start="7462" end="7474" title="Gary Lineker" label="Gary Lineker"/>
<link wikidata="Q374189" start="7484" end="7495" title="Alan Hansen" label="Alan Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q375781" start="7673" end="7682" title="Jan Mølby" label="Jan Mølby"/>
<link wikidata="Q888630" start="7711" end="7722" title="Bobby Mimms" label="Bobby Mimms"/>
<link wikidata="Q290853" start="7903" end="7917" title="Craig Johnston" label="Craig Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q544085" start="8015" end="8028" title="Ronnie Whelan" label="Ronnie Whelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362206" start="8553" end="8563" title="Paul Walsh" label="Paul Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914547" start="8910" end="8914" title="Loan (association football)" label="loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="8997" end="9012" title="Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q82608" start="9021" end="9035" title="1986–87 in English football" label="1986–87 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583688" start="9193" end="9209" title="1987 Football League Cup Final" label="League Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="9482" end="9489" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="9811" end="9816" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="10275" end="10290" title="The Irish Times" label="The Irish Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q214629" start="10374" end="10389" title="Stadio Grande Torino" label="Stadio Comunale"/>
<link wikidata="Q342826" start="10723" end="10736" title="John Aldridge" label="John Aldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q344989" start="10802" end="10817" title="Peter Beardsley" label="Peter Beardsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q187198" start="10961" end="10975" title="Kenny Dalglish" label="Kenny Dalglish"/>
<link wikidata="Q45671" start="11451" end="11458" title="Anfield" label="Anfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q342826" start="11540" end="11553" title="John Aldridge" label="John Aldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q344989" start="11626" end="11641" title="Peter Beardsley" label="Peter Beardsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151884" start="12007" end="12024" title="1989 FA Cup Final" label="1989 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q706113" start="12275" end="12288" title="Stuart McCall" label="Stuart McCall"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="12564" end="12581" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q642557" start="12585" end="12597" title="Hillsborough Stadium" label="Hillsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="12607" end="12626" title="Sheffield Wednesday F.C." label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q234132" start="12698" end="12706" title="Hillsborough disaster" label="disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843952" start="12888" end="12908" title="Liverpool F.C. 0–2 Arsenal F.C. (26 May 1989)" label="League title decider"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="12917" end="12924" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q275823" start="13020" end="13034" title="Michael Thomas (footballer, born 1967)" label="Michael Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q344989" start="13149" end="13164" title="Peter Beardsley" label="Peter Beardsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="13194" end="13198" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="13374" end="13395" title="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="13683" end="13697" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658304" start="13909" end="13912" title="Liverpool 9–0 Crystal Palace (1989)" label="9–0"/>
<link wikidata="Q118823" start="14087" end="14099" title="1990–91 European Cup" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="14103" end="14107" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q14907879" start="14178" end="14185" title="1990–91 in English football" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="14373" end="14380" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q310352" start="14471" end="14485" title="Graeme Souness" label="Graeme Souness"/>
<link wikidata="Q45671" start="14579" end="14586" title="Anfield" label="Anfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="14813" end="14821" title="UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="15049" end="15064" title="Football League Division Two" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="15065" end="15075" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="15374" end="15391" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="15485" end="15497" title="Leeds United" label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="15685" end="15702" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997332" start="15854" end="15861" title="1992–93 in English football" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="16008" end="16022" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q728892" start="16258" end="16273" title="Ronny Rosenthal" label="Ronny Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091355" start="16278" end="16290" title="Paul Stewart (footballer, born 1964)" label="Paul Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365269" start="16540" end="16547" title="1993–94 in English football" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989584" start="16589" end="16601" title="Nigel Clough" label="Nigel Clough"/>
<link wikidata="Q206548" start="16650" end="16663" title="Robbie Fowler" label="Robbie Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="16864" end="16870" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19456" start="16892" end="16904" title="Bristol City F.C." label="Bristol City"/>
<link wikidata="Q927681" start="16925" end="16934" title="Roy Evans" label="Roy Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q294501" start="17132" end="17147" title="Steve McManaman" label="Steve McManaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="17192" end="17208" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="17279" end="17288" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="17599" end="17616" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q444975" start="17625" end="17639" title="Stan Collymore" label="Stan Collymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q360514" start="17959" end="17969" title="Peter Reid" label="Peter Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="18057" end="18067" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q927681" start="18107" end="18116" title="Roy Evans" label="Roy Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="18307" end="18313" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45671" start="18437" end="18444" title="Anfield" label="Anfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q19601" start="18602" end="18617" title="Oldham Athletic A.F.C." label="Oldham Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="18619" end="18631" title="Swansea City A.F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19637" start="18650" end="18665" title="Tranmere Rovers F.C." label="Tranmere Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484524" start="18746" end="18763" title="1996 FA Cup Final" label="1996 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q170328" start="18879" end="18891" title="Eric Cantona" label="Eric Cantona"/>
<link wikidata="Q45671" start="19006" end="19013" title="Anfield" label="Anfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="19056" end="19068" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="19130" end="19144" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474922" start="19199" end="19215" title="1996–97 in English football" label="1996–97 campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q619505" start="19241" end="19252" title="Elland Road" label="Elland Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q552905" start="19264" end="19280" title="Howard Wilkinson" label="Howard Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313763" start="19344" end="19357" title="George Graham" label="George Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q187198" start="19383" end="19397" title="Kenny Dalglish" label="Kenny Dalglish"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="19401" end="19417" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q483583" start="19494" end="19506" title="Alan Shearer" label="Alan Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="19863" end="19879" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529" start="20000" end="20007" title="Wrexham A.F.C." label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="20066" end="20078" title="Football League Second Division" label="Division Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="20094" end="20105" title="North Wales" label="North Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="20131" end="20139" title="Midfielder" label="midfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q782658" start="20206" end="20220" title="Sydney Olympic FC" label="Sydney Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="20378" end="20383" title="Wales national football team" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="20494" end="20502" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="20506" end="20513" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="20612" end="20617" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8621" start="20621" end="20626" title="Terni" label="Terni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221" start="20795" end="20802" title="Brescia" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q631878" start="20975" end="20994" title="UEFA Euro 1992 qualifying" label="Euro 1992 qualifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="21003" end="21010" title="German national football team" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q200688" start="21090" end="21103" title="Faroe Islands national football team" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q432321" start="21107" end="21124" title="Cardiff Arms Park" label="Cardiff Arms Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q776955" start="21128" end="21161" title="1994 FIFA World Cup qualification" label="1994 FIFA World Cup qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603730" start="21173" end="21188" title="List of Wales national football team hat-tricks" label="Welsh hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q184586" start="21351" end="21362" title="Gareth Bale" label="Gareth Bale"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="21582" end="21601" title="Football League Two" label="Football League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="21688" end="21703" title="Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q894605" start="21762" end="21775" title="Boston United" label="Boston United"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="21880" end="21886" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q263951" start="21977" end="21991" title="Mark Lawrenson" label="Mark Lawrenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740814" start="22291" end="22300" title="Long ball (Football)" label="long-ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610749" start="22374" end="22389" title="Stephen Vaughan Sr." label="Stephen Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19626" start="22457" end="22472" title="Shrewsbury Town" label="Shrewsbury Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766497" start="22537" end="22551" title="Mark Aizlewood" label="Mark Aizlewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340849" start="22768" end="22780" title="Robbie Booth" label="Robbie Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929709" start="22782" end="22795" title="Michael Walsh (footballer, born 1986)" label="Michael Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491000" start="22800" end="22813" title="Shaun Whalley" label="Shaun Whalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828868" start="22878" end="22891" title="Michael Brown (footballer, born 1985)" label="Michael Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q109780" start="22893" end="22907" title="George Elokobi" label="George Elokobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340892" start="22912" end="22922" title="Robbie Foy" label="Robbie Foy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19495" start="22989" end="23008" title="Peterborough United F.C." label="Peterborough United"/>
<link wikidata="Q526694" start="23063" end="23074" title="Mark Wright (footballer, born 1963)" label="Mark Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q390183" start="23323" end="23346" title="The New Saints F.C." label="Total Network Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="23422" end="23443" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="23607" end="23611" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340204" start="23658" end="23668" title="Sky Sports" label="Sky Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962638" start="23673" end="23688" title="Sky Sports News" label="Sky Sports News"/>
<link wikidata="Q930192" start="23715" end="23721" title="LFC TV" label="LFC TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="23978" end="23991" title="breast cancer" label="breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323117" start="24087" end="24116" title="English Football Hall of Fame" label="English Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332118" start="24494" end="24505" title="Ebury Press" label="Ebury Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q170263" start="24997" end="25004" title="Chester" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="25309" end="25321" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="25337" end="25358" title="Scottish independence" label="Scottish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="25393" end="25417" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="referendum on that issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056350" start="25474" end="25493" title="Indian Super League" label="Indian Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q20650304" start="25549" end="25581" title="2017 UEFA Champions League Final" label="2017 UEFA Champions League Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="25603" end="25610" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672878" start="25710" end="25743" title="Accrington Stanley, Who Are They?" label="Accrington Stanley, Who Are They?"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="25809" end="25825" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="25844" end="25847" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q841080" start="25861" end="25867" title="Hustle (TV series)" label="Hustle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428848" start="25972" end="25977" title="Flint, Flintshire" label="Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="25979" end="25990" title="North Wales" label="North Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q109296921" start="26325" end="26334" title="Owen Beck (footballer)" label="Owen Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="26359" end="26368" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="26398" end="26439" title="Member of the Order of the British Empire" label="Member of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591571" start="26447" end="26468" title="1996 New Year Honours" label="1996 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="26613" end="26643" title="Football League First Division" label="Football League First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580182" start="26645" end="26652" title="1981–82 Football League First Division" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446169" start="26654" end="26661" title="1982–83 Football League First Division" label="1982–83"/>
<link wikidata="Q195936" start="26663" end="26670" title="1983–84 Football League First Division" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q134173" start="26672" end="26679" title="1985–86 Football League First Division" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436262" start="26681" end="26688" title="1989–90 Football League First Division" label="1989–90"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="26691" end="26697" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386591" start="26699" end="26706" title="1985–86 FA Cup" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165212" start="26708" end="26715" title="1988–89 FA Cup" label="1988–89"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386612" start="26717" end="26724" title="1991–92 FA Cup" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="26727" end="26746" title="Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033097" start="26748" end="26755" title="1980–81 Football League Cup" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749625" start="26757" end="26764" title="1981–82 Football League Cup" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810504" start="26766" end="26773" title="1982–83 Football League Cup" label="1982–83"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810506" start="26775" end="26782" title="1983–84 Football League Cup" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285346" start="26784" end="26791" title="1994–95 Football League Cup" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026011" start="26794" end="26819" title="Football League Super Cup" label="Football League Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="26831" end="26848" title="FA Charity Shield" label="FA Charity Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736667" start="26850" end="26854" title="1982 FA Charity Shield" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736674" start="26856" end="26860" title="1986 FA Charity Shield" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736677" start="26871" end="26875" title="1989 FA Charity Shield" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045548" start="26877" end="26881" title="1990 FA Charity Shield" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="26893" end="26905" title="European Cup" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q641465" start="26907" end="26914" title="1980–81 European Cup" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q497085" start="26916" end="26923" title="1983–84 European Cup" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009646" start="26938" end="26966" title="PFA Young Player of the Year" label="PFA Young Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q621867" start="26975" end="27011" title="PFA Players&amp;#x27; Player of the Year" label="PFA Players&amp;#x27; Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750244" start="27020" end="27046" title="FWA Footballer of the Year" label="FWA Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400865" start="27055" end="27095" title="BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year" label="BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044044" start="27104" end="27139" title="PFA Team of the Year" label="PFA First Division Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276089" start="27172" end="27175" title="Professional Footballers&amp;#x27; Association" label="PFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q233454" start="27216" end="27236" title="European Golden Boot" label="European Golden Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="27245" end="27271" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division Golden Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="27280" end="27304" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool Top Goalscorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424336" start="27379" end="27412" title="FAI International Football Awards" label="FAI International Football Awards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413284" wikidata="Q182314" url="?curid=413284" title="Peter Schmeichel">
<text>Peter Bolesław Schmeichel (born 18 November 1963) is a Danish former professional footballer who played as a goalkeeper. During eight seasons at English club Manchester United, he won 15 trophies including five Premier League titles, three FA Cups and he captained the club to victory in the 1999 UEFA Champions League final to complete the Treble. Schmeichel also played for the Denmark national team, with whom he won the UEFA European Championship in 1992. Regarded as one of the greatest goalkeepers of all time, he was voted the IFFHS World&#x27;s Best Goalkeeper in both 1992 and 1993, while the International Federation of Football History &amp; Statistics ranked Schmeichel among the top ten goalkeepers of the 20th century.

Born in Gladsaxe, Copenhagen, Schmeichel is tall and weighed close to during his playing days, and wore specially-made size XXXL football shirts. A fierce competitor, he often loudly criticised perceived mistakes by his defenders. Unusual for a goalkeeper, he scored 11 goals during his career, including one for the national team. He was also the most capped player for the Denmark national team, with 129 games between 1987 and 2001, until he was overtaken by Simon Kjær in 2023. In addition to Euro 92, he played for his country at the 1998 FIFA World Cup and three additional European Championship tournaments. He captained the national team in 30 matches. He also represented Gladsaxe-Hero, Hvidovre, Brøndby, Sporting CP, Aston Villa and Manchester City in a career that lasted from 1981 until 2003 and yielded 24 trophies.

In 2001, Schmeichel won a public poll held by Reuters, in which the majority of the 200,000 participants voted him as the best goalkeeper ever, ahead of Lev Yashin and Gordon Banks. In 2003, Schmeichel was inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame in recognition of his impact on the English game. In March 2004, he was named as one of the &quot;125 greatest living footballers&quot;, at the FIFA 100 celebrations. Schmeichel&#x27;s son, Kasper, is also a professional goalkeeper, currently playing for Scottish side Celtic and the Danish national team.

==Early life==
Schmeichel was born in the Søborggård parish of Gladsaxe, Denmark, to Inger, a Danish nurse, and Antoni &quot;Tolek&quot; Schmeichel, a Polish jazz musician. He held Polish citizenship until November 1971 when he, his father, and his three sisters became Danish citizens.

Schmeichel inherited his middle name – Bolesław – from his great-grandfather. He spent his early years in the town of Buddinge, Copenhagen, and began his football career playing for a team in the adjacent suburb of Høje-Gladsaxe. His first match came on 7 August 1972 at the age of 8. After a two-and-a-half-year unbeaten run, Schmeichel was approached by BK Hero, a team from a few divisions above Høje-Gladsaxe and with one of the largest youth football schemes in Denmark. BK Hero merged with Gladsaxe BK in 1979 to form Gladsaxe-Hero BK, and Schmeichel was presented with the opportunity to play for the Zealand FA&#x27;s junior representative team.

Before becoming a professional footballer, Schmeichel had to work a number of jobs to make ends meet. His first job came in the dyeing department of a textile factory, but safety concerns led to his resignation. He then spent 12 months as a cleaner at an old people&#x27;s home, before taking up an office job with the World Wildlife Fund. He originally worked in the organisation&#x27;s shops, but three weeks after he joined, the store manager left and Schmeichel was promoted to the position of sales manager. Soon after, Schmeichel was called upon to do his four months of compulsory military service. However, this coincided with Hvidovre&#x27;s summer training camp in Portugal, which he was permitted to go on with the proviso that he completed his military service the following month. Nevertheless, the delicate organisational situation that arose between the WWF, the Danish defence department and Hvidovre prompted Schmeichel to give up working for the WWF. A job with his father-in-law&#x27;s flooring firm came next, until he realised that his knees could not support his frame for eight hours a day, and he was offered a job with the advertising firm owned by Hvidovre&#x27;s chairman, Niels Erik Madsen. This was to be his last job outside football, as he was offered a contract with Brøndby the following spring.

==Club career==
===Early career: Gladsaxe-Hero and Hvidovre===
Eventually graduating to the Gladsaxe-Hero senior squad, Schmeichel met his first mentor in Svend Aage Hansen, the first team coach at the club, and later to become his father-in-law. With Gladsaxe-Hero already relegated from the Danish Third Division with three games to go, Hansen promoted Schmeichel and six others from the youth team for a match against IF Skjold Birkerød. The team lost 1–0, but Schmeichel received mentions in local newspapers for his personal performance. At the end of the season, Hansen explained to Schmeichel his plan for the future, which involved Schmeichel spending two more seasons with Gladsaxe-Hero BK before moving on to Hvidovre (where he scored six league goals), playing for the Denmark national team, and eventually having a successful career abroad. Schmeichel admits that he had received an offer to play for B 1903&#x27;s youth team, but he turned it down as the club &quot;seemed a bit boring&quot;.

The following season, Gladsaxe-Hero needed only to avoid defeat to Stubbekøbing to prevent relegation from the Danish National League. In the end, Schmeichel played one of the best games of his career and Gladsaxe-Hero won the match. At the end of the game, Hansen&#x27;s daughter, Bente, ran onto the pitch and hugged Schmeichel. The two ended up going out as a couple, and they eventually got married.

Despite having the fifth best defence in the league, conceding 40 goals in 30 games, Schmeichel and Hvidovre finished in 14th place and were relegated in 1985. After only a single season, the club bounced right back to the 1st Division, but Schmeichel left the club to join Brøndby.

===Brøndby===
Before the 1987 season, Schmeichel joined Brøndby, who finished as runners-up the previous season. In the five seasons that Schmeichel played with Brøndby, they went on to win the 1st Division four times. The climax of his Brøndby career would come in the 1990–91 UEFA Cup, which saw Schmeichel as an important part of the team that reached the semi-finals, keeping seven clean sheets in the competition. The club was eliminated from the tournament following a 2–1 away defeat to Roma with a last-minute goal by Rudi Völler. Schmeichel was voted 10th in &quot;The World&#x27;s Best Goalkeeper 1991&quot; poll by the IFFHS.

===Manchester United===

Following his showings on the international scene, Manchester United signed Schmeichel on 6 August 1991 for £505,000, a price described in 2000 by Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson as the &quot;bargain of the century.&quot; Schmeichel was virtually unknown outside Denmark at the time, especially within the United squad members. Manchester United finished as runners-up in Schmeichel&#x27;s first season. and they also won the Football League Cup for the first time in the club&#x27;s history. For his performances throughout the season, he was elected &quot;The World&#x27;s Best Goalkeeper of 1992&quot; by IFFHS.

In the 1992–93 season, 22 clean sheets from Schmeichel helped United win the Premier League championship, the first time the club had won England&#x27;s top trophy in 26 years. Schmeichel was once again named &quot;The World&#x27;s Best Goalkeeper&quot; in 1993. In January 1994, Schmeichel fell out with Ferguson, as United had squandered a 3–0 lead to draw 3–3 with Liverpool. The two had a row where Schmeichel &quot;said the most horrible things&quot;, and Ferguson considered selling him as a result. A few days later, Schmeichel apologised to his teammates for losing his temper. Ferguson overheard, and decided to retain Schmeichel. Schmeichel and United repeated the Premier League championship win at the end of the season, also capturing the FA Cup. United were denied a domestic treble by losing the 1994 League Cup Final to Aston Villa, a game for which Schmeichel was suspended.

Following a match against Arsenal in November 1996, Schmeichel was accused of racism by Ian Wright. During the game, Schmeichel and Wright had a number of controversies, and at the end of the game, the two players confronted each other on their way off the pitch. After the game, news emerged of a police inquiry into the incident, where it was alleged that Schmeichel had made a racist remark. In March 1997, the Crown Prosecution Service decided not to press any charges.

Schmeichel ended his Manchester United career on a high note, when the club won the Treble (the FA Premier League title, FA Cup and UEFA Champions League in the same season). In that year&#x27;s FA Cup semi-final against Arsenal, Schmeichel saved a penalty kick by Dennis Bergkamp in the last minutes of the game (which Schmeichel revealed he was unaware of time), to send the game into extra time. In the absence of the suspended Roy Keane, he captained United in the UEFA Champions League final in May 1999. German opponents Bayern Munich had a 1–0 lead until the dying minutes of the game, when United received a corner kick. Schmeichel ran into the attack attempting to cause confusion, and Teddy Sheringham scored the equalising goal. A few seconds later, Ole Gunnar Solskjær scored the winner for United to ensure that Schmeichel&#x27;s United career ended with a trophy win. Schmeichel cartwheeled gleefully in his area after Solskjær&#x27;s winning goal.

With his departure, Manchester United had trouble finding a replacement for him, going through several high-profile goalkeepers including Mark Bosnich, Massimo Taibi, Fabien Barthez, Tim Howard and Roy Carroll, before finally buying Edwin van der Sar, who Sir Alex Ferguson considered the best goalkeeper to have played for the club since Schmeichel.

===Sporting CP===
Schmeichel decided to leave English football at the end of the 1998–99 season, as the gruelling 60-game season, which came with playing with a successful club, was threatening to undermine his high standards at the age of 36. Seeking a slower pace of football, he moved to Sporting CP in Lisbon, where he signed a two-year contract. In his first season with the club, he won the 1999–2000 Primeira Liga title, putting an end to the team&#x27;s 18 years without a championship. At the end of the 1999–2000 season, Schmeichel and Sporting CP agreed to terminate his contract with a free transfer back to Manchester United verbally agreed. However, Sir Alex Ferguson called the deal off due to turning an eye to the &quot;future&quot;, Fabien Barthez. The contract issue with Sporting CP was quickly resolved and he continued for a second season in Portugal.

His second year with Sporting was the first time in 14 years, since his Hvidovre days, that Schmeichel&#x27;s club had finished below second place in the league. Schmeichel stated his wish to activate a contract option of a further year at Sporting in January 2001, but eventually decided to leave the club when his contract expired in June 2001.

===Aston Villa===
Schmeichel returned to England with Aston Villa in July 2001, signing a one-year contract with the option to extend it by a further year. On 20 October 2001, Schmeichel became the first goalkeeper to score a Premier League goal, in a 3–2 defeat away to Everton; this feat has been repeated just five times since: by Blackburn Rovers&#x27; Brad Friedel on 21 February 2004, also from a corner kick; by Tottenham Hotspur&#x27;s Paul Robinson from a free-kick on 17 March 2007; by Everton&#x27;s Tim Howard on 4 January 2012; by Stoke City&#x27;s Asmir Begović on 2 November 2013; and by Liverpool&#x27;s Alisson Becker on 16 May 2021. Schmeichel left Aston Villa after one season after he fell behind Peter Enckelman in the club&#x27;s pecking order under new manager Graham Taylor, who had replaced John Gregory in February 2002.

===Manchester City===
In 2002, Schmeichel moved to Manchester City on a free transfer. The move was described as a &quot;shock&quot; given his former allegiance to United, with manager Kevin Keegan stating he only needed 20 minutes to convince him to join City. During his only season with the club, City went unbeaten in the Manchester derby, meaning during his career he never was on the losing side; during his nine years with Manchester United, they were unbeaten against Manchester City, while in his single season with City, they won at Maine Road and drew at Old Trafford.

In the final derby to be played at Maine Road, caught live on television as the two teams were about to come out of the tunnel, United&#x27;s Gary Neville refused to shake Schmeichel&#x27;s hand before City went on to win the game 3–1. Speaking in 2018, Neville said &quot;When you look back now and you&#x27;re 43, like I am, there&#x27;s two things about that. One, he left Man United at the age of whatever he was, 35, and he said he was retiring, basically to go abroad. At the time when he came back, he played for Manchester City. You can&#x27;t play for Manchester City. I&#x27;m a United fan and I can&#x27;t play for Manchester City, I can&#x27;t play for Leeds and I can&#x27;t play for Liverpool. That&#x27;s just written in stone. You just don&#x27;t play for those clubs, irrespective of what happens. He&#x27;d won the treble with United in &#x27;99, said that he was retiring...he should have carried on playing for United for the next two or three years if that was the case. We struggled for a keeper between Peter and Edwin.&quot;

Schmeichel announced his retirement from football in April 2003, with City replacing him with fellow veteran keeper David Seaman.

==International career==
Schmeichel made his debut for the Denmark national team in May 1987, under national manager Sepp Piontek, and was selected for UEFA Euro 1988, where he eventually became Denmark&#x27;s starting goalkeeper, after initially serving as a back-up to Troels Rasmussen in Denmark&#x27;s opening 3–2 defeat to Spain; Denmark lost both of their remaining two matches 2–0 to West Germany and Italy, however, and were eliminated in the first round of the competition.

Under new national manager Richard Møller Nielsen, Schmeichel was Denmark&#x27;s starting goalkeeper at the Euro 92 tournament which they went on to win. Although Denmark initially finished behind Yugoslavia in their qualification campaign for the final tournament, the latter nation were banned from the competition, while Denmark replaced them in the finals. Schmeichel made a string of important saves during the tournament, keeping a clean sheet in Denmark&#x27;s opening 0–0 draw against England, and producing decisive stops against Eric Cantona and Jean-Pierre Papin in a 2–1 win over France to advance to the last four. In the semi-finals against defending champions the Netherlands, following a 2–2 draw after extra time, he stopped a penalty kick from Marco van Basten – the only miss of the shoot-out – which meant Denmark advanced to the final in a 5–4 shootout victory. Schmeichel also made several decisive saves in the final, and even held a cross with one hand, keeping a clean sheet in his nation&#x27;s 2–0 victory over Germany.

In November 1993, Schmeichel and Denmark failed to qualify for the 1994 FIFA World Cup, as they were tied on points and goal difference with the Republic of Ireland, and went out on goals scored. Schmeichel played for Denmark at Euro 96, hosted by England. The defending European Champions went out in the preliminary group stage, despite delivering results equivalent to the Euro 92 tournament in the first round. Under national manager Bo Johansson, Schmeichel was a part of the Danish squad at the 1998 FIFA World Cup, during which he overtook Morten Olsen as the most-capped player for Denmark. He was one of the leading members of the Danish campaign, which ended in a 3–2 quarter-final defeat to Brazil.

He scored his only goal for the Danish national team, a penalty kick in a 2–2 draw against Belgium, in a June 2000 warm-up match for Euro 2000. He represented Denmark at Euro 2000, where the team was eliminated in the group stage. He announced his retirement from the national team in February 2001, and played his final match (his 129th international appearance) two months later, captaining the side in a 3–0 friendly win over Slovenia at Copenhagen&#x27;s Parken Stadium; he was substituted in the 65th minute to a standing ovation, replaced by long-time back-up Peter Kjær. He kept a clean sheet in the match.

==Style of play==
Schmeichel is widely regarded by pundits, as well as both former and current goalkeeping colleagues as one of the greatest goalkeepers of all time, and also as Denmark&#x27;s greatest goalkeeper ever, and has been described as a modern, talented, world-class, and complete goalkeeper, who also stood out for the longevity of his career. A tall, strong and physically imposing goalkeeper, with a large frame and long reach, as well as excellent reflexes, he was also extremely athletic and agile for a player of his size, and was known for his ability to cover the goal with his trademark &quot;star jump&quot; saves, a technique he reportedly developed from playing handball.

He was highly regarded for his goalkeeping technique, shot-stopping ability, and positioning between the posts, as well as his command of his area, handling, and ability to rush off his line both in one on one situations or when coming out to claim crosses. A courageous and fierce competitor, he was a vocal presence in goal, known for his strong character, mentality, ability to organise his defence, and leadership from the back, as well as for his criticism of his defenders whenever they made mistakes. He was also effective at stopping penalties. In addition to his goalkeeping ability, he was also known for his capacity to read the game, as well as his adeptness with the ball at his feet, and his distribution and ability to launch swift counter-attacks with his long and accurate throws and kicks. Unusually for a goalkeeper, he would often go up for corner kicks in the opposition&#x27;s area when his team were trailing, and scored 11 goals in his career. An example of this was when he was playing for Manchester United in a UEFA Cup match against Rotor Volgograd at Old Trafford in September 1995. He scored in the last minutes of the game to tie the match 2–2, though United were eliminated from the tournament on the away goals rule.

==Later career==
In December 1999, Schmeichel became the owner of his childhood club Hvidovre IF, but withdrew from the club in June 2002.

Schmeichel worked as a pundit for the BBC after retiring, being a regular analyst on &quot;Match of the Day&quot; until 2005. He then began hosting live UEFA Champions League matches on Danish television channel TV3+, with Preben Elkjær and Brian Laudrup the studio pundits. However, he still works occasionally as a pundit for the BBC. He&#x27;s worked for American television broadcaster CBS Sports on their UEFA Champions League coverage since 2021.

He also took part in Soccer Aid, and played for the Rest of the World team, who lost 2–1 after he was substituted at half-time. Schmeichel was a contestant on the 2006 series of the BBC&#x27;s popular Saturday night TV programme &quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot;, but was voted out by the public on his 43rd birthday. He also appeared on &quot;The Weakest Link&quot; in the UK, but he was voted off as the weakest link in the first round.

On 31 August 2007, an investor group including Schmeichel announced their intention to invest DKK 250 million (€33.5 million) in the football club Brøndby IF and make him sports director. This was announced in a press conference in Danish at a hotel in Copenhagen. The offer fell through when Brøndby failed to accept the offer within the group&#x27;s deadline.

In February 2007, he became the host in a new quiz, on TV3 named &quot;1 mod 100&quot; (the Danish version of &quot;1 vs. 100&quot;). In 2008, he became the host of the European version of the Discovery Channel programme, &quot;Dirty Jobs&quot;.

==Personal life==
Schmeichel was divorced from his wife Bente Schmeichel in 2013. He remarried again in 2019 to Playboy model Laura Von Lindholm.

Bente Schmeichel is the mother of his two children, Cecile Schmeichel and Kasper Schmeichel, a fellow goalkeeper for Celtic and the Denmark national team since 2013.

Schmeichel plays the piano as a hobby and joined Robbie Williams onstage during his 2006 Close Encounters Tour at Copenhagen&#x27;s Parken Stadium to play the keyboards during &quot;Feel&quot;.

===Criticism of sportswashing and FIFA support===
In 2018, Schmeichel hosted a series of programmes produced by the state-owned Russian television station RT. They took the form of a mixture of football and travel reports, on the occasion of the World Cup in football in the country. He has been criticised for participating in sportswashing, by receiving money to promote World Cup hosts Russia and Qatar. In addition, he is a supporter of an unpopular FIFA proposal that the World Cup be held every two years.

==Career statistics==

===Club===
===International===
:&quot;Score and result list Denmark&#x27;s goal tally first, score column indicates score after Schmeichel goal.&quot;

==Honours==
Brøndby 
* Danish 1st Division/Danish Superliga: 1987, 1988, 1990, 1991
* Danish Cup: 1988–89

Manchester United 
* Premier League: 1992–93, 1993–94, 1995–96, 1996–97, 1998–99
* FA Cup: 1993–94, 1995–96, 1998–99
* Football League Cup: 1991–92
* FA Charity Shield: 1993, 1994, 1996, 1997
* UEFA Champions League: 1998–99
* European Super Cup: 1991

Sporting CP 
* : 1999–2000
* : 2000

Aston Villa 
* UEFA Intertoto Cup: 2001

Denmark 
* UEFA European Championship: 1992

Individual

* (Goalkeeper of the Year in the Danish League): 1987, 1988, 1990, 1992
* Danish Football Player of the Year: 1990, 1993, 1999
* UEFA European Championship Team of the Tournament: 1992
* UEFA Goalkeeper of the Year: 1992, 1993, 1998
* IFFHS World&#x27;s Best Goalkeeper: 1992, 1993
* PFA Team of the Year: 1992–93 Premier League
* Premier League Player of the Season: 1995–96
* UEFA Club Goalkeeper of the Year: 1997–98
* UEFA Champions League 10 Seasons Dream Team (1992 to 2002): 2002
* English Football Hall of Fame: 2003
* PFA England League Team of the Century (1907 to 2007): 2007
*Most clean sheets in the Premier League: 1994–95, 1995–96, 1997–98 
* Premier League Hall of Fame: 2022
* Premier League 10 Seasons Awards (1992–93 to 2001–02):
** Overseas and overall Team of the Decade
** Save of the Decade (vs. Newcastle, 21 December 1997)
* Premier League 20 Seasons Awards (1992–93 to 2011–12):
** Fantasy Teams of the 20 Seasons public and panel choice
* FIFA 100
* Danish Football Hall of Fame
* World Soccer: The 100 Greatest Footballers of All Time
* Football League 100 Legends

Orders
* Honorary Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE): 2001

==Published works==
*

==See also==
* List of men&#x27;s footballers with 100 or more international caps

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q182314" start="0" end="25" title="Peter Schmeichel" label="Peter Bolesław Schmeichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="82" end="92" title="association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201330" start="109" end="119" title="goalkeeper (association football)" label="goalkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="158" end="175" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="211" end="225" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="240" end="246" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q715772" start="255" end="264" title="Captain (association football)" label="captained"/>
<link wikidata="Q833096" start="292" end="324" title="1999 UEFA Champions League final" label="1999 UEFA Champions League final"/>
<link wikidata="Q845101" start="341" end="347" title="Treble (association football)" label="Treble"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="380" end="401" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="424" end="450" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059906" start="534" end="568" title="IFFHS World&amp;#x27;s Best Goalkeeper" label="IFFHS World&amp;#x27;s Best Goalkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383" start="602" end="663" title="International Federation of Football History &amp;amp; Statistics" label="International Federation of Football History &amp;amp; Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="700" end="731" title="IFFHS World&amp;#x27;s Best Goalkeeper#The World&amp;#x27;s Best Man Goalkeeper of the Century (1901–2000)" label="goalkeepers of the 20th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q484018" start="742" end="750" title="Gladsaxe Municipality" label="Gladsaxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="752" end="762" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="1087" end="1093" title="cap (football)" label="capped"/>
<link wikidata="Q208638" start="1196" end="1206" title="Simon Kjær" label="Simon Kjær"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="1273" end="1292" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q843097" start="1430" end="1438" title="Hvidovre IF" label="Hvidovre"/>
<link wikidata="Q211906" start="1440" end="1447" title="Brøndby IF" label="Brøndby"/>
<link wikidata="Q75729" start="1449" end="1460" title="Sporting CP" label="Sporting CP"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="1462" end="1473" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="1478" end="1493" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="1611" end="1618" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q167828" start="1718" end="1728" title="Lev Yashin" label="Lev Yashin"/>
<link wikidata="Q213879" start="1733" end="1745" title="Gordon Banks" label="Gordon Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323117" start="1789" end="1818" title="English Football Hall of Fame" label="English Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="1963" end="1971" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q295797" start="2009" end="2015" title="Kasper Schmeichel" label="Kasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="2088" end="2094" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2168" end="2178" title="Søborggård" label="Søborggård"/>
<link wikidata="Q484018" start="2189" end="2197" title="Gladsaxe Municipality" label="Gladsaxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="2314" end="2321" title="citizen" label="citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984305" start="2532" end="2540" title="Buddinge" label="Buddinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="2542" end="2552" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374461" start="2629" end="2642" title="Høje-Gladsaxe" label="Høje-Gladsaxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12313977" start="2938" end="2954" title="Gladsaxe-Hero Boldklub" label="Gladsaxe-Hero BK"/>
<link wikidata="Q12335447" start="3022" end="3032" title="Zealand Football Association" label="Zealand FA"/>
<link wikidata="Q837142" start="3324" end="3346" title="Nursing home" label="old people&amp;#x27;s home"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="3388" end="3407" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="World Wildlife Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q211906" start="4368" end="4375" title="Brøndby IF" label="Brøndby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4554" end="4571" title="Svend Aage Hansen" label="Svend Aage Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12318089" start="4820" end="4838" title="IF Skjold Birkerød" label="IF Skjold Birkerød"/>
<link wikidata="Q843097" start="5118" end="5126" title="Hvidovre IF" label="Hvidovre"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="5179" end="5200" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q797322" start="5312" end="5318" title="Boldklubben 1903" label="B 1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q778665" start="5952" end="5961" title="relegated" label="relegated"/>
<link wikidata="Q754116" start="6365" end="6381" title="1990–91 UEFA Cup" label="1990–91 UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739" start="6589" end="6593" title="A.S. Roma" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q44464" start="6621" end="6632" title="Rudi Völler" label="Rudi Völler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383" start="6725" end="6730" title="IFFHS" label="IFFHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="6809" end="6826" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q44980" start="6931" end="6944" title="Alex Ferguson" label="Alex Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="7192" end="7211" title="EFL Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997332" start="7389" end="7403" title="1992–93 in English football" label="1992–93 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q262031" start="7408" end="7419" title="clean sheet" label="clean sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="7459" end="7473" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="7750" end="7759" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="8134" end="8140" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484592" start="8193" end="8214" title="1994 Football League Cup Final" label="1994 League Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="8218" end="8229" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="8301" end="8308" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="8353" end="8359" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q312595" start="8363" end="8373" title="Ian Wright" label="Ian Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141790" start="8689" end="8714" title="Crown Prosecution Service" label="Crown Prosecution Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q845101" start="8834" end="8840" title="Treble (association football)" label="Treble"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="8882" end="8903" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q279532" start="8999" end="9011" title="Penalty kick (association football)" label="penalty kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q185389" start="9015" end="9030" title="Dennis Bergkamp" label="Dennis Bergkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q188632" start="9181" end="9190" title="Roy Keane" label="Roy Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="9277" end="9290" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q234576" start="9445" end="9461" title="Teddy Sheringham" label="Teddy Sheringham"/>
<link wikidata="Q18976" start="9511" end="9530" title="Ole Gunnar Solskjær" label="Ole Gunnar Solskjær"/>
<link wikidata="Q350628" start="9852" end="9864" title="Mark Bosnich" label="Mark Bosnich"/>
<link wikidata="Q349011" start="9866" end="9879" title="Massimo Taibi" label="Massimo Taibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191139" start="9881" end="9895" title="Fabien Barthez" label="Fabien Barthez"/>
<link wikidata="Q200785" start="9897" end="9907" title="Tim Howard" label="Tim Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q258824" start="9912" end="9923" title="Roy Carroll" label="Roy Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q482955" start="9947" end="9964" title="Edwin van der Sar" label="Edwin van der Sar"/>
<link wikidata="Q75729" start="10357" end="10368" title="Sporting CP" label="Sporting CP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109821" start="10463" end="10486" title="1999–2000 Primeira Liga" label="1999–2000 Primeira Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q111950716" start="11487" end="11534" title="List of goalkeepers who have scored in the Premier League" label="first goalkeeper to score a Premier League goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="11560" end="11567" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="11623" end="11639" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q241378" start="11646" end="11658" title="Brad Friedel" label="Brad Friedel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="11708" end="11725" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q215824" start="11733" end="11746" title="Paul Robinson (footballer, born 1979)" label="Paul Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736" start="11833" end="11843" title="Stoke City F.C." label="Stoke City"/>
<link wikidata="Q431368" start="11851" end="11864" title="Asmir Begović" label="Asmir Begović"/>
<link wikidata="Q18237361" start="11909" end="11923" title="Alisson Becker" label="Alisson Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q471713" start="12006" end="12021" title="Peter Enckelman" label="Peter Enckelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9486" start="12073" end="12086" title="Graham Taylor" label="Graham Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q942124" start="12105" end="12117" title="John Gregory (footballer)" label="John Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="12188" end="12203" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q152832" start="12322" end="12334" title="Kevin Keegan" label="Kevin Keegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q670390" start="12463" end="12479" title="Manchester derby" label="Manchester derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q865093" start="12680" end="12690" title="Maine Road" label="Maine Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q83457" start="12703" end="12715" title="Old Trafford" label="Old Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q348857" start="12860" end="12872" title="Gary Neville" label="Gary Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q482955" start="13754" end="13759" title="Edwin Van der Sar" label="Edwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q214498" start="13884" end="13896" title="David Seaman" label="David Seaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q470178" start="14016" end="14028" title="Sepp Piontek" label="Sepp Piontek"/>
<link wikidata="Q151867" start="14051" end="14065" title="UEFA Euro 1988" label="UEFA Euro 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q222206" start="14170" end="14186" title="Troels Rasmussen" label="Troels Rasmussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="14227" end="14232" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="14290" end="14302" title="Germany national football team" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="14307" end="14312" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274343" start="14410" end="14432" title="Richard Møller Nielsen" label="Richard Møller Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q161810" start="14491" end="14498" title="UEFA Euro 1992" label="Euro 92"/>
<link wikidata="Q188363" start="14580" end="14590" title="Yugoslavia national football team" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="14876" end="14883" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q170328" start="14922" end="14934" title="Eric Cantona" label="Eric Cantona"/>
<link wikidata="Q13494" start="14939" end="14956" title="Jean-Pierre Papin" label="Jean-Pierre Papin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="14975" end="14981" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="15062" end="15073" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q483629" start="15145" end="15161" title="Marco van Basten" label="Marco van Basten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080070" start="15233" end="15238" title="UEFA Euro 1992 final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="15498" end="15517" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="15576" end="15595" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q180563" start="15660" end="15667" title="UEFA Euro 1996" label="Euro 96"/>
<link wikidata="Q455567" start="15869" end="15881" title="Bo Johansson" label="Bo Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="15932" end="15951" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q310103" start="15978" end="15990" title="Morten Olsen" label="Morten Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="16133" end="16139" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="16233" end="16240" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="16275" end="16284" title="UEFA Euro 2000" label="Euro 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q172221" start="16571" end="16579" title="Slovenia national football team" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33003" start="16601" end="16615" title="Parken Stadium" label="Parken Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q700565" start="16708" end="16718" title="Peter Kjær (footballer)" label="Peter Kjær"/>
<link wikidata="Q9284972" start="17369" end="17378" title="star jump" label="star jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="17441" end="17449" title="handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17625" end="17642" title="Goalkeeper (association football)#Sweeper-keeper" label="rush off his line"/>
<link wikidata="Q509883" start="18490" end="18498" title="1995–96 UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059186" start="18513" end="18528" title="Rotor Volgograd" label="Rotor Volgograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="18881" end="18884" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908130" start="18934" end="18950" title="Match of the Day" label="Match of the Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q167393" start="19066" end="19079" title="Preben Elkjær" label="Preben Elkjær"/>
<link wikidata="Q212854" start="19084" end="19097" title="Brian Laudrup" label="Brian Laudrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931052" start="19233" end="19243" title="CBS Sports" label="CBS Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963216" start="19318" end="19328" title="Soccer Aid" label="Soccer Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070684" start="19532" end="19553" title="Strictly Come Dancing" label="Strictly Come Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q327762" start="19641" end="19657" title="The Weakest Link" label="The Weakest Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="19848" end="19849" title="Euro" label="€"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624387" start="20155" end="20158" title="TV3 (Denmark)" label="TV3"/>
<link wikidata="Q160896" start="20216" end="20225" title="1 vs. 100" label="1 vs. 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="20293" end="20310" title="Discovery Channel" label="Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q676924" start="20328" end="20338" title="Dirty Jobs" label="Dirty Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="20459" end="20466" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q295797" start="20568" end="20585" title="Kasper Schmeichel" label="Kasper Schmeichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="20611" end="20617" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47875" start="20710" end="20725" title="Robbie Williams" label="Robbie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q82971" start="20750" end="20771" title="Close Encounters Tour" label="Close Encounters Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q495725" start="20843" end="20847" title="Feel (Robbie Williams song)" label="Feel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22868" start="21011" end="21013" title="RT (TV network)" label="RT"/>
<link wikidata="Q83290448" start="21184" end="21197" title="sportswashing" label="sportswashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="21245" end="21251" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q846" start="21256" end="21261" title="Qatar" label="Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q162031" start="21567" end="21586" title="Danish 1st Division" label="Danish 1st Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q204752" start="21587" end="21603" title="Danish Superliga" label="Danish Superliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q200668" start="21605" end="21609" title="1987 Danish 1st Division" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269984" start="21611" end="21615" title="1988 Danish 1st Division" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269989" start="21617" end="21621" title="1990 Danish 1st Division" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270194" start="21623" end="21627" title="1991 Danish Superliga" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q750605" start="21630" end="21640" title="Danish Cup" label="Danish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="21672" end="21686" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q837731" start="21688" end="21695" title="1992–93 FA Premier League" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q841303" start="21697" end="21704" title="1993–94 FA Premier League" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q841266" start="21706" end="21713" title="1995–96 FA Premier League" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q533191" start="21715" end="21722" title="1996–97 FA Premier League" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q628453" start="21724" end="21731" title="1998–99 FA Premier League" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="21734" end="21740" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386617" start="21742" end="21749" title="1993–94 FA Cup" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386623" start="21751" end="21758" title="1995–96 FA Cup" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386633" start="21760" end="21767" title="1998–99 FA Cup" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="21770" end="21789" title="Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810517" start="21791" end="21798" title="1991–92 Football League Cup" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="21801" end="21818" title="FA Charity Shield" label="FA Charity Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045538" start="21820" end="21824" title="1993 FA Charity Shield" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045202" start="21826" end="21830" title="1994 FA Charity Shield" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045557" start="21832" end="21836" title="1996 FA Charity Shield" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044356" start="21838" end="21842" title="1997 FA Charity Shield" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="21845" end="21866" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q279736" start="21868" end="21875" title="1998–99 UEFA Champions League" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="21878" end="21896" title="European Super Cup" label="European Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088622" start="21898" end="21902" title="1991 European Super Cup" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109821" start="21921" end="21930" title="1999–2000 Primeira Liga" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q10375083" start="21935" end="21939" title="2000 Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q182068" start="21956" end="21974" title="UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="UEFA Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q603713" start="21976" end="21980" title="2001 UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="21993" end="22019" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q161810" start="22021" end="22025" title="UEFA Euro 1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478296" start="22113" end="22147" title="Danish Football Player of the Year" label="Danish Football Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q338624" start="22168" end="22217" title="UEFA European Championship Team of the Tournament" label="UEFA European Championship Team of the Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22219" end="22223" title="UEFA Euro 1992#Awards" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q530702" start="22226" end="22253" title="Best European Goalkeeper" label="UEFA Goalkeeper of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059906" start="22274" end="22308" title="IFFHS World&amp;#x27;s Best Goalkeeper" label="IFFHS World&amp;#x27;s Best Goalkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044044" start="22323" end="22343" title="PFA Team of the Year" label="PFA Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22345" end="22367" title="PFA Team of the Year (1990s)#FA Premier League" label="1992–93 Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188692" start="22370" end="22405" title="Premier League Player of the Season" label="Premier League Player of the Season"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22407" end="22414" title="1995–96 FA Premier League#Annual awards" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q373232" start="22417" end="22449" title="UEFA Club Football Awards" label="UEFA Club Goalkeeper of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323117" start="22528" end="22557" title="English Football Hall of Fame" label="English Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276089" start="22566" end="22569" title="Professional Footballers&amp;#x27; Association" label="PFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q225273" start="22668" end="22675" title="1994–95 FA Premier League" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q841266" start="22677" end="22684" title="1995–96 FA Premier League" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q18995" start="22686" end="22693" title="1997–98 FA Premier League" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q106634956" start="22697" end="22724" title="Premier League Hall of Fame" label="Premier League Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590501" start="22733" end="22765" title="Premier League 10 Seasons Awards" label="Premier League 10 Seasons Awards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22791" end="22830" title="Premier League 10 Seasons Awards#Teams of the Decade" label="Overseas and overall Team of the Decade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22834" end="22852" title="Premier League 10 Seasons Awards#Save of the Decade" label="Save of the Decade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240312" start="22889" end="22921" title="Premier League 20 Seasons Awards" label="Premier League 20 Seasons Awards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22947" end="22978" title="Premier League 20 Seasons Awards#Fantasy Teams of the 20 Seasons" label="Fantasy Teams of the 20 Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="23005" end="23013" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23016" end="23044" title="Denmark national football team#Hall of Fame" label="Danish Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q729035" start="23047" end="23059" title="World Soccer Magazine" label="World Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661771" start="23104" end="23131" title="Football League 100 Legends" label="Football League 100 Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="23151" end="23192" title="Member of the Order of the British Empire" label="Member of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q945035" start="23244" end="23310" title="List of men&amp;#x27;s footballers with 100 or more international caps" label="List of men&amp;#x27;s footballers with 100 or more international caps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413285" wikidata="Q244799" url="?curid=413285" title="Peter Shilton">
<text>Peter Leslie Shilton (born 18 September 1949) is an English former professional footballer who played as a goalkeeper.

His 31-year career included spells at 11 clubs and he has the unique distinction of playing over 1,000 English league games, including in excess of 100 for five different clubs. During his time at Nottingham Forest, Shilton won many honours, including two European Cups, a UEFA Super Cup, the First Division championship, and the Football League Cup.

Shilton represented England at the FIFA World Cup in 1982, 1986 (where Diego Maradona scored two famous goals against him) and 1990, and the UEFA European Championship in 1980 and 1988. Despite not making his World Cup finals debut until the age of 32, Shilton has played in 17 finals matches, and shares the record of 10 clean sheets in World Cup finals matches with French goalkeeper Fabien Barthez.

He holds the all-time record for the most competitive appearances in world football (1,396), and, with 125 caps, Shilton is also the England national team&#x27;s most-capped player. The IFFHS ranked Shilton among the top ten goalkeepers of the 20th century in 2000.

==Club career==
===Leicester City===
Shilton was a 13-year-old pupil at King Richard III Boys School in Leicester, when he started training at schoolboy level with his local club Leicester City in 1963. He caught the eye of first-team goalkeeper Gordon Banks, who commented to the coach about how promising he was.

In May 1966, a 16-year-old Shilton made his debut for Leicester against Everton and his potential was quickly spotted to the extent that the Leicester City management sided with their teenage prodigy and soon sold World Cup winner Banks to Stoke City. Shilton settled into first team life thereafter, even managing to score a goal at The Dell against Southampton in October 1967 direct from a clearance at the opposite end of the pitch; the Southampton goalkeeper Campbell Forsyth misjudged Shilton&#x27;s long punt upfield, which, instead of splashing harmlessly in the mud, spun off the pitch and flew over Forsyth&#x27;s head into the goal. Leicester won the game 5–1.

The following season Leicester had a mixed season, suffering relegation from the First Division (they were promoted back to the top tier as champions two seasons later) but reaching the FA Cup Final at Wembley; 19-year-old Shilton became one of the event&#x27;s youngest-ever goalkeepers. It did not go his way, however, as a single goal from Manchester City&#x27;s Neil Young early in the match was enough to win the game. Despite the many honours and accolades which were to come Shilton&#x27;s way, he would not appear in an FA Cup Final again. He reached the semi-finals with Leicester in 1974, but Liverpool won the match after a replay.

===Stoke City===
Shilton joined Stoke City in November 1974 for £325,000, a world record for a goalkeeper at that time. Shilton played in 26 matches for Stoke in 1974–75 as they narrowly missed out on the league title. He was an ever-present in 1975–76 playing in all of the club&#x27;s 48 fixtures that season. However, in January 1976 a severe storm caused considerable damage to the Victoria Ground and to pay for the repair work Stoke had to sell off their playing staff. The summer of 1976 saw Manchester United lodge a bid for Shilton. Stoke agreed a fee of £275,000 for the goalkeeper, but they could not agree on Shilton&#x27;s wage demands, which would have made him the highest paid player at the club. He remained with Stoke in 1976–77 and a young and inexperienced side suffered relegation to the Second Division. He was sold to Nottingham Forest in September 1977.

===Nottingham Forest===
Nottingham Forest made an offer of £250,000 and Shilton signed a month into the new season. Forest had just been promoted to the First Division and were riding high under the management of Brian Clough. They won the League Cup in a replay after initially drawing with Liverpool at Wembley, though Shilton played no part as he was cup-tied, and then won the League title in their first season back in the First Division. Shilton made a save in the clinching 0–0 draw against Coventry City which critics regarded among his greatest ever – a vicious close-range header from Mick Ferguson seemed destined for the net with Shilton slightly out of position, but he got across to palm it over the bar. During the season as a whole, Shilton conceded just 18 goals in 37 league appearances. Shilton subsequently won the PFA Players&#x27; Player of the Year award, voted for by his fellow professionals.

Forest won the League Cup again in 1979 – this time Shilton played as they defeated Southampton 3–2 at Wembley – before reaching the European Cup final where a Trevor Francis goal was enough to beat Swedish side Malmö in Munich. Shilton had another eventful season with Forest, reaching a third consecutive League Cup final, with Wolverhampton Wanderers the opponents at Wembley. There was no third successive victory, however, a communication error between Shilton and defender David Needham resulted in a collision on the edge of the Forest penalty area, leaving Andy Gray free to tap the ball into the net for the game&#x27;s only goal.

Forest then reached the European Cup final again in 1980 – as holders they were entitled to defend the trophy and faced SV Hamburg in Madrid. Like the 1979 final, the game was tight and one goal settled it from Forest winger John Robertson. Among the disappointed Hamburg players was Kevin Keegan, now Shilton&#x27;s captain at international level.

Life began to decline for Shilton afterwards. Forest failed to continue their trophy-winning form while Shilton began what would be a long-standing gambling addiction which would cause considerable strain to his family. There were also stories of an extramarital affair and a conviction for drink-driving, with the player fined £350 for the offence. All of this contributed to Shilton&#x27;s decision to leave Nottingham Forest in 1982 and start afresh.

===Southampton===
Shilton left Forest for Southampton, where his former international teammate Alan Ball was playing. Shilton suffered FA Cup semi final defeat again in 1984 when he was beaten by a last minute Adrian Heath header which gave Everton a place in the final; and again in 1986 when Liverpool beat Southampton 2-0. He joined Derby County in the summer of 1987.

He was the subject of &quot;This Is Your Life&quot; in March 1986 when he was surprised by Eamonn Andrews at London Waterloo station.

===Derby County===
Shilton helped the Derby side of Mark Wright, Dean Saunders and Ted McMinn finish fifth in the league, and they only missed out on competing in the UEFA Cup due to the ban on English clubs in European competition (which ran from 1985 to 1990) arising from the Heysel disaster. In 1991, Derby were relegated and Shilton started to consider his playing future. He was 42 years old and was ready to become a coach or manager. In early 1991, he had rejected an offer to replace Stan Ternent as Hull City manager for geographical reasons.

===Later career===
Shilton finally left Derby in February 1992 on accepting an offer to become player-manager of Plymouth Argyle – a turbulent era that is documented in the 2009 book, &quot;Peter Shilton&#x27;s Nearly Men&quot;. Plymouth were battling against relegation in the Football League Second Division but Shilton&#x27;s efforts were unable to save Plymouth from the drop. His £300,000 record signing Peter Swan proved to be a disaster as the player had an awful relationship with both his teammates and the fans.

In 1994, he started to concentrate solely on management and Plymouth reached the Division Two play-offs, but lost in the semi-finals to Burnley. In January 1994, he had been linked with Southampton for a possible return as manager following the departure of Ian Branfoot, but the job went to Alan Ball instead. The following February, with Plymouth heading for relegation, he left the club and announced his intention to start playing again. He was now 45 years old.

He joined Wimbledon in the Premier League for a short period, as injury cover for the first choice goalkeeper Hans Segers, but did not play a first team game for them. He subsequently signed for Bolton Wanderers, making a couple of appearances, including the Division One play-off semi final against Wolverhampton Wanderers at Molineux. Bolton lost 2–1, but eventually overcame Wolves in the second leg, Shilton however did not play in this game; Keith Branagan did instead. He then signed for Coventry City, where he failed to make a first-team appearance, before joining West Ham United, where again he never played a first-team game, although he was selected as a substitute on several occasions.

With 996 Football League matches to his name, Shilton was anxious to reach 1,000 and he did when he joined Leyton Orient in November 1996, in an exchange deal for 39-year-old Les Sealey. His thousandth League game came on 22 December 1996, against Brighton &amp; Hove Albion, which was screened live on Sky Sports and was preceded by the presentation from the Football League of a special edition of the &quot;Guinness Book of Records&quot; to Shilton. He played five more matches before retiring on 1,005 league games at the age of 47 at the end of the 1996–97 season. By the time of his retirement, he was the fifth oldest player ever to have played in the Football League or Premier League. Shilton recovered from financial troubles caused by business decisions and gambling, and became a prolific after-dinner speaker.

==International career==
===Early career===

Despite playing at a lower level, Shilton impressed England manager Alf Ramsey sufficiently to give him his debut against East Germany in November 1970, which England won 3–1. Little more than six months later, Leicester were promoted back to the First Division. His second England cap came in a goalless draw against Wales at Wembley; and his first competitive match for his country was his third appearance as England drew 1–1 with Switzerland in a qualifying game for the 1972 European Championships. At this stage, Banks was still England&#x27;s first choice keeper, but the remaining brace of back-ups from the 1970 World Cup, Peter Bonetti and Alex Stepney, had been cast aside by Ramsey so Shilton could begin to regard himself as his country&#x27;s number two goalkeeper at the age of 22.

Shilton&#x27;s fourth and fifth England caps came towards the end of 1972, before a tragic incident suddenly saw Shilton propelled into the limelight as England&#x27;s number one keeper. In October 1972, Gordon Banks was involved in a car crash which resulted in the loss of the sight in one eye and thus ended his career. Liverpool goalkeeper Ray Clemence was called up to make his debut a month later for England&#x27;s opening qualifier for the 1974 World Cup, (a 1–0 win over Wales). Shilton ended up with over 100 caps compared to Clemence&#x27;s 61.

In the summer of 1973, Shilton kept three clean sheets as England defeated Northern Ireland, Wales and Scotland. Against Scotland, Shilton made a right handed save diving to his left from Kenny Dalglish&#x27;s shot that Shilton considered among his best saves. While drawing with Czechoslovakia earned Shilton his tenth cap – as a warm-up to a crucial World Cup qualifier against Poland in Chorzów a week later. This went badly for England, with Shilton unable to stop both goals in a 2–0 defeat and therefore making victory in the final qualifier, against the same opposition at Wembley four months later, a necessity if England were to make the finals. A perceived blunder by Shilton in this match led to a crucial goal by Jan Domarski for Poland, Shilton&#x27;s night contrasting with the performance of Polish goalkeeper Jan Tomaszewski, who, though famously derided as &quot;a clown&quot; by Brian Clough (later Shilton&#x27;s manager at Nottingham Forest), made a string of crucial saves as Poland got the draw they needed to qualify for the 1974 World Cup at England&#x27;s expense.

This experience perhaps led incoming England manager Don Revie to favour Ray Clemence in his selections. In 1975, Clemence won eight of the nine caps available, though England failed to reach the 1976 European Championships during this period. From 1977 new manager Ron Greenwood started to select Shilton as regularly as Clemence, eventually reaching the stage where he made a point of alternating them, seemingly unable to choose. This indecision attracted some adverse comment, with some commentators questioning Greenwood&#x27;s ability to manage at the highest level. Shilton then featured heavily as England qualified for the 1980 European Championships in Italy – their first tournament for a decade. Shilton had won his 30th England cap in a 2–0 win over Spain in March 1980; his 31st would not come until the European Championship. It was a 1–0 defeat to Italy, which proved crucial as England failed to get through to the knockout phase.

===1982 FIFA World Cup===

In the midst of Shilton&#x27;s issues, he had the 1982 World Cup to consider. Shilton had played in half of the qualifying games in England&#x27;s group, UEFA group four UEFA group four – home wins over Norway, and Switzerland, a goalless draw against Romania, and a vital 1–0 win over Hungary. The latter was the last game of the campaign, and in spite of England&#x27;s previous away defeat against Norway, famously mocked by Norwegian commentator Bjørge Lillelien, results elsewhere meant that a draw would be sufficient for Shilton and England to avoid a repeat of the elimination at the qualification stage they had experienced eight years previously. The result went England&#x27;s way this time and they qualified for their first World Cup for a dozen years, with Shilton appearing in the finals in Spain for the first time at the comparatively mature age of 32.

Clemence had played in the friendlies building up to the competition, but it was Shilton who was selected for the opening group game against France in Bilbao. England won 3–1 and Shilton stayed in goal for the two remaining group games, three wins meaning England advanced to the second phase as group winners.

===UEFA Euro 1984 and 1986 FIFA World Cup qualifiers===

With Bobby Robson now running the England team, Shilton&#x27;s international career flourished, playing in Robson&#x27;s first ten matches and even captaining the side in seven of them in the absence of Bryan Robson and Ray Wilkins. One game, a 2–0 win over Scotland, earned Shilton his 50th cap.

Clemence returned for a qualifier for the 1984 European Championships against Luxembourg, but this game, Clemence&#x27;s 61st for his country, also proved to be his last.

England failed to qualify for the European Championships. However, he was now the established first pick goalkeeper for his country, and would remain so through to the end of his international career. Almost half his international caps (61 out of 125) were earned after his 35th birthday. It was 1985 before another goalkeeper was selected for an England game, when Robson could give a debut to the Manchester United goalkeeper Gary Bailey in a relatively unimportant friendly match. Shilton was still the keeper for the qualifying campaign for the 1986 World Cup, which thus far had seen three wins from three matches and no goals conceded.

A 70th cap came Shilton&#x27;s way in a 1–0 defeat against Scotland at Hampden Park; he later saved a penalty from Andy Brehme as England beat West Germany 3–0 in a tour match in Mexico, a year before England were hoping to return there for the World Cup.

England accomplished going through the whole qualifying campaign undefeated. By the time they played Mexico in an acclimatisation match prior to the competition, Shilton was 80 games into his England career, having beaten Banks&#x27; record for a goalkeeper of 73 caps the previous year against Turkey.

===1986 FIFA World Cup===

At the World Cup itself, England started slowly, losing the opening group match to Portugal and then drawing against outsiders Morocco, during which time Robson was led off injured and Wilkins was sent off. In their absences, Shilton was handed the captaincy as England found their form to defeat Poland 3–0 in their final group game – Gary Lineker scored them all – and progress to the second round.

There they met Paraguay and though Shilton did have to make one fingertip save during the first half, England were rarely troubled. Lineker scored twice and Peter Beardsley once as England went through 3–0 and into a quarter final meeting with Argentina, a match which again would ultimately form part of the legend of Shilton&#x27;s whole career.

Argentina captain Diego Maradona had been the man of the tournament thus far, but in a tight first half England managed to keep his creativity reasonably at bay. But early in the second half, Maradona changed the game, much to Shilton&#x27;s anger.

Maradona began an attack which seemingly broke down on the edge of the England box as Steve Hodge got a foot to the ball. The ball was skewed back towards the penalty area and Maradona, continuing the run from his initial pass, went after it as Shilton came out to punch the ball clear. Maradona managed to punch the ball over Shilton and into the net. Shilton and his teammates signalled that Maradona had used his hand – a foul for any player except a goalkeeper – but the Tunisian referee Ali Bin Nasser allowed the goal. A photograph subsequently showed Maradona outjumping Shilton and his fist clearly making contact with the ball as Shilton was still midway through his own stretch, arm extended (having not anticipated Maradona&#x27;s action). Maradona later said the goal was scored by the &quot;Hand of God&quot;. Nasser never refereed at such a high level again, having missed such a blatant infringement.

Shortly afterwards, Maradona scored a legitimate individual goal, taking on almost the whole England defence and Shilton before shooting into an empty net. In 2002, the goal was voted &quot;Goal of the Century&quot; as part of the buildup to the 2002 FIFA World Cup tournament on the FIFA website. Lineker pulled one back and nearly equalised in the closing seconds, but England were out.

===UEFA Euro 1988===
However, Shilton continued to play for England, featuring in a straightforward and successful qualification campaign for the 1988 European Championships, which were to be held in West Germany.

Shilton had won his 90th cap for England in a 2–0 win over Northern Ireland in a European Championship qualifier.

Shilton&#x27;s 99th cap came in England&#x27;s first game in group 2 at the Championship finals. This game ended in a 1–0 defeat to the Republic of Ireland with Shilton beaten by an early Ray Houghton header. Shilton&#x27;s 100th was against the Netherlands, who had also lost their first game at the finals. Marco van Basten eliminated England from the tournament with a hat-trick as England lost this match 3–1. Robson left Shilton out of the third and final group game as it was now meaningless, but England still lost it, also 3–1. Chris Woods, longtime understudy to Shilton (and his teenage understudy a decade earlier at Forest – he had played in the League Cup final when Shilton was cup-tied) was given a rare game.

===1990 FIFA World Cup===
Shilton played in all bar one of the England games over the next 18 months – the one he missed saw a debut for a future England goalkeeping first choice, David Seaman of Queens Park Rangers. In June 1989, Shilton broke his old England skipper Bobby Moore&#x27;s record of 108 appearances for his country when he won his 109th cap in a friendly against Denmark in Copenhagen. Prior to the match he was handed a framed England goalkeeper&#x27;s jersey with &#x27;109&#x27; on the front. He had, by this time, kept three clean sheets in three qualifying matches for the 1990 World Cup and would ultimately concede no goals at all as England qualified for the tournament, to be held in Italy.

Shilton was the oldest players at the 1990 World Cup and the last born in the 1940s. His 119th appearance for his country saw England draw 1–1 with the Republic of Ireland in the opening group game; England got through the group, beat Belgium 1–0 in the second round match, and then edged past Cameroon 3–2 in the quarter-finals, thanks to two Lineker penalties after England went 2–1 down. Then came the West Germans in the semi-finals, Shilton&#x27;s 124th England game.

It was goalless at half time, but shortly after the restart Shilton was beaten by Andreas Brehme&#x27;s deflected free kick that looped off Paul Parker&#x27;s and dropped into the net over Shilton&#x27;s head, despite his back pedalling attempts to tip the ball over. Lineker&#x27;s late equaliser salvaged a draw for England but Shilton could not get close enough to any of the penalties taken by the Germans in the deciding shoot out, while England missed two of theirs and went out of the tournament.

Shilton was the keeper for the third place play-off game, which ended in a 2–1 win for hosts Italy, Shilton suffering an embarrassing moment when he dithered over a back pass and was tackled by Roberto Baggio who scored as a result of Shilton&#x27;s error. It was his 125th appearance for his country and, after the tournament ended, he announced it would be his last. His final appearance came just four months before the 20th anniversary of his international debut, making his full international career one of the longest on record. He was never booked or sent off at full international level.

==Style of play==
Considered by pundits to be one of the best goalkeepers in the world in his prime, as well as one of the best shot-stoppers of his generation, and as one of England&#x27;s greatest players ever in his position, Shilton is even being described by some in the media as one of the greatest keepers of all time. Shilton was an intelligent and efficient goalkeeper, who was regarded above all for his physical presence, handling, positional sense, composure and consistency, as well as his ability to communicate with his teammates, organise his defence, and inspire confidence in his back-line. He possessed significant physical strength, which made him an imposing presence in the area, despite not being the tallest of goalkeepers. Furthermore, he was known for his agility, and also possessed excellent reflexes, and good shot-stopping abilities. Known for his work-rate, mentality, discipline in training, and physical conditioning. He also stood out for his exceptional longevity throughout his career, which spanned four decades. He retired at the age of 47, having competed in over 1,000 professional matches.

However, Shilton also drew criticism in the English media at times for his increasing lack of pace and agility with age in his later career, which along with his timing and relatively modest stature for a goalkeeper, is thought to have limited him when facing penalties, most noticeably in England&#x27;s penalty shoot-out defeat to eventual champions West Germany in the 1990 World Cup semi-final; indeed, throughout his international career, his penalty–saving record was not particularly impressive, with his only save for England coming against Andreas Brehme of West Germany in 1985.

==Personal life==
Shilton married Sue Flitcroft in September 1970, and the couple have two sons, Michael and Sam, who later became a professional footballer.

In December 2011, it was announced that Shilton had split from his wife after 40 years of marriage.

Shilton was charged with drink driving in March 2013, he was banned for 20 months and ordered to pay £1,020 costs.

In March 2015, it was announced that Shilton was to marry his second wife, jazz singer Stephanie Hayward, the pair having got engaged in 2014. The couple were married at the Parish of St Peter and St Paul Church in West Mersea, on 10 December 2016.

Shilton has expressed support for the UK&#x27;s withdrawal from the European Union.

In January 2020, Shilton said that he had overcome a 45-year gambling addiction with the help of his wife, Steph. Shilton has worked with the UK government to raise awareness of associated issues including mental health problems.

Shilton was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in the 1986 New Year Honours, Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 1991 New Year Honours, and Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2024 New Year Honours for services to association football and the prevention of gambling harm.

==Career statistics==
===Club===


===International===
===Managerial===

==Honours==
Leicester City
*Football League Second Division: 1970–71
*FA Charity Shield: 1971
*FA Cup runner-up: 1968–69

Nottingham Forest
*Football League First Division: 1977–78
*Football League Cup: 1978–79
*FA Charity Shield: 1978
*European Cup: 1978–79, 1979–80
*European Super Cup: 1979

Individual
*PFA First Division Team of the Year: 1974–75, 1977–78, 1978–79, 1979–80, 1980–81, 1981–82, 1982–83, 1983–84, 1984–85, 1985–86
*PFA Team of the Century (1977–1996): 2007
*PFA Players&#x27; Player of the Year: 1977–78
*World XI: 1978, 1982, 1983, 1985, 1989, 1990
*Onze Mondial: 1979, 1980
*Nottingham Forest Player of the Season: 1981–82
*Southampton Player of the Season: 1984–85, 1985–86
*FWA Tribute Award: 1991
*English Football Hall of Fame: Inducted 2002
*Football League 100 Legends

==See also==
* List of men&#x27;s footballers with 100 or more international caps
* List of men&#x27;s footballers with the most official appearances

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q244799" start="0" end="20" title="Peter Shilton" label="Peter Leslie Shilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="80" end="90" title="association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201330" start="107" end="117" title="goalkeeper (association football)" label="goalkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="317" end="334" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="376" end="388" title="UEFA Champions League" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="393" end="407" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="413" end="427" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="450" end="469" title="EFL League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="492" end="499" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="507" end="521" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q46934" start="525" end="529" title="1982 FIFA World Cup" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q46938" start="531" end="535" title="1986 FIFA World Cup" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515" start="543" end="557" title="Diego Maradona" label="Diego Maradona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493724" start="558" end="593" title="Argentina v England (1986 FIFA World Cup)" label="scored two famous goals against him"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="599" end="603" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="613" end="639" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q182196" start="643" end="647" title="UEFA Euro 1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q151867" start="652" end="656" title="UEFA Euro 1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="781" end="806" title="FIFA World Cup records#Goalkeeping" label="record of 10 clean sheets"/>
<link wikidata="Q191139" start="858" end="872" title="Fabien Barthez" label="Fabien Barthez"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007841" start="888" end="958" title="List of men&amp;#x27;s footballers with the most official appearances" label="all-time record for the most competitive appearances in world football"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="982" end="986" title="Cap (sport)" label="caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="1008" end="1029" title="England national football team" label="England national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383" start="1061" end="1066" title="IFFHS" label="IFFHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q83065" start="1246" end="1255" title="Leicester" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="1321" end="1335" title="Leicester City F.C." label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q213879" start="1388" end="1400" title="Gordon Banks" label="Gordon Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="1530" end="1537" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q134202" start="1672" end="1688" title="1966 FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736" start="1698" end="1708" title="Stoke City F.C." label="Stoke City"/>
<link wikidata="Q161792" start="1792" end="1800" title="The Dell (Southampton)" label="The Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="1809" end="1820" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028066" start="1922" end="1938" title="Campbell Forsyth" label="Campbell Forsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822886" start="2212" end="2226" title="1968–69 Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858419" start="2317" end="2329" title="1969 FA Cup Final" label="FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="2333" end="2340" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="2474" end="2489" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361496" start="2497" end="2507" title="Neil Young (footballer, born 1944)" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484477" start="2659" end="2671" title="FA Cup Final" label="FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="2734" end="2743" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736" start="2807" end="2817" title="Stoke City F.C." label="Stoke City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576483" start="2937" end="2944" title="1974–75 Stoke City F.C. season" label="1974–75"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577023" start="3020" end="3027" title="1975–76 Stoke City F.C. season" label="1975–76"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592109" start="3161" end="3176" title="Victoria Ground" label="Victoria Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="3274" end="3291" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577516" start="3514" end="3521" title="1976–77 Stoke City F.C. season" label="1976–77"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="3678" end="3695" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q207658" start="3867" end="3879" title="Brian Clough" label="Brian Clough"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="3894" end="3904" title="Football League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="4152" end="4165" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry City"/>
<link wikidata="Q621867" start="4489" end="4525" title="PFA Players&amp;#x27; Player of the Year" label="PFA Players&amp;#x27; Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="4706" end="4718" title="UEFA Champions League" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q345221" start="4733" end="4747" title="Trevor Francis" label="Trevor Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q204881" start="4785" end="4790" title="Malmö FF" label="Malmö"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="4903" end="4926" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q516216" start="5138" end="5147" title="Andy Gray (footballer, born 1955)" label="Andy Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q51974" start="5334" end="5344" title="Hamburger SV" label="SV Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q579743" start="5439" end="5453" title="John Robertson (footballer born 1953)" label="John Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q152832" start="5498" end="5510" title="Kevin Keegan" label="Kevin Keegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309330" start="5855" end="5868" title="drink driving" label="drink-driving"/>
<link wikidata="Q310058" start="6114" end="6123" title="Alan Ball Jr." label="Alan Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q373122" start="6229" end="6241" title="Adrian Heath" label="Adrian Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="6260" end="6267" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19470" start="6355" end="6367" title="Derby County F.C." label="Derby County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249607" start="6420" end="6437" title="This Is Your Life (British TV series)" label="This Is Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778021" start="6483" end="6497" title="Eamonn Andrews" label="Eamonn Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q795691" start="6501" end="6524" title="London Waterloo station" label="London Waterloo station"/>
<link wikidata="Q526694" start="6579" end="6590" title="Mark Wright (footballer, born 1963)" label="Mark Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q545303" start="6592" end="6605" title="Dean Saunders" label="Dean Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693509" start="6610" end="6620" title="Ted McMinn" label="Ted McMinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="6694" end="6702" title="UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q323888" start="6806" end="6821" title="Heysel disaster" label="Heysel disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597912" start="7020" end="7032" title="Stan Ternent" label="Stan Ternent"/>
<link wikidata="Q19477" start="7036" end="7045" title="Hull City A.F.C." label="Hull City"/>
<link wikidata="Q48947" start="7194" end="7209" title="Plymouth Argyle F.C." label="Plymouth Argyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="7359" end="7390" title="Football League Second Division" label="Football League Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177200" start="7490" end="7500" title="Peter Swan (footballer, born 1966)" label="Peter Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="7685" end="7697" title="Football League Second Division" label="Division Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q19458" start="7740" end="7747" title="Burnley F.C." label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147240" start="7862" end="7874" title="Ian Branfoot" label="Ian Branfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q310058" start="7896" end="7905" title="Alan Ball Jr." label="Alan Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q19482" start="8082" end="8091" title="Wimbledon F.C." label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="8099" end="8113" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467302" start="8182" end="8193" title="Hans Segers" label="Hans Segers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="8267" end="8283" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="8372" end="8395" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q380823" start="8399" end="8407" title="Molineux Stadium" label="Molineux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384103" start="8519" end="8533" title="Keith Branagan" label="Keith Branagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="8566" end="8579" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="8645" end="8660" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="8782" end="8797" title="The Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595" start="8880" end="8893" title="Leyton Orient F.C." label="Leyton Orient"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436844" start="8948" end="8958" title="Les Sealey" label="Les Sealey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19453" start="9021" end="9047" title="Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion F.C." label="Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340204" start="9076" end="9086" title="Sky Sports" label="Sky Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="9183" end="9207" title="Guinness Book of Records" label="Guinness Book of Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="9428" end="9447" title="the Football League" label="the Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="9451" end="9465" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18342738" start="9574" end="9594" title="public speaking" label="after-dinner speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="9694" end="9701" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q311029" start="9710" end="9720" title="Alf Ramsey" label="Alf Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q152424" start="9764" end="9776" title="East Germany national football team" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="9960" end="9965" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q165141" start="10076" end="10087" title="Switzerland national football team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q182386" start="10117" end="10144" title="1972 European Football Championship" label="1972 European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q132664" start="10258" end="10272" title="1970 FIFA World Cup" label="1970 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q344902" start="10274" end="10287" title="Peter Bonetti" label="Peter Bonetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q380205" start="10292" end="10304" title="Alex Stepney" label="Alex Stepney"/>
<link wikidata="Q213879" start="10644" end="10656" title="Gordon Banks" label="Gordon Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="10763" end="10772" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q363148" start="10784" end="10796" title="Ray Clemence" label="Ray Clemence"/>
<link wikidata="Q166121" start="10888" end="10902" title="1974 FIFA World Cup" label="1974 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q190978" start="11072" end="11088" title="Northern Ireland national football team" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="11100" end="11108" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q182072" start="11277" end="11291" title="Czechoslovakia national football team" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166196" start="11377" end="11383" title="Poland national football team" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q104302" start="11387" end="11394" title="Chorzów" label="Chorzów"/>
<link wikidata="Q368538" start="11722" end="11734" title="Jan Domarski" label="Jan Domarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q269275" start="11822" end="11837" title="Jan Tomaszewski" label="Jan Tomaszewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q207658" start="11894" end="11906" title="Brian Clough" label="Brian Clough"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="11940" end="11957" title="Nottingham Forest" label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q166121" start="12045" end="12059" title="1974 World Cup" label="1974 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q350795" start="12141" end="12150" title="Don Revie" label="Don Revie"/>
<link wikidata="Q188548" start="12284" end="12311" title="1976 European Football Championship" label="1976 European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q708818" start="12354" end="12367" title="Ron Greenwood" label="Ron Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q182196" start="12720" end="12747" title="1980 European Football Championship" label="1980 European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="12851" end="12856" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="12952" end="12957" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46934" start="13114" end="13128" title="1982 FIFA World Cup" label="1982 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q85725263" start="13234" end="13249" title="1982 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group 4" label="UEFA group four"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="13267" end="13273" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q165141" start="13279" end="13290" title="Switzerland national football team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q168397" start="13316" end="13323" title="Romania national football team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q170561" start="13350" end="13357" title="Hungary national football team" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771404" start="13514" end="13530" title="Bjørge Lillelien" label="Bjørge Lillelien"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="14076" end="14082" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q8692" start="14086" end="14092" title="Bilbao" label="Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q189587" start="14309" end="14321" title="Bobby Robson" label="Bobby Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q296583" start="14507" end="14519" title="Bryan Robson" label="Bryan Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q352820" start="14524" end="14535" title="Ray Wilkins" label="Ray Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q182770" start="14644" end="14671" title="1984 European Football Championship" label="1984 European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q184266" start="14680" end="14690" title="Luxembourg national football team" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="15173" end="15190" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q713610" start="15202" end="15213" title="Gary Bailey" label="Gary Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q46938" start="15323" end="15337" title="1986 FIFA World Cup" label="1986 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q193651" start="15488" end="15500" title="Hampden Park" label="Hampden Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="15560" end="15572" title="Germany national football team" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="15775" end="15781" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q267245" start="16088" end="16096" title="Portugal national football team" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207337" start="16132" end="16139" title="Morocco national football team" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q47778" start="16341" end="16353" title="Gary Lineker" label="Gary Lineker"/>
<link wikidata="Q172020" start="16422" end="16430" title="Paraguay national football team" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q344989" start="16564" end="16579" title="Peter Beardsley" label="Peter Beardsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="16651" end="16660" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515" start="16774" end="16788" title="Diego Maradona" label="Diego Maradona"/>
<link wikidata="Q166307" start="17092" end="17103" title="Steve Hodge" label="Steve Hodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15839293" start="17431" end="17435" title="Foul (sports)" label="foul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331296" start="17444" end="17450" title="Player (game)" label="player"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="17481" end="17488" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q859528" start="17490" end="17497" title="Referee (association football)" label="referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q648205" start="17498" end="17512" title="Ali Bin Nasser" label="Ali Bin Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q622495" start="17810" end="17821" title="The hand of God" label="Hand of God"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17972" end="17987" title="Argentina v England (1986)#The Goal of the Century" label="individual goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="18169" end="18188" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="18207" end="18211" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="18212" end="18219" title="website" label="website"/>
<link wikidata="Q151867" start="18459" end="18486" title="1988 UEFA European Football Championship" label="1988 European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="18513" end="18525" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q25555266" start="18704" end="18711" title="UEFA Euro 1988 Group 2" label="group 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q151867" start="18719" end="18738" title="1988 UEFA European Football Championship" label="Championship finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="18779" end="18798" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q703538" start="18831" end="18843" title="Ray Houghton" label="Ray Houghton"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="18889" end="18900" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q483629" start="18952" end="18968" title="Marco van Basten" label="Marco van Basten"/>
<link wikidata="Q726234" start="19179" end="19190" title="Chris Woods" label="Chris Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q214498" start="19549" end="19561" title="David Seaman" label="David Seaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18723" start="19565" end="19584" title="Queens Park Rangers F.C." label="Queens Park Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191492" start="19638" end="19649" title="Bobby Moore" label="Bobby Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="19747" end="19754" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="19962" end="19976" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="20320" end="20327" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q175309" start="20379" end="20387" title="Cameroon national football team" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159045" start="20641" end="20655" title="Andreas Brehme" label="Andreas Brehme"/>
<link wikidata="Q769780" start="20699" end="20710" title="Paul Parker (footballer)" label="Paul Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q67964" start="21258" end="21272" title="Roberto Baggio" label="Roberto Baggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q159045" start="23342" end="23356" title="Andreas Brehme" label="Andreas Brehme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408147" start="23492" end="23495" title="Sam Shilton" label="Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343199" start="23974" end="23985" title="West Mersea" label="West Mersea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="24043" end="24091" title="Brexit" label="the UK&amp;#x27;s withdrawal from the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="24347" end="24388" title="Member of the Order of the British Empire" label="Member of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583135" start="24402" end="24423" title="1986 New Year Honours" label="1986 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="24425" end="24467" title="Officer of the Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586993" start="24481" end="24502" title="1991 New Year Honours" label="1991 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="24508" end="24552" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255705" start="24566" end="24587" title="2024 New Year Honours" label="2024 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="24764" end="24795" title="Football League Second Division" label="Football League Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24797" end="24804" title="1970–71 Football League#Second Division" label="1970–71"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="24806" end="24823" title="FA Charity Shield" label="FA Charity Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736649" start="24825" end="24829" title="1971 FA Charity Shield" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="24831" end="24837" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q599143" start="24849" end="24856" title="1968–69 FA Cup" label="1968–69"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="24877" end="24907" title="Football League First Division" label="Football League First Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24909" end="24916" title="1977–78 Football League#First Division" label="1977–78"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="24918" end="24937" title="Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q602879" start="24939" end="24946" title="1978–79 Football League Cup" label="1978–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736660" start="24967" end="24971" title="1978 FA Charity Shield" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="24973" end="24985" title="UEFA Champions League" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q642789" start="24987" end="24994" title="1978–79 European Cup" label="1978–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q596726" start="24996" end="25003" title="1979–80 European Cup" label="1979–80"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="25005" end="25023" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="European Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q600736" start="25025" end="25029" title="1979 European Super Cup" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044044" start="25043" end="25078" title="PFA Team of the Year" label="PFA First Division Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276089" start="25170" end="25173" title="Professional Footballers&amp;#x27; Association" label="PFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q621867" start="25213" end="25249" title="PFA Players&amp;#x27; Player of the Year" label="PFA Players&amp;#x27; Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25260" end="25268" title="World Soccer Magazine#Eric Batty&amp;#x27;s World XI" label="World XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049896" start="25306" end="25318" title="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Onze Mondial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25332" end="25370" title="Nottingham Forest F.C.#Player of the Season" label="Nottingham Forest Player of the Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569130" start="25381" end="25413" title="Southampton F.C. Player of the Season" label="Southampton Player of the Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4311712" start="25433" end="25450" title="FWA Tribute Award" label="FWA Tribute Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323117" start="25458" end="25487" title="English Football Hall of Fame" label="English Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661771" start="25504" end="25531" title="Football League 100 Legends" label="Football League 100 Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q945035" start="25548" end="25614" title="List of men&amp;#x27;s footballers with 100 or more international caps" label="List of men&amp;#x27;s footballers with 100 or more international caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007841" start="25617" end="25682" title="List of men&amp;#x27;s footballers with the most official appearances" label="List of men&amp;#x27;s footballers with the most official appearances"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413286" wikidata="Q18529" url="?curid=413286" title="Wrexham A.F.C.">
<text>Wrexham Association Football Club () is a professional association football club based in Wrexham, Wales. Formed in 1864, it is the oldest club in Wales and the third-oldest professional association football team in the world. They compete in EFL League One, the third level of the English football league system.

The Welsh team initially participated in friendlies and cup competitions and first entered a league by joining The Combination in 1890. The team spent 13 seasons in the Combination and two seasons in the Welsh Senior League, winning four Combination titles and two Welsh Senior League titles. It entered the Birmingham &amp; District League in 1905, where it would remain until becoming an inaugural member of the Football League&#x27;s Third Division North in 1921. It spent 37 years in the Northern section until it was placed in the re-organized Third Division in 1958 and then relegated two years later. Wrexham was promoted out of the Fourth Division in 1961–62, only to be relegated again two years later. Another promotion followed in 1969–70, and it reached the Second Division for the first time after winning the Third Division title in 1977–78. Two successive relegations saw it back in the fourth tier by 1983, and it saw no further promotion until 1992–93. Relegated once more in 2002, it gained immediate promotion in 2002–03, before worsening financial problems resulted in another relegation and then administration in December 2004. It took 18 months for the club to exit administration and the club&#x27;s decline on the pitch continued, as it dropped out of the Football League in 2008. Wrexham subsequently had five unsuccessful play-off campaigns in the fifth tier of the English football league system, before being promoted as champions of the 2022–23 National League to EFL League Two. On 13 April 2024, the club secured a second consecutive promotion to EFL League One.

Wrexham&#x27;s honours include winning the Welsh Cup a record 23 times, the Football League Trophy in 2005 at the Millennium Stadium and the FA Trophy in 2013 at Wembley Stadium. The club is also the record winner of the short-lived FAW Premier Cup, winning it five times out of the 11 years of its tenure, participating against fellow Welsh clubs such as Cardiff City, Swansea City and Newport County. However, their biggest rivalries are with English clubs Chester, Shrewsbury Town, and Tranmere Rovers, with games between the clubs known as the cross-border derby. In 1992, Wrexham upset the reigning English Champions Arsenal in the FA Cup. They also scored a 1–0 victory over FC Porto in 1984 in the European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup. Wrexham was eligible for the European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup due to winning the Welsh Cup; their first European tie was against FC Zürich of Switzerland in 1972 and their last was played in Romania against Petrolul Ploiești in 1995. Wrexham&#x27;s home stadium, the Racecourse Ground, is the world&#x27;s oldest international stadium that still continues to host international games. The record attendance at the ground was set in 1957 when the club hosted a match against Manchester United in front of 34,445 spectators.

The 2020 purchase of the club by Canadian actor Ryan Reynolds and American actor Rob McElhenney and the attendant publicity from the docuseries &quot;Welcome to Wrexham&quot; had a significant impact on the club&#x27;s visibility, leading to its acquiring a new global fanbase with no precedent for a team who were then in the fifth division.

==History==
===1864–1905: A club of pioneers===
The club was formed in October 1864 by members of the Wrexham Cricket Club who wanted a sporting activity for the winter months. This makes them (after Sheffield, Cray, Hallam, and Notts County) the fifth oldest association football team, the third oldest professional club and the oldest in Wales. Their first game was played on 22 October 1864 at the Denbighshire County Cricket Ground (The Racecourse) against the Prince of Wales Fire Brigade.

As the rules of football were still somewhat fluid at the time, early matches featured teams with up to 17 players on each side (16 players when playing the Provincial Insurance Office and Chester College, 15 players against the Volunteer Fire Brigade). In these early years, Wrexham were leaders of the campaign to restrict teams to having just 11 players on the pitch at any one time. In 1876, the newly formed Football Association of Wales saw Wales play their first international match, against Scotland at The West of Scotland Cricket Club, Partick, featuring Edwin Cross and Alfred Davies as the first of many Wrexham F.C. players to play for Wales.

In the 1877–78 season, the FAW inaugurated the Welsh Cup competition, to run on similar lines to the English FA Cup. The first Welsh Cup final was played at Acton Park. Wrexham got to the final of the inaugural competition, where they defeated Druids F.C. 1–0, with James Davies being credited with the goal. Because of a lack of money at the fledgling FAW, Wrexham did not receive their trophy until the next year. For their first decade, Wrexham mostly played friendly matches against both Welsh and English opposition, with the Welsh Cup providing most of their competitive football, Wrexham winning it again in 1883.

1883 also saw Wrexham&#x27;s first appearance in the FA Cup, when after receiving a bye to the second round of the competition they were defeated 3–4 at home by Oswestry. Crowd trouble at the game led to the club being expelled from the Football Association, leading to the club being reformed in 1884 as Wrexham Olympic. Olympic was dropped from this club&#x27;s name in 1888. Thanks to a dispute with their landlords, who had raised the rent of the Racecourse Ground to £10 a year, Wrexham played their home games in the 1881–82 and 1882–83 seasons at Rhosddu Recreation Ground (changing the club&#x27;s name to &quot;Wrexham Athletic&quot; for one season), before moving back to the Racecourse Ground for the 1883–84 season, where the club have played their home games ever since.

In 1890 Wrexham joined The Combination league, playing their first game against Gorton Villa on 6 September 1890, with Arthur Lea scoring Wrexham&#x27;s only goal in a 5–1 defeat. Lea played for the club despite only having one arm as did playing colleague James Roberts. Wrexham finished the season second from bottom in eighth place in the first season. Wrexham played in the Combination for four years before a rapid increase in costs resulted in the club joining the Welsh League in the 1894–95 season. Wrexham won the Welsh League both years that they were in it, but they then decided to return to the Combination League in 1896, as despite the reduced support they received, the savings made on their traveling expenses outweighed the reduction in gate revenue.

===1905–1968: Into the Football League===
The club remained in the Combination League until 1905, by which time they had managed to win the league four times. After several unsuccessful attempts, Wrexham was finally elected to the Birmingham and District League in time for the beginning of the 1905–06 season. Wrexham&#x27;s first-ever match in this league was at home against Kidderminster Harriers at the Racecourse, and two thousand spectators witnessed Wrexham win the match 2–1. Wrexham finished sixth in their first season in this league. During their time in the Birmingham and District League, Wrexham won the Welsh Cup six times, in 1908–09, 1909–10, 1910–11, 1913–14, 1914–15, and 1920–21. They also reached the First Round proper of the FA Cup for a second time in the 1908–09 season before losing a replay 1–2 to Exeter City after extra time.

In 1921 Wrexham was elected to the newly formed Third Division North of the Football League. Their first League game was against Hartlepools United at the Racecourse in front of 8,000 spectators. Playing in blue shirts, Wrexham were defeated 0–2. The week after this defeat Wrexham travelled north to play Hartlepools and managed to get their revenge by beating them 1–0 in a hard-earned victory. It was during this particular season that Wrexham achieved many &quot;firsts&quot; in the club&#x27;s history, such as when Ted Regan scored the club&#x27;s first ever Football League hat-trick, and also Brian Simpson became the first Wrexham player to be sent off in a Football League game, against Southport in January 1922. Charlie Hewitt was the club&#x27;s first-ever manager during this period.

In the 1926–27 season the club got past the first round of the FA Cup only to be knocked out by Rhyl. The following season Wrexham fought their way to the fourth round before they lost 0–1 to Birmingham City. A record 32 league goals from Albert Mays helped Wrexham to get to third position in the division in the 1928–29 season. Later in that season Tommy Bamford made his first appearance for the club. He went on to score 201 League and Cup goals for the club during his time at the Racecourse. During the 1929–30 season the club recorded their best-ever league win to date when they defeated Rochdale 8–0. Wrexham enjoyed their best-ever Third Division North season in 1932–33, when they finished runners-up to Hull City and won 18 of their 21 home games during the course of the season. This was the first season that the club appeared in their now-familiar red and white strip for the first time for the short-lived 1939–40 season.

During the Second World War years, when long cross-county trips were impossible due to the war, Wrexham played in the &quot;Regional League West&quot; against local teams from Merseyside and Manchester, amongst others in the northwest region. Wrexham&#x27;s position as a barracks town meant that the team could secure the services of many famous guest players such as Stanley Matthews, Stan Cullis, and others. In the first post-war season Wrexham equaled their best-ever position when they again finished third in the Third Division North. In the summer of 1949, the club made its first-ever tour abroad when it played three games against the British army in Germany. The club reached the fourth round of the FA Cup in 1956–57 where they played Manchester United&#x27;s Busby Babes in front of a crowd of 34,445 people at the Racecourse, which still remains a club record. The 5–0 defeat did not spoil the occasion for the large home crowd, and later that season Wrexham managed to win the Welsh Cup for the first time in 26 years.

1960 saw the club relegated to a lower tier for the first time in their history, and they dropped into the newly created Fourth Division. But their performances improved following the appointment of Ken Barnes as player-manager. He led Wrexham to promotion to the third division in his first season in charge and oversaw the 10–1 trouncing of Hartlepool United, which is still the club&#x27;s record league victory. Two years after their promotion, Wrexham was relegated to the Fourth Division again, and in 1966 they finished rock-bottom at 92nd in the Football League after an extremely disappointing season.

=== 1968–1982: The glory years ===
John Neal was appointed manager of Wrexham in 1968, succeeding Alvan Williams who had brought Neal to the club as his assistant. He guided the club to a 9th-place finish in 1969, before leading Wrexham to their second Football League promotion in 1970 with a second-place finish and promotion to the Third Division. With Welsh clubs now able to qualify for the European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup by winning the Welsh Cup, Wrexham played their inaugural match in Europe against Swiss side FC Zurich in Switzerland on 13 September 1972, the game finishing 1–1. In the return leg, Wrexham won 2–1, advancing to the second round with a 3–2 win on aggregate. The second round drew Wrexham against Yugoslav side Hajduk Split. Over the course of two games, the score finished 3–3 on aggregate with Wrexham matching their more illustrious opponents, but they were knocked out of the competition due to the away goals rule.

The 1972–73 season saw the completion of the new Yale stand, with a capacity of up to 5,500. Including the terrace helped to comprise the bottom tier of the stand. The 1973–74 season saw Wrexham change their badge from the Maelor crest to a brand new badge that had much more resemblance to the Welsh roots of the club, with three feathers on the top of the badge and two dragons, one on either side of the badge and facing inwards. This is still the badge for today&#x27;s team. This season also saw Wrexham reach the quarter-finals of the FA Cup in another cup run. After victories over Shrewsbury Town, Rotherham United, Middlesbrough, Crystal Palace and Southampton, their cup run finally came to an end with a loss to first division side Burnley at Turf Moor, with 15,000 Wrexham fans present to watch the match. Also that season Wrexham just missed out on the promotion spots, finishing in 4th place at the end of the season.

1975–76 saw John Neal&#x27;s starlets captained by Eddie May, again shocking the football world by reaching the quarter-finals of the European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup after another sparkling cup run and defeats of several higher quality opponents. In the first round, Wrexham beat Swedish team Djurgårdens IF 3–2 on aggregate. They then managed to knock out the Polish side Stal Rzeszow 3–1 on aggregate. Wrexham played Belgian champions Anderlecht in the quarter-finals and narrowly lost 2–1 to the eventual winners of the competition. The 1976–77 season saw Wrexham again beat First Division opposition in both Cup competitions as they went on another cup run, defeating Tottenham Hotspur in the Football League Cup and Sunderland in the FA Cup. However, the league season was a traumatic one as the club, on the verge of promotion to the second division with only four matches left to play, needing just three points to reach their goal, missed out after a poor run.

Arfon Griffiths took over as player-manager for the 1977–78 season. They reached both the League and FA Cup quarter-finals that season, and Wrexham finally clinched promotion to the second division when they beat Rotherham United 7–1 at a packed Racecourse, Wrexham went on to win the Third Division Championship that year. In the 1978–79 season Wrexham made it to the fourth round of the FA Cup, where they lost to Tottenham Hotspur 3–2 in the replay after the first game finished 3–3. The Spurs team had stars amongst their ranks such as Ossie Ardiles, Ricky Villa, and Glenn Hoddle, and Wrexham were bested in getting knocked out. Following Arfon Griffiths&#x27; resignation from the manager&#x27;s position in 1981, his assistant Mel Sutton was put in charge, with a third-round FA Cup win over Brian Clough&#x27;s Nottingham Forest in another cup run, the highlight of the season.

=== 1982–1991: Decline ===
The summer of 1982 saw Bobby Roberts appointed the club&#x27;s new manager. Relegation meant the club had dire financial problems, resulting in the sale of many of the club&#x27;s experienced and talented players. Frank Carrodus, Ian Edwards, Mick Vinter and Wayne Cegieski had already left during the summer, Steve Fox, Joey Jones, Dixie McNeil and Billy Ronson soon followed. Wrexham were again relegated to the Fourth Division after plummeting from apparent mid-table security. The club&#x27;s slide continued into the following season, and only goal difference prevented Wrexham from being forced to apply for re-election to the League.

The 1984–85 season saw Wrexham take on FC Porto in European competition. Wrexham won the home leg with a 1–0 victory, but in the second leg, Porto showed their class and were 3–0 up after 38 minutes. However, Wrexham pulled goals back and the game finished 4–3, making it 4–4 on aggregate with Wrexham advancing on away goals. The second round draw was to pair Wrexham with Italian side AS Roma, managed by Sven-Göran Eriksson. Wrexham lost 3–0 on aggregate over the two legs. Their league performance was even more dire than the previous year, and by the time Bobby Roberts was finally removed from his post, Wrexham was rock-bottom of the entire Football League.

Former Racecourse favourite Dixie McNeil was appointed caretaker manager, and immediately inspired a revival that saw Wrexham win 7 of their last 10 matches and comfortably finish clear of having to apply for re-election, which earned him the job on a permanent basis that summer. His first season in charge saw the team finish mid-table position in an average season, he led the team to a Welsh Cup final win over Kidderminster Harriers. 1986 saw Wrexham make a return to European football with a first-round draw against Maltese side FC Zurrieq, whom they beat 7–0 on aggregate to earn a second-round tie against Real Zaragoza which they drew 2–2 with on aggregate but they went out on away goals.

Following the Bradford City stadium fire in May 1985, legislation on ground safety at all football grounds was brought into effect. This eventually led to the closure of the Mold Road stand because it did not reach the necessary safety standards. Led by Dixie McNeil, Wrexham reached the Fourth Division play-offs in 1989, having finished seventh in the league. Wrexham beat Scunthorpe United in the semi-final 5–1 on aggregate, but narrowly lost to Leyton Orient 2–1 in the final. After Wrexham started the next season with just 3 wins from 13 league games, Dixie McNeil resigned before his inevitable sacking.

He was replaced, initially on a temporary basis, by Brian Flynn, but his appointment was made permanent a month later. However the club continued to struggle domestically, and Flynn was forced to make three important signings in Mark Sertori, Eddie Youds and Alan Kennedy which saw the team finish in twenty-first place, therefore avoiding relegation. At the start of the 1990–91 season it was announced there would be no relegation to the Conference Premier as a team had already voluntarily left the league. That season Wrexham finished in ninety-second place. Wrexham were knocked out of the European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup in the second round by Manchester United 5–0 on aggregate, who eventually went on to win the trophy.

=== 1991–2001: Giant killers ===
The 1991–92 season saw Wrexham still in a poor financial state, as they continued to struggle on the field. With the club knocked out of the League Cup and struggling in the league, it was left to the FA Cup to keep the season alive. Having beaten Telford United and Winsford United, they were drawn to play the previous season&#x27;s First Division champions Arsenal. Wrexham produced one of their most memorable nights to beat the &quot;Gunners&quot; 2–1 after being behind, with a thunderous Mickey Thomas free kick and a Steve Watkin goal. They lost in the next round to West Ham United 1–0 in a replay after the first game had finished 2–2.

In an attempt to change the fortunes of the club after several seasons in the doldrums at the bottom of the football league pyramid, the 1992–93 season saw Wrexham manager Brian Flynn make a shrewd signing when he enlisted the services of Gary Bennett, who soon settled and helped Wrexham into the promotion race. Wrexham&#x27;s season came to a head on 27 April 1993 when with two games left they traveled to Northampton Town requiring a win to gain promotion to the next tier of English football. The game ended with a 2–0 victory to Wrexham and the 5,500 travelling &quot;Reds&quot; supporters there were jubilant when promotion had finally been achieved. The 1994–95 season would see Wrexham achieve more success in cup competitions, this time going on a run through the FA Cup. Having beaten Stockport County and Rotherham United, they faced Premier League side Ipswich Town at the Racecourse, with Wrexham running out 2–1 winners thanks to goals from Gary Bennett and Kieron Durkan. In the next round, Wrexham was drawn away to Manchester United and despite taking the lead at Old Trafford, United went on to win 5–2.

The 1995–96 season once again saw Wrexham in European action, with their opposition this time coming in the form of Romanian team Petrolul Ploiești; the home leg ended in a 0–0 draw but Wrexham lost 1–0 in the away leg, with the Romanians scoring the only goal of the match, and Wrexham were subsequently knocked out of the tournament. The 1996–97 season saw Wrexham set off on another strong run in the FA Cup and beat more top-flight opposition. Following wins at Colwyn Bay and Scunthorpe United, they were drawn to play West Ham United at home, the game ending in a 1–1 draw on a snow-covered pitch. The replay at Upton Park ended in a shock 1–0 win to Wrexham as Kevin Russell scored in the dying minutes to send Wrexham into the fourth round. After also beating Peterborough United and Birmingham City in the following rounds, they played Chesterfield in an all-Division-2 FA Cup quarter-final, Wrexham narrowly losing to the Spireites 1–0.

June 1997 was the date for the official opening of Colliers Park, which was Wrexham&#x27;s new training ground and was situated just outside Gresford on Chester Road. It was built at a cost of £750,000 and is widely regarded to be one of the best training grounds outside of the top flight. It has been used for training by many visiting teams that play at a higher standard over the years, such as Barcelona. The 1999–2000 season saw Wrexham again beat a top-flight team in the FA Cup, this time in the shape of Middlesbrough. The final score of the match was 2–1, with the second-half goals coming from Robin Gibson and Darren Ferguson after being behind the Premiership outfit. Wrexham went on to win the FAW Premier Cup in May 2001.

=== 2001–2008: Administration and the slide into non-League football===
At the start of the 21st century, the club was dogged with many problems off the pitch, including then chairman Alex Hamilton, attempting to get the club evicted from the stadium so that he could use and sell it for his own development purposes – the saga involved the sale of the Racecourse Ground to a separate company owned by Hamilton immediately after he became the club&#x27;s chairman. The club was included in FIFA Football 2004 for the first time and remained playable up to FIFA 08. In the summer of 2004, Hamilton gave the club a year&#x27;s notice to quit the ground.

The club&#x27;s fans developed an affinity with the fans of fellow football league club Brighton &amp; Hove Albion, who themselves had managed to successfully depose their chairman and keep control of their stadium after he had sold the ground for development purposes in almost the same circumstances. On 3 December 2004 the club was placed in financial administration by the High Court in Manchester as the club owed £2,600,000, including £800,000 which was owed to the Inland Revenue in unpaid taxes. Wrexham became the first League club to suffer a ten-point deduction under the new rule for being placed in administration, dropping them from the middle of the League One table to the relegation zone after the point deduction, and subsequently condemned Wrexham to relegation.

Despite their financial troubles, Wrexham went on to win the 2004–05 Football League Trophy by defeating Southend United 2–0 after extra time, in Wrexham&#x27;s first appearance at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff. The winning goals were scored by Juan Ugarte and Darren Ferguson as Wrexham ran out winners in front of nearly 20,000 Wrexham fans. Wrexham still retained an outside chance of escaping the drop in the 2004–05 season following an end-of-season winning streak; however, their faint hopes of staying up were ended with a 2–1 home loss to Brentford on 3 May 2005. The 10-point deduction proved decisive in determining Wrexham&#x27;s fate, as the club finished with 43 points compared to 20th-placed Milton Keynes Dons&#x27; 51 – a net points tally of 53 after deduction, which had condemned them to relegation.

In October 2005, Birmingham High Court decided that Alex Hamilton&#x27;s company CrucialMove had improperly acquired the freehold of the ground and the decision went against him. Hamilton then took this to the Appeal Court in London and it ruled on 14 March 2006 that the stadium must remain in the hands of the club&#x27;s administrators. On 30 April 2006 the administrators reached an agreement with local car dealer Neville Dickens, subject to agreement by the shareholders and creditors (which was achieved on 30 May), for Dickens to take over control of the club and all its assets. Had the club still been in administration by 3 June then Wrexham would have automatically been expelled from the League because of their financial situation. &quot;Wrexham Football Club (2006) Ltd&quot; is the name of the &quot;phoenix&quot; company that took over the assets of the old &quot;Wrexham Association Football Club Limited&quot; – technically, the club is no longer known as &quot;Wrexham Association Football Club&quot; due to the takeover of the club by Neville Dickens and Geoff Moss and their associates; this is reflected on new merchandise, although most fans will still refer to it as &quot;Wrexham AFC&quot;.

The 2006–07 season started well for Wrexham, as they went 8 games unbeaten. However, the club would then struggle with Denis Smith eventually being sacked in January 2007 with Wrexham in the bottom half of the division and after a poor run of results. He was replaced by coach Brian Carey. Wrexham finished 19th in League Two with 51 points after an impressive late run of form which saw them win 4 out of their last 5 games, which included defeating local rivals Shrewsbury in the last derby match at Gay Meadow. Wrexham&#x27;s league status was saved on the last day of the season with a vital 3–1 victory on 5 May 2007 over Boston United at home which sent their opponents down to the Conference Premier and ensured that Wrexham would stay in the Football League.

Expectations were high for the 2007–08 season, with fans expecting a promotion push. However, the season started badly with the club in 24th by November 2007. Brian Carey was eventually sacked, and on 15 November 2007, Brian Little was named as Wrexham&#x27;s new manager and the replacement to Carey, who took the role of assistant manager. After a promising start to his reign, Wrexham experienced a run of seven straight league defeats, prompting the club to bring in eleven new players during the January transfer window. Wrexham went six matches unbeaten before some poor form which saw defeats against some fellow strugglers. Wrexham were finally relegated to non-League following a 2–0 defeat away at Hereford United, ending the club&#x27;s 87-year stay in the Football League.

===2008–2020: The non-League years===
The 2008–09 season started well, with a 5–0 home victory against Stevenage Borough. However a run of poor results followed, with Wrexham being left in the mid-table battle, only four points above the relegation zone and only keeping two clean sheets all season. Following a 3–0 home defeat against Rushden and Diamonds, and fans calling for his dismissal, Little left Wrexham by mutual consent. Little was replaced by Dean Saunders. Wrexham&#x27;s first full season in the Conference Premier ended in a disappointing 10th place. The following year, 2009–10, ended in a similar fashion with Wrexham finishing in 11th position, well off the pace of the promotion battle.

In March 2011, the ownership of the club became subject to two bids: one from Wrexham Supporters&#x27; Trust and another from local businesswoman Stephanie Booth. Wrexham&#x27;s MP and AM indicated that they would prefer Wrexham Supporters&#x27; Trust to secure the bid. A third bid later came in, but after WST and Booth came to an agreement, their bid was then re-accepted. In April 2011, the club was served with a winding-up order from HMRC, with an unpaid tax bill of just under £200,000. The team finished the 2010–11 season in 4th place, qualifying for a playoff spot, but were beaten 5–1 on aggregate by Luton Town in the semi-final.

During the 2011–12 season, Wrexham were invited back into the Welsh Cup after 16 years, entering at the third round stage. New manager Andy Morrell guided Wrexham to a record tally of 98 points but this was not enough to gain automatic promotion, as they ended the season only 5 points adrift of Fleetwood Town, who gained the only automatic place. Wrexham lost in the play-offs to Luton Town again. Wrexham earned themselves places in both the FA Trophy final and the Conference Premier play-off final, their first two appearances at Wembley Stadium in the club&#x27;s 150-year history to date, and within five weeks of one another. In the FA Trophy final, Wrexham won on penalties after a 1–1 draw with Grimsby Town. A 5–2 aggregate win over Kidderminster Harriers in the two-legged play-off semi-final saw Wrexham through to the final versus Newport County, the first play-off final to feature two Welsh teams; Newport defeated Wrexham 2–0.

In June 2013, members of Wrexham Supporters Trust voted on whether they should change the club&#x27;s name back to Wrexham AFC. As a result, the name was changed.

In February 2014, Andy Morrell stepped down as manager. Billy Barr was appointed as interim manager before being replaced a few weeks later by Kevin Wilkin. Wrexham finished the 2013–14 season in 17th place. In 2018–19, Wrexham finished in 4th place but lost the play-off quarter-final to Eastleigh. In 2019–20, the club finished 19th on points per game after the season was ended early due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the lowest position in the club&#x27;s 150-year history.

===2020–present: New owners, return to EFL and the Parkinson era===
In November 2020, Canadian-American actor Ryan Reynolds and American actor Rob McElhenney, through their RR McReynolds Company LLC, bought the club. The deal received the backing of 98.6% of the 2,000 members of the Wrexham Supporters Trust that voted and was completed in February 2021. They were included in &quot;FIFA 22&quot; as part of the &quot;Rest of World&quot; section, becoming the first non-league team to be featured in the series. 

Following the takeover, a docuseries called &quot;Welcome to Wrexham&quot; was announced to be in production for FX with Boardwalk Pictures. The series debuted on 24 August 2022 on FX and Hulu in the United States, followed by a release on Disney+ in the United Kingdom and Ireland the next day. The acquisition by Reynolds and McElhenney and the attendant publicity from &quot;Welcome to Wrexham&quot; had a significant impact on the club&#x27;s visibility, leading to its acquiring a new global fanbase with no precedent for a team in the fifth tier. The club&#x27;s fortunes began to attract dedicated coverage from global sporting media that would not typically be afforded teams outside the Premier League. This, in turn, inspired a debate about the potential replicability of this strategy for other lesser-known clubs and leagues, with &quot;The Guardian&quot; remarking that &quot;everybody wants to ‘do a Wrexham’, but not everybody can.&quot;

During the 2021–22 season, under the leadership of newly hired manager Phil Parkinson, Wrexham finished second before losing the play-off semi-final 5–4 to Grimsby Town after extra time. Wrexham also reached the 2022 FA Trophy final which they lost 1–0 to Bromley. 

During the 2022–23 season, the team progressed to the fourth round in the 2022–23 FA Cup, being the only National League team to do so, beating Coventry City in an upset in the third round, and eventually being knocked out by Sheffield United in a replay. The first game against Sheffield United, which ended in a 3–3 draw, was ESPN&#x27;s most followed football game across its digital platforms. Wrexham vied with Notts County throughout the season to lead the league, trading the first spot back and forth, and both setting new National League records for wins, goals, and goal difference, while 20+ points ahead of the third place team by the end of the season. Wrexham secured winning their first league title in 45 years, and were promoted to the EFL League Two after a 15-year absence, following a 3–1 win against Boreham Wood. The club amassed a tally of 111 points that season, a record for the top five divisions of English league football, beating Notts County to the championship and single automatic promotion spot. Wrexham&#x27;s income increased to over £10 million in the year ending in June 2023.

During the 2023–24 season, Wrexham secured a second successive promotion, taking the club to EFL League One, the third tier of the English football system and ultimately finished second behind Stockport County. Wrexham was awarded Category Four status as an EFL academy from the 2023/24 campaign with the short-term aim to reach Category Three status and operate an Under-18 side. Club Necaxa&#x27;s backers purchased 5% of Wrexham AFC in April 2024 and both owners, in turn, purchased a minority stake in Necaxa. The academy was awarded Category Three status as an EFL academy from the 2024/25 season. The football club joined the European Club Association in August 2024.

The 2024–25 season began with the first League One match in 19 years and with the 5,000th recorded league match for the club, winning at home 3–2 to Wycombe Wanderers. The Allyn family of Skaneateles, New York was announced as a new minority investor in the club in October 2024.

== Sponsorship ==
Wrexham&#x27;s home kit is red shirts, white shorts, and white socks. The club has played in a predominantly red kit with white features since the late 1930s. The away kit is white shirts, red shorts, and red socks. In 2014–15, to celebrate the club&#x27;s 150th anniversary, Wrexham wore a red and black hooped Nike home shirt as this was the club&#x27;s first ever recorded home shirt. Macron have been the kit supplier of Wrexham AFC since 2016 and helped arrange a pre-season training camp for the first team in pre-season 2017 in Portugal where over 600 supporters traveled over to support the team in a 2–1 win over Louletano. They still visit Portugal each summer.

In April 2011, Wrexham signed a two-year sponsorship deal with Greene King brewery. This was cancelled in September after Wrexham University (then known as Glyndŵr University) bought the Racecourse, as the university had an exclusive deal with another brewery. Starting with the kits for the 2021–22 seasons, the back neck of the shirt has the number &quot;1934&quot; embroidered in, in remembrance of the Gresford disaster. In May 2023, the team&#x27;s training kit was announced to be sponsored by Betty Buzz, a beverage company owned by Blake Lively, for the 2023–24 season.

===Kit manufacturers and sponsors===
:Source:

==Stadium==

Since 1864, Wrexham have played their home games at The Racecourse Ground, situated on the Mold Road, which is the main through road heading into Wrexham; it is opposite the residential area of Maesgwyn, situated between Wrexham University and Wrexham General railway station. In August 2011 Wrexham University purchased the stadium and the club training facilities in Gresford, adding their name to the stadium for it to become The Glyndŵr University Racecourse Stadium (Glyndŵr University was the name of Wrexham University at the time). Subsequently, in 2016, Wrexham Supporters Trust secured a 99-year lease on the ground, and the name reverted to the Racecourse Ground. The capacity is 10,500, which made it one of the largest stadiums in the National League. In June 2022, Wrexham AFC purchased the Racecourse Ground freehold from the university and are planning renovations to the stadium. The maximum capacity as of the 2024/25 season is 13,341 due to an expanded temporary Kop.

==Support==
In August 2011, Wrexham were faced with being expelled from the Football Conference, fans rallied and raised £127,000 in one day to help pay a bond, so they could secure football for the forthcoming season. A month later the Wrexham Supporters&#x27; Trust (WST) took over the day-to-day running of the club. Fan ownership of Wrexham was finally ratified on 12 December 2011. As of May 2015 the WST had 4,129 adult members and joint-owners of the club. As well as the city of Wrexham, support is drawn from the surrounding towns and villages of the district, such as Gwersyllt and Rhos, the Flintshire towns of Mold, Buckley, Holywell and Deeside. For the 2013 FA Trophy final coaches of Wrexham fans came from many North Wales towns including; Bala, Bangor, Caernarfon, Colwyn Bay, Denbigh, Flint, Llandudno, Prestatyn, Rhyl and Ruthin. Additionally, many Wrexham fans reside in Shropshire.

Exiled supporters clubs can be found in South Wales, Manchester and London. Over the past 15 years, even as a lower-league side, Wrexham have been able to attract gates of 11,000+ for big games at the Racecourse. Famous Wrexham fans include Canadian astronaut Chris Hadfield, former Royal butler Paul Burrell, actor and television presenter Tim Vincent, actor Llŷr Ifans, actor and comedian Ted Robbins, Sweet guitarist Andy Scott, Lloyd Roberts of rock band Neck Deep, 2012 Olympian weightlifter Gareth Evans, Sky Sports reporter Bryn Law, Rugby World Cup referee Nigel Owens and former footballers Neil Roberts, Robbie Savage and Mark Hughes. The club also has a namesake club in Uganda, Wrexham F.C. Uganda, established in 2009, created by Welsh charity Teams4U.

===Rivalries===
Wrexham has a fierce rivalry with Chester; the two contest the cross-border derby. The clubs are located just 10 miles apart, but are Welsh and English respectively. The first match was held in 1888 with Wrexham running out 3–2 winners at Faulkner Street, the former home of Chester City; the most recent was played in March 2018 with Wrexham winning 2–0 at the Racecourse Ground. Wrexham lead the head-to-head rivalry with 67 wins compared to Chester&#x27;s 50. Games between the two are classed as &quot;high risk&quot; for the potential of disorder and are generally moved to early kick-offs with a large police presence to prevent it, though arrests do still occur for various offenses surrounding the fans of both clubs.

Former Chester City player Lee Dixon said of the derby &quot;I&#x27;m telling you, Chester versus Wrexham was a real derby! It&#x27;s difficult to compare if you&#x27;ve not played in each one but there&#x27;s something special about any derby at any level. I played for Chester v Wrexham and that could get ferocious, it lost nothing in ferocity compared to Arsenal v Spurs&quot;. Former Wales and Liverpool striker Ian Rush, who played for both clubs, said in 2013 that the cross-border derby between the two clubs is &quot;as intense as they come&quot; and &quot;It is like Wales v England really, it is incredible&quot;.

Wrexham also have a fierce rivalry with Shrewsbury Town and Tranmere Rovers due to geographical proximity. The games are often moved to early kick-offs, in accordance with police wishes, to minimize the potential of trouble as has happened between clubs previously. In 2003, 32 hooligans were jailed after a Tranmere v Wrexham match at Prenton Park and trouble was again evident when the two clubs met in a 2013 friendly at the Racecourse Ground. Though not as intense as they once were, due to divisional differences, Crewe Alexandra and Port Vale, as well as fellow Welsh clubs Cardiff City, Newport County, and Swansea City are also classed as rivals. Wrexham is represented by a hooligan firm known as the &#x27;Front Line&#x27; that have been involved in major disorder around Britain since the early 1980s.

Recent seasons have also seen rivalries cultivated with both Stockport County and Notts County after Wrexham battled Stockport for the 2021–22 National League title, narrowly missing out in spite of a late season surge that saw Wrexham beat Stockport at home twice in the FA Trophy and League, before battling Notts County for the title in 2022–23 in a season that saw both teams clear the century mark for both goals and points with a 3–2 win on Easter Monday in 2023 for Wrexham, helped by a Ben Foster penalty save in the last minute, proving crucial as Wrexham finished 4 points clear of Notts to win the title and promotion back to the EFL. 2023–24 saw Wrexham win another promotion in 2nd place, just behind Stockport who won the league (although Wrexham beat them 2–1 at home on the final day of the season ) to ensure the two would be in League One for the 2024–25 League One season.

Since being promoted to League One for the 2024–25 season, Wrexham have formed a rivalry with Birmingham City, who were relegated in the previous season from the Championship. The rivalry has been dubbed the &quot;Hollywood Derby&quot;, as Wrexham is owned by Canadian-American actor Ryan Reynolds and American actor Rob McElhenney while Birmingham is partially owned by former American football quarterback Tom Brady.

===Team mascot===
Wrex the Dragon is the official team mascot of Wrexham. The mascot, along with the team nickname &quot;The Dragons&quot;, was introduced in 2001–02 following a ballot of fans to help increase sponsorship and promote the club&#x27;s Welsh image whilst also providing a more original nickname as Bristol City, Swindon Town and Cheltenham Town also use the nickname of &#x27;The Robins&#x27;. Wrex is occasionally performed by owner Rob McElhenney.

==Training ground==
Wrexham&#x27;s training ground was the purpose-built Colliers Park, in neighbouring Gresford. When the construction had been completed it was officially opened in June 1997, at a building cost of £750,000. It is widely regarded in British football as one of the best training grounds outside the top flight and one of the best never to have been used by a top-flight team. The England national team, Barcelona, Rangers and the Wales national team have all used it for training purposes. Colliers Park continues to be improved; a running hill, as well as all-weather pitches and a small stand have been constructed since the facilities opened in 1997. Colliers Park was bought by Glyndwr University as part of their purchase of the Racecourse Ground assets in 2011. Wrexham&#x27;s former training ground found a new purpose after about £4 million were invested by the Football Association of Wales to transform it into a National Development Centre in February 2018.

For the beginning of the 2016–17 season, Wrexham moved back to their former training ground at Stansty Park, the home of Welsh National League side Lex Glyndwr, due to the use of Colliers Park becoming financially unsustainable for the club. Wrexham did however retain the use of Colliers Park for Youth and Reserve fixtures. After one season of training at Stansty Park, Wrexham announced their move to a new training ground at 9 Acre field for the beginning of the 2017–18 season based near the city center but also used Stansty Park in 2021. Wrexham still occasionally train at Colliers Park since the takeover and use multiple venues.

==Players==

===Squad===














====Out on loan====


 

====Academy====








===Notable former players===
&quot;For all players with a Wikipedia article, see Wrexham A.F.C. players.&quot;

&quot;For a complete list of players, see List of Wrexham A.F.C. players with 100+ appearances, 25–99 appearances and 1–24 appearances.&quot;

====Hall of Fame====
The following are members of the Wrexham A.F.C. Hall of Fame. Entry is not restricted to players; anyone who has made a great contribution to the club in any capacity can be considered.
====Player of the Year====
====Player records====
*Most goals in a season in all competitions: Tommy Bamford – 51 (1933–34)
*Most League goals in a season: Tommy Bamford – 44 (1933–34, Division Three North)
*Most league goals in total: Tommy Bamford – 175
*Most hat tricks: Tommy Bamford – 16
*Most goals scored in a single game by one player: Andy Morrell – 7 (against Merthyr Tydfil, 16 February 2000)
*Most league appearances: 592 – Arfon Griffiths (1959–61, 1962–79)
*Most appearances in total: 713 - Arfon Griffiths (1959–61, 1962–79)
*Most capped player: 146 - Daniel Bennett, Singapore
*Most caps while at Wrexham: 49 – Dennis Lawrence, Trinidad &amp; Tobago
*Oldest player: Bobby Roberts – 43 years, 88 days (against Worcester City, 29 October 1983)
*Youngest player: Ken Roberts – 15 years, 158 days (against Bradford PA, 1 September 1951)

===Reserves===
Between 1988 and 1995 the reserve team of Wrexham played in the Welsh football leagues.

On 2 August 2022, Wrexham announced their participation in the upcoming 2022–23 Central League season.

==Seasons==
==Team records==
*Attendance – 34,445 v Manchester United, FA Cup 4th round, 26 January 1957
*League attendance – 29,261 v Chester City, Division Three, 26 December 1936
*Average attendance – 11,651, 1977–78
*Highest league win – 10–1 v Hartlepools United, 3 March 1962
*Worst league defeat – 9–0 v Brentford, Division Three, 15 October 1963
*Highest league finish - 15th, Second Division, 1978–79
*Lowest league finish - 17th, Conference National, 2013–14
*Biggest cup win – 6–0 v Charlton Athletic, FA Cup 3rd round, 5 January 1980
*Most games won in a row – 10, 5 April 2003 – 8 May 2003, 2002–03
*Most league wins in a season – 34, 2022–23
*Most goals in a season – 115, 2022–23
*Longest unbeaten run – 28, October 2022 – 7 April 2023, 2022–23
*Most consecutive league clean sheets – 7, 9 October – 26 November, 2011–12
*Most clean sheets in a season – 26, 1973–74 and 2018–19
*Highest transfer received – £800,000 for Bryan Hughes, Birmingham City, 1997
*Highest transfer fee paid – £590,000 for Modou Faal, West Bromwich Albion, 2024

===European record===
European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup:
== Club officials ==
=== Coaching staff ===

===Board of Directors===


=== Honourary ===
=== Managerial history ===
Managerial history for Wrexham AFC from 1912 to present.&quot;&quot;
==Honours==
Wrexham AFC&#x27;s honours include:

League
*Third Division North / Third Division (level 3)
**Champions: 1977–78
**Runners-up: 1932–33
*Fourth Division / Third Division / League Two (level 4)
**Runners-up: 1969–70, 1992–93, 2023–24
**Promoted: 1961–62, 2002–03
*National League (level 5)
**Champions: 2022–23
**Runners-up: 2011–12, 2021–22
*The Combination
**Champions: 1900–01, 1901–02, 1902–03, 1904–05
*Welsh Senior League
**Champions: 1894–95, 1895–96

Cup
*Football League Trophy
**Winners: 2004–05
*FA Trophy
**Winners: 2012–13
**Runners-up: 2014–15, 2021–22
*Football League North Cup
**Winners: 1943–44
*FAW Premier Cup
**Winners: 1997–98, 1999–2000, 2000–01, 2002–03, 2003–04 (Record)
*Welsh Cup
**Winners (23): 1877–78, 1882–83, 1892–93, 1896–97, 1902–03, 1904–05, 1908–09, 1909–10, 1910–11, 1913–14, 1914–15, 1920–21, 1923–24, 1924–25, 1930–31, 1956–57, 1957–58, 1959–60, 1971–72, 1974–75, 1977–78, 1985–86, 1994–95 (Record)
*Supporters Direct Cup
**Winners: 2015–16 (Shared)

==Literature==
*&quot;Champions 2022/23 – The Story Of A Record-Breaking Season&quot;, Wrexham A.F.C., 2023
*&quot;The Giant Killers; a Wrexham fan&#x27;s view&quot; by Richard Partington, Bridge Books, 2001
*&quot;My Wrexham Story; The Inspirational Autobiography From The Beloved Football Hero&quot; by Paul Mullin, Cornerstone, 2023 
*&quot;The Racecourse Robins from Adams to Youds: a Who&#x27;s who of Wrexham Association Football Club, 1921 to 1999&quot; by Peter Jones and Gareth Davies, the authors, 1999
*&quot;Tinseltown: Hollywood and the Beautiful Game - A Match Made In Wrexham&quot; by Ian Herbert, Headline, 2023
*&quot;Wrexham; A Complete Record 1872 – 1992&quot; by Peter Jones, Breedon Books, 1992
*&quot;Wrexham AFC (Ultimate Football Heroes)&quot; by Paul Harrison, John Blake Publishing, 2024 
*&quot;Wrexham FC 1872–1950&quot; by Peter Jones and Gareth Davies, History Press Limited, 2000
*&quot;Wrexham FC 1950–2000&quot; by Peter Jones and Gareth Davies, History Press Limited, 2001
*&quot;Wrexham FC, An A–Z history&quot; by Dean Hayes, Sigma, 1998
*&quot;Wrexham Football Club Pen-Portraits&quot; by Don Meredith, Don Meredith, 1997
*&quot;Wrexham; The European era&quot; by Peter Jones, Desert Island Books, 2002
*&quot;Wrexham; Through The Trap Door&quot; by Peter Jones, Desert Island Books, 2008
The team plays a significant role in the 1994 book &quot;Twenty Two Foreigners in Funny Shorts&quot; by Peter Davies, written for the World Cup in the US. It profiles the ongoing and ultimately successful promotion effort.

==See also==
*Club of Pioneers
*List of Wrexham A.F.C. seasons
*List of Wrexham A.F.C. records and statistics
*List of Wrexham A.F.C. players (25–99 Appearances, 1–24 Appearances)
*&quot;Welcome to Wrexham&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Official Twitter account</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18529" start="0" end="33" title="Wrexham A.F.C." label="Wrexham Association Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="55" end="75" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q496368" start="90" end="97" title="Wrexham" label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085582" start="132" end="152" title="Oldest football clubs" label="oldest club in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085582" start="161" end="225" title="Oldest football clubs" label="third-oldest professional association football team in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q19565" start="243" end="257" title="EFL League One" label="EFL League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559" start="282" end="312" title="English football league system" label="English football league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229457" start="426" end="441" title="The Combination" label="The Combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q21999652" start="519" end="538" title="Denbighshire League" label="Welsh Senior League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634803" start="623" end="655" title="West Midlands (Regional) League" label="Birmingham &amp;amp; District League"/>
<link wikidata="Q516075" start="752" end="772" title="Football League Third Division North" label="Third Division North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="864" end="878" title="Football League Third Division" label="Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436315" start="955" end="970" title="Football League Fourth Division" label="Fourth Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="1085" end="1100" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683408" start="1432" end="1446" title="Administration (British football)" label="administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559" start="1708" end="1738" title="English football league system" label="English football league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q112052268" start="1782" end="1805" title="2022–23 National League" label="2022–23 National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="1809" end="1823" title="EFL League Two" label="EFL League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q19565" start="1894" end="1908" title="EFL League One" label="EFL League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="1954" end="1963" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q843159" start="1987" end="2009" title="EFL Trophy" label="Football League Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604328" start="2013" end="2017" title="2005 Football League Trophy final" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q204496" start="2025" end="2043" title="Millennium Stadium" label="Millennium Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046509" start="2052" end="2061" title="FA Trophy" label="FA Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838949" start="2065" end="2069" title="2013 FA Trophy Final" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="2073" end="2088" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119083" start="2144" end="2159" title="FAW Premier Cup" label="FAW Premier Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18662" start="2267" end="2279" title="Cardiff City F.C." label="Cardiff City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="2281" end="2293" title="Swansea City A.F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18523" start="2298" end="2312" title="Newport County A.F.C." label="Newport County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041933" start="2370" end="2377" title="Chester F.C." label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q19626" start="2379" end="2394" title="Shrewsbury Town" label="Shrewsbury Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q19637" start="2400" end="2415" title="Tranmere Rovers F.C." label="Tranmere Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188115" start="2459" end="2477" title="cross-border derby" label="cross-border derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022621" start="2496" end="2532" title="Wrexham A.F.C. 2–1 Arsenal F.C." label="upset the reigning English Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="2533" end="2540" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q128446" start="2592" end="2600" title="FC Porto" label="FC Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q584999" start="2616" end="2646" title="1984–85 European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q206692" start="2775" end="2784" title="FC Zürich" label="FC Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322550" start="2853" end="2870" title="FC Petrolul Ploiești" label="Petrolul Ploiești"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202579" start="2913" end="2930" title="Racecourse Ground" label="Racecourse Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="3120" end="3137" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q192682" start="3218" end="3231" title="Ryan Reynolds" label="Ryan Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q935989" start="3251" end="3265" title="Rob McElhenney" label="Rob McElhenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q113144658" start="3320" end="3338" title="Welcome to Wrexham" label="Welcome to Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q18491" start="3714" end="3723" title="Sheffield F.C." label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696729" start="3725" end="3729" title="Cray Wanderers F.C." label="Cray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257402" start="3731" end="3737" title="Hallam F.C." label="Hallam"/>
<link wikidata="Q19598" start="3743" end="3755" title="Notts County F.C." label="Notts County"/>
<link wikidata="Q762243" start="4199" end="4214" title="University of Chester" label="Chester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q275173" start="4423" end="4452" title="Football Association of Wales" label="Football Association of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="4457" end="4462" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555554" start="4474" end="4499" title="1876 Scotland v Wales football match" label="first international match"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="4509" end="4517" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573475" start="4521" end="4554" title="Hamilton Crescent" label="The West of Scotland Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140469" start="4556" end="4563" title="Partick" label="Partick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346324" start="4575" end="4586" title="Edwin Cross" label="Edwin Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722523" start="4591" end="4604" title="Alfred Davies (footballer)" label="Alfred Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="4714" end="4723" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="4776" end="4782" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555627" start="4794" end="4809" title="1877–78 Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677659" start="4824" end="4834" title="Acton Park, Wrexham" label="Acton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3583363" start="4911" end="4922" title="Druids F.C." label="Druids F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q24033907" start="4933" end="4945" title="James Davies (footballer, born 1845)" label="James Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751307" start="5450" end="5458" title="Oswestry Town F.C." label="Oswestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202579" start="5740" end="5757" title="Racecourse Ground" label="Racecourse Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887945" start="5843" end="5868" title="Rhosddu Recreation Ground" label="Rhosddu Recreation Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229457" start="6097" end="6112" title="The Combination" label="The Combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799469" start="6193" end="6203" title="Arthur Lea (footballer)" label="Arthur Lea"/>
<link wikidata="Q21999652" start="6545" end="6557" title="Welsh Senior League" label="Welsh League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18518" start="7222" end="7244" title="Kidderminster Harriers F.C." label="Kidderminster Harriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48939" start="7670" end="7681" title="Exeter City F.C." label="Exeter City"/>
<link wikidata="Q516075" start="7749" end="7769" title="Football League Third Division North" label="Third Division North"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="7773" end="7792" title="the Football League" label="the Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19592" start="7830" end="7848" title="Hartlepool United F.C." label="Hartlepools United"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="8282" end="8291" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q18525" start="8398" end="8407" title="Southport F.C." label="Southport"/>
<link wikidata="Q595516" start="8596" end="8600" title="Rhyl F.C." label="Rhyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="8692" end="8707" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4101408" start="8851" end="8864" title="Tommy Bamford" label="Tommy Bamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q48949" start="9096" end="9104" title="Rochdale A.F.C." label="Rochdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q19477" start="9215" end="9224" title="Hull City A.F.C." label="Hull City"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9450" end="9466" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23100" start="9615" end="9625" title="Merseyside" label="Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="9630" end="9640" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q216140" start="9808" end="9824" title="Stanley Matthews" label="Stanley Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q182705" start="9826" end="9837" title="Stan Cullis" label="Stan Cullis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="10186" end="10203" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q373507" start="10211" end="10222" title="Busby Babes" label="Busby Babes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779997" start="10673" end="10683" title="Ken Barnes (English footballer)" label="Ken Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19592" start="10817" end="10834" title="Hartlepool United F.C." label="Hartlepool United"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737658" start="11184" end="11198" title="Alvan Williams" label="Alvan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="11482" end="11512" title="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q206692" start="11605" end="11614" title="FC Zurich" label="FC Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q181216" start="11823" end="11835" title="Hajduk Split" label="Hajduk Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q208679" start="12015" end="12030" title="away goals rule" label="away goals rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770499" start="12256" end="12262" title="Maelor" label="Maelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19626" start="12622" end="12637" title="Shrewsbury Town F.C." label="Shrewsbury Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q48950" start="12639" end="12655" title="Rotherham United F.C." label="Rotherham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="12657" end="12670" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="12672" end="12686" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q19458" start="12776" end="12783" title="Burnley F.C." label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q683112" start="12787" end="12796" title="Turf Moor" label="Turf Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315962" start="12978" end="12987" title="John Neal (footballer, born 1932)" label="John Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q622430" start="13258" end="13272" title="Djurgårdens IF Fotboll" label="Djurgårdens IF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329203" start="13338" end="13350" title="Stal Rzeszów (football)" label="Stal Rzeszow"/>
<link wikidata="Q187528" start="13402" end="13412" title="R.S.C. Anderlecht" label="Anderlecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="13637" end="13654" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789156" start="13935" end="13950" title="Arfon Griffiths" label="Arfon Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q310373" start="14475" end="14488" title="Ossie Ardiles" label="Ossie Ardiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q705946" start="14490" end="14501" title="Ricky Villa" label="Ricky Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q296666" start="14507" end="14519" title="Glenn Hoddle" label="Glenn Hoddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810858" start="14669" end="14679" title="Mel Sutton" label="Mel Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207658" start="14734" end="14746" title="Brian Clough" label="Brian Clough"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="14754" end="14771" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935517" start="14872" end="14885" title="Bobby Roberts (footballer)" label="Bobby Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147258" start="15079" end="15090" title="Ian Edwards (footballer born 1955)" label="Ian Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691828" start="15170" end="15180" title="Joey Jones" label="Joey Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284878" start="15182" end="15194" title="Dixie McNeil" label="Dixie McNeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913257" start="15199" end="15211" title="Billy Ronson" label="Billy Ronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q128446" start="15530" end="15538" title="FC Porto" label="FC Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739" start="15878" end="15885" title="AS Roma" label="AS Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q218369" start="15898" end="15917" title="Sven-Göran Eriksson" label="Sven-Göran Eriksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10308" start="16772" end="16785" title="Real Zaragoza" label="Real Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116681" start="16872" end="16898" title="Bradford City stadium fire" label="Bradford City stadium fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19615" start="17233" end="17250" title="Scunthorpe United F.C." label="Scunthorpe United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595" start="17308" end="17321" title="Leyton Orient F.C." label="Leyton Orient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605051" start="17523" end="17534" title="Brian Flynn (footballer)" label="Brian Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336583" start="17714" end="17725" title="Eddie Youds" label="Eddie Youds"/>
<link wikidata="Q958330" start="17730" end="17742" title="Alan Kennedy" label="Alan Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q58916" start="17911" end="17929" title="Conference Premier" label="Conference Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283867" start="18480" end="18494" title="Telford United F.C." label="Telford United"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213266" start="18499" end="18514" title="Winsford United F.C." label="Winsford United"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="18592" end="18599" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022621" start="18656" end="18688" title="Wrexham A.F.C. 2–1 Arsenal F.C." label="beat the &amp;quot;Gunners&amp;quot; 2–1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931375" start="18727" end="18740" title="Mickey Thomas (footballer)" label="Mickey Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614248" start="18757" end="18769" title="Steve Watkin (footballer)" label="Steve Watkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="18807" end="18822" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q48945" start="19289" end="19305" title="Northampton Town F.C." label="Northampton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18526" start="19676" end="19692" title="Stockport County F.C." label="Stockport County"/>
<link wikidata="Q9653" start="19746" end="19758" title="Ipswich Town F.C." label="Ipswich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524690" start="19836" end="19848" title="Gary Bennett (footballer born 1962)" label="Gary Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q10483810" start="19853" end="19866" title="Kieron Durkan" label="Kieron Durkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83457" start="19962" end="19974" title="Old Trafford" label="Old Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322550" start="20134" end="20151" title="FC Petrolul Ploiești" label="Petrolul Ploiești"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479641" start="20470" end="20480" title="Colwyn Bay F.C." label="Colwyn Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q330731" start="20622" end="20632" title="Boleyn Ground" label="Upton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397401" start="20672" end="20685" title="Kevin Russell (footballer)" label="Kevin Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19495" start="20772" end="20791" title="Peterborough United F.C." label="Peterborough United"/>
<link wikidata="Q48935" start="20849" end="20861" title="Chesterfield F.C." label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406264" start="21093" end="21101" title="Gresford" label="Gresford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="21465" end="21478" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352416" start="21557" end="21569" title="Robin Gibson (footballer)" label="Robin Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q513167" start="21574" end="21589" title="Darren Ferguson" label="Darren Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119083" start="21660" end="21675" title="FAW Premier Cup" label="FAW Premier Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313999" start="22180" end="22198" title="FIFA Football 2004" label="FIFA Football 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q19453" start="22431" end="22457" title="Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion F.C." label="Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q759652" start="22688" end="22712" title="Administration (insolvency)" label="financial administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="22734" end="22744" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034804" start="22815" end="22829" title="Inland Revenue" label="Inland Revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q843159" start="23195" end="23217" title="Football League Trophy" label="Football League Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48951" start="23231" end="23246" title="Southend United F.C." label="Southend United"/>
<link wikidata="Q204496" start="23311" end="23329" title="Millennium Stadium" label="Millennium Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="23333" end="23340" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q10395053" start="23375" end="23386" title="Juan Ugarte" label="Juan Ugarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q513167" start="23391" end="23406" title="Darren Ferguson" label="Darren Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571" start="23677" end="23686" title="Brentford F.C." label="Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q248188" start="23837" end="23855" title="Milton Keynes Dons F.C." label="Milton Keynes Dons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257529" start="25287" end="25298" title="Denis Smith (footballer, born 1947)" label="Denis Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963283" start="25445" end="25456" title="Brian Carey" label="Brian Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="25483" end="25493" title="Football League Two" label="League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q894605" start="25795" end="25808" title="Boston United F.C." label="Boston United"/>
<link wikidata="Q58916" start="25856" end="25874" title="Conference Premier" label="Conference Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="25918" end="25933" title="Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179615" start="26155" end="26167" title="Brian Little (footballer)" label="Brian Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q18516" start="26644" end="26659" title="Hereford United F.C." label="Hereford United"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493668" start="26764" end="26771" title="2008–09 Football Conference" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q9426" start="26825" end="26842" title="Stevenage F.C." label="Stevenage Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138515" start="27058" end="27078" title="Rushden and Diamonds F.C." label="Rushden and Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q545303" start="27178" end="27191" title="Dean Saunders" label="Dean Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493670" start="27309" end="27316" title="2009–10 Football Conference" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608239" start="27576" end="27591" title="Stephanie Booth" label="Stephanie Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493671" start="27946" end="27953" title="2010–11 Football Conference" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q18520" start="28042" end="28052" title="Luton Town F.C." label="Luton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493672" start="28084" end="28091" title="2011–12 Football Conference" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="28135" end="28144" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404769" start="28208" end="28220" title="Andy Morrell" label="Andy Morrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838949" start="28518" end="28533" title="2013 FA Trophy Final" label="FA Trophy final"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957875" start="28542" end="28575" title="2013 Conference Premier play-off Final" label="Conference Premier play-off final"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="28608" end="28623" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18515" start="28778" end="28790" title="Grimsby Town F.C." label="Grimsby Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18518" start="28817" end="28839" title="Kidderminster Harriers F.C." label="Kidderminster Harriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957875" start="28905" end="28910" title="2013 Conference Premier play-off Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q18523" start="28918" end="28932" title="Newport County A.F.C." label="Newport County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397758" start="29325" end="29337" title="Kevin Wilkin" label="Kevin Wilkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14273868" start="29360" end="29367" title="2013–14 Football Conference" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q54806064" start="29393" end="29400" title="2018–19 National League" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303493" start="29471" end="29480" title="Eastleigh F.C." label="Eastleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q64172989" start="29485" end="29492" title="2019–20 National League" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="29580" end="29597" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192682" start="29767" end="29780" title="Ryan Reynolds" label="Ryan Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q935989" start="29800" end="29814" title="Rob McElhenney" label="Rob McElhenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q96482598" start="30041" end="30048" title="FIFA 22" label="FIFA 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111944" start="30124" end="30134" title="non-league" label="non-league"/>
<link wikidata="Q326704" start="30162" end="30168" title="FIFA (video game series)" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q113144658" start="30222" end="30240" title="Welcome to Wrexham" label="Welcome to Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q110565573" start="30285" end="30287" title="FX Networks" label="FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757022" start="30293" end="30311" title="Boardwalk Pictures" label="Boardwalk Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630304" start="30360" end="30364" title="Hulu" label="Hulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958752" start="30412" end="30419" title="Disney+" label="Disney+"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="31021" end="31033" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q111955907" start="31137" end="31144" title="2021–22 Wrexham A.F.C. season" label="2021–22"/>
<link wikidata="Q797757" start="31197" end="31211" title="Phil Parkinson" label="Phil Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18515" start="31282" end="31294" title="Grimsby Town F.C." label="Grimsby Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q111948835" start="31338" end="31358" title="2022 FA Trophy final" label="2022 FA Trophy final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584552" start="31382" end="31389" title="Bromley F.C." label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183326" start="31467" end="31481" title="2022–23 FA Cup" label="2022–23 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="31537" end="31550" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="31619" end="31635" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="31721" end="31725" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q19598" start="31809" end="31821" title="Notts County F.C." label="Notts County"/>
<link wikidata="Q58916" start="31924" end="31939" title="National League (division)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="32146" end="32160" title="EFL League Two" label="EFL League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q4094837" start="32214" end="32226" title="Boreham Wood F.C." label="Boreham Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q118905957" start="32519" end="32526" title="2023–24 in English football" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q19565" start="32601" end="32615" title="EFL League One" label="EFL League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q18526" start="32701" end="32717" title="Stockport County F.C." label="Stockport County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280895" start="32889" end="32900" title="Club Necaxa" label="Club Necaxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q841054" start="33140" end="33165" title="European Club Association" label="European Club Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q125553959" start="33187" end="33194" title="2024–25 EFL League One" label="2024–25"/>
<link wikidata="Q48953" start="33332" end="33349" title="Wycombe Wanderers F.C." label="Wycombe Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980545" start="33355" end="33360" title="Welch Allyn" label="Allyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="33794" end="33798" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439645" start="33870" end="33876" title="Macron (sportswear)" label="Macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564162" start="34218" end="34229" title="Greene King" label="Greene King"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400501" start="34277" end="34295" title="Wrexham University" label="Wrexham University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607565" start="34561" end="34578" title="Gresford disaster" label="Gresford disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q162959" start="34695" end="34707" title="Blake Lively" label="Blake Lively"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400501" start="35015" end="35033" title="Wrexham University" label="Wrexham University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531369" start="35038" end="35069" title="Wrexham General railway station" label="Wrexham General railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406264" start="35163" end="35171" title="Gresford" label="Gresford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18504" start="35858" end="35877" title="Football Conference" label="Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36102" end="36115" title="List of fan-owned sports teams#Wales" label="Fan ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q496368" start="36269" end="36276" title="Wrexham" label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q843868" start="36342" end="36350" title="Wrexham County Borough" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623567" start="36360" end="36369" title="Gwersyllt" label="Gwersyllt"/>
<link wikidata="Q616452" start="36374" end="36378" title="Rhosllannerchrugog" label="Rhos"/>
<link wikidata="Q505610" start="36384" end="36394" title="Flintshire" label="Flintshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191195" start="36404" end="36408" title="Mold, Flintshire" label="Mold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019227" start="36410" end="36417" title="Buckley, Flintshire" label="Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050619" start="36419" end="36427" title="Holywell, Flintshire" label="Holywell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405926" start="36432" end="36439" title="Deeside" label="Deeside"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838949" start="36449" end="36469" title="2013 FA Trophy final" label="2013 FA Trophy final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="36509" end="36520" title="North Wales" label="North Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q171923" start="36538" end="36542" title="Bala, Gwynedd" label="Bala"/>
<link wikidata="Q234178" start="36544" end="36550" title="Bangor, Gwynedd" label="Bangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q428829" start="36552" end="36562" title="Caernarfon" label="Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q527467" start="36564" end="36574" title="Colwyn Bay" label="Colwyn Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186888" start="36576" end="36583" title="Denbigh" label="Denbigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428848" start="36585" end="36590" title="Flint, Flintshire" label="Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q996492" start="36592" end="36601" title="Llandudno" label="Llandudno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813948" start="36603" end="36612" title="Prestatyn" label="Prestatyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020203" start="36614" end="36618" title="Rhyl" label="Rhyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013633" start="36623" end="36629" title="Ruthin" label="Ruthin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23103" start="36673" end="36683" title="Shropshire" label="Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="36726" end="36737" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="36739" end="36749" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="36754" end="36760" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="36936" end="36945" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076962" start="36946" end="36960" title="Chris Hadfield" label="Chris Hadfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q594752" start="36982" end="36994" title="Paul Burrell" label="Paul Burrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395436" start="37027" end="37038" title="Tim Vincent" label="Tim Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257561" start="37046" end="37056" title="Llŷr Ifans" label="Llŷr Ifans"/>
<link wikidata="Q245068" start="37068" end="37076" title="comedian" label="comedian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693663" start="37077" end="37088" title="Ted Robbins" label="Ted Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q487919" start="37090" end="37095" title="The Sweet" label="Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q527532" start="37106" end="37116" title="Andy Scott (guitarist)" label="Andy Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955493" start="37118" end="37131" title="Neck Deep" label="Lloyd Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955493" start="37145" end="37154" title="Neck Deep" label="Neck Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="37156" end="37169" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Olympian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522838" start="37183" end="37195" title="Gareth Evans (weightlifter)" label="Gareth Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340204" start="37197" end="37207" title="Sky Sports" label="Sky Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q59725854" start="37217" end="37225" title="Bryn Law" label="Bryn Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16640" start="37227" end="37242" title="Rugby World Cup" label="Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q202648" start="37243" end="37250" title="referee" label="referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609520" start="37251" end="37262" title="Nigel Owens" label="Nigel Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="37274" end="37285" title="Association football" label="footballers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974867" start="37286" end="37298" title="Neil Roberts (Welsh footballer)" label="Neil Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q350799" start="37300" end="37313" title="Robbie Savage" label="Robbie Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q214513" start="37318" end="37329" title="Mark Hughes" label="Mark Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607563" start="37351" end="37359" title="namesake" label="namesake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="37368" end="37374" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041933" start="37503" end="37510" title="Chester F.C." label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188115" start="37532" end="37550" title="cross-border derby" label="cross-border derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="37603" end="37608" title="Wales" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="37613" end="37620" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070732" start="37744" end="37756" title="Chester City F.C." label="Chester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q353358" start="38223" end="38232" title="Lee Dixon" label="Lee Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333687" start="38555" end="38570" title="North London derby" label="Arsenal v Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="38585" end="38590" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="38595" end="38604" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q219354" start="38613" end="38621" title="Ian Rush" label="Ian Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q19626" start="38862" end="38877" title="Shrewsbury Town" label="Shrewsbury Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q19637" start="38882" end="38897" title="Tranmere Rovers" label="Tranmere Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q619072" start="39158" end="39170" title="Prenton Park" label="Prenton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202579" start="39250" end="39267" title="Racecourse Ground" label="Racecourse Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q19587" start="39341" end="39356" title="Crewe Alexandra F.C." label="Crewe Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q48948" start="39361" end="39370" title="Port Vale F.C." label="Port Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q18662" start="39402" end="39414" title="Cardiff City F.C." label="Cardiff City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18523" start="39416" end="39430" title="Newport County A.F.C." label="Newport County"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="39436" end="39448" title="Swansea City F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18526" start="39697" end="39713" title="Stockport County" label="Stockport County"/>
<link wikidata="Q19598" start="39718" end="39730" title="Notts County" label="Notts County"/>
<link wikidata="Q107221079" start="39771" end="39794" title="2021-22 National League" label="2021–22 National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q112052268" start="39976" end="39983" title="2022-23 National League" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q10585" start="40130" end="40140" title="Ben Foster (footballer)" label="Ben Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="40277" end="40280" title="English Football League" label="EFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q125553959" start="40501" end="40519" title="2024-25 EFL League One" label="2024–25 League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="40623" end="40638" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q117814796" start="40662" end="40681" title="2023–24 EFL Championship" label="the previous season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="40691" end="40703" title="EFL Championship" label="Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="40743" end="40752" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029681" start="40789" end="40806" title="Canadian Americans" label="Canadian-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q192682" start="40813" end="40826" title="Ryan Reynolds" label="Ryan Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q935989" start="40846" end="40860" title="Rob McElhenney" label="Rob McElhenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="40907" end="40924" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="40925" end="40936" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="40937" end="40946" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q19456" start="41261" end="41273" title="Bristol City F.C." label="Bristol City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19634" start="41275" end="41287" title="Swindon Town" label="Swindon Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q48932" start="41292" end="41307" title="Cheltenham Town" label="Cheltenham Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406264" start="41518" end="41526" title="Gresford" label="Gresford"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="41811" end="41832" title="England national football team" label="England national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="41834" end="41843" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597" start="41845" end="41852" title="Rangers F.C." label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="41861" end="41880" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600202" start="42496" end="42508" title="Stansty Park" label="Stansty Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981951" start="42522" end="42543" title="Welsh National League (Wrexham Area)" label="Welsh National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537609" start="42549" end="42560" title="Lex XI F.C." label="Lex Glyndwr"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43210" end="43232" title=":Category:Wrexham A.F.C. players" label="Wrexham A.F.C. players"/>
<link wikidata="Q129821066" start="43319" end="43335" title="List of Wrexham A.F.C. players" label="100+ appearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q129821079" start="43337" end="43354" title="List of Wrexham A.F.C. players (25–99 appearances)" label="25–99 appearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q129821096" start="43359" end="43375" title="List of Wrexham A.F.C. players (1–24 appearances)" label="1–24 appearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q4101408" start="43686" end="43699" title="Tommy Bamford" label="Tommy Bamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838679" start="43706" end="43713" title="1933–34 in English football" label="1933–34"/>
<link wikidata="Q4101408" start="43747" end="43760" title="Tommy Bamford" label="Tommy Bamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838679" start="43767" end="43774" title="1933–34 in English football" label="1933–34"/>
<link wikidata="Q516075" start="43776" end="43796" title="Football League Third Division North" label="Division Three North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404769" start="43935" end="43947" title="Andy Morrell" label="Andy Morrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519427" start="43961" end="43975" title="Merthyr Tydfil F.C." label="Merthyr Tydfil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789156" start="44027" end="44042" title="Arfon Griffiths" label="Arfon Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789156" start="44096" end="44111" title="Arfon Griffiths" label="Arfon Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053244" start="44158" end="44172" title="Daniel Bennett (footballer)" label="Daniel Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3677" start="44218" end="44233" title="Dennis Lawrence" label="Dennis Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935517" start="44273" end="44286" title="Bobby Roberts (footballer)" label="Bobby Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882874" start="44316" end="44330" title="Worcester City F.C." label="Worcester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388387" start="44367" end="44378" title="Ken Roberts (footballer, born 1936)" label="Ken Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q896965" start="44409" end="44420" title="Bradford (Park Avenue) A.F.C." label="Bradford PA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721916" start="44617" end="44639" title="Central League (England)" label="2022–23 Central League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="44701" end="44718" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="44720" end="44726" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070732" start="44784" end="44796" title="Chester City F.C." label="Chester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19565" start="44798" end="44812" title="Football League One" label="Division Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446255" start="44861" end="44868" title="1977–78 Football League" label="1977–78"/>
<link wikidata="Q19592" start="44898" end="44916" title="Hartlepool United F.C." label="Hartlepools United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571" start="44960" end="44969" title="Brentford F.C." label="Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q19565" start="44971" end="44985" title="Football League One" label="Division Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="45034" end="45049" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45051" end="45058" title="1978–79 Football League#Second Division" label="1978–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q58916" start="45089" end="45108" title="National League (division)" label="Conference National"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45110" end="45117" title="2013–14 Football Conference#Conference Premier" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462" start="45143" end="45160" title="Charlton Athletic F.C." label="Charlton Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736718" start="45162" end="45168" title="1979–80 FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951267" start="45253" end="45260" title="2002–03 Wrexham F.C. season" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q112567628" start="45297" end="45304" title="2022–23 Wrexham A.F.C. season" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493672" start="45477" end="45484" title="2011–12 Football Conference" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444780" start="45522" end="45529" title="1973–74 Football League" label="1973–74"/>
<link wikidata="Q54806064" start="45534" end="45541" title="2018–19 National League" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q995049" start="45584" end="45596" title="Bryan Hughes" label="Bryan Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="45598" end="45613" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q108275241" start="45662" end="45672" title="Modou Faal" label="Modou Faal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18744" start="45674" end="45694" title="West Bromwich Albion" label="West Bromwich Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="45724" end="45754" title="European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q516075" start="45999" end="46019" title="Football League Third Division North" label="Third Division North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="46022" end="46036" title="Football League Third Division" label="Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446255" start="46060" end="46067" title="1977–78 Football League Third Division" label="1977–78"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483173" start="46082" end="46089" title="1932–33 Football League Third Division North" label="1932–33"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436315" start="46091" end="46106" title="Football League Fourth Division" label="Fourth Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="46109" end="46123" title="Football League Third Division" label="Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="46126" end="46136" title="EFL League Two" label="League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444542" start="46161" end="46168" title="1969–70 Football League Fourth Division" label="1969–70"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262680" start="46170" end="46177" title="1992–93 Football League Third Division" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q117771515" start="46179" end="46186" title="2023–24 EFL League Two" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153210" start="46199" end="46206" title="1961–62 Football League Fourth Division" label="1961–62"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323087" start="46208" end="46215" title="2002–03 Football League Third Division" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q58916" start="46217" end="46232" title="National League (division)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q112052268" start="46256" end="46263" title="2022–23 National League" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493672" start="46278" end="46285" title="2011–12 Football Conference" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q107221079" start="46287" end="46294" title="2021–22 National League" label="2021–22"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229457" start="46296" end="46311" title="The Combination" label="The Combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338445" start="46325" end="46332" title="1900–01 in English football" label="1900–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248841" start="46334" end="46341" title="1901–02 in English football" label="1901–02"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439896" start="46343" end="46350" title="1902–03 in English football" label="1902–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267623" start="46352" end="46359" title="1904–05 in English football" label="1904–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q21999652" start="46361" end="46380" title="Denbighshire League" label="Welsh Senior League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473603" start="46394" end="46401" title="1894–95 in English football" label="1894–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609379" start="46403" end="46410" title="1895–96 in English football" label="1895–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q843159" start="46417" end="46439" title="EFL Trophy" label="Football League Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603674" start="46451" end="46458" title="2004–05 Football League Trophy" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046509" start="46460" end="46469" title="FA Trophy" label="FA Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4627990" start="46481" end="46488" title="2012–13 FA Trophy" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991984" start="46503" end="46510" title="2014–15 FA Trophy" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q108841652" start="46512" end="46519" title="2021–22 FA Trophy" label="2021–22"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465867" start="46521" end="46546" title="Football League North and South" label="Football League North Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565352" start="46558" end="46565" title="1943–44 in English football" label="1943–44"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119083" start="46567" end="46582" title="FAW Premier Cup" label="FAW Premier Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593130" start="46594" end="46601" title="1997–98 FAW Premier Cup" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595499" start="46603" end="46612" title="1999–2000 FAW Premier Cup" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598207" start="46614" end="46621" title="2000–01 FAW Premier Cup" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600831" start="46623" end="46630" title="2002–03 FAW Premier Cup" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602219" start="46632" end="46639" title="2003–04 FAW Premier Cup" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="46650" end="46659" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555627" start="46676" end="46683" title="1877–78 Welsh Cup" label="1877–78"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948887" start="46685" end="46692" title="1882–83 Welsh Cup" label="1882–83"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46694" end="46701" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1892–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46703" end="46710" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1896–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46712" end="46719" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1902–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46721" end="46728" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1904–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46730" end="46737" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1908–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46739" end="46746" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1909–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46748" end="46755" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1910–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46757" end="46764" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1913–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46766" end="46773" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1914–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46775" end="46782" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1920–21"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46784" end="46791" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1923–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46793" end="46800" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1924–25"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46802" end="46809" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1930–31"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46811" end="46818" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1956–57"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46820" end="46827" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1957–58"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46829" end="46836" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1959–60"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46838" end="46845" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1971–72"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46847" end="46854" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1974–75"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46856" end="46863" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1977–78"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46865" end="46872" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603909" start="46874" end="46881" title="List of Welsh Cup finals" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644608" start="46892" end="46913" title="Supporters Direct Cup" label="Supporters Direct Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647297" start="46925" end="46932" title="2015–16 in English football" label="2015–16"/>
<link wikidata="Q21210914" start="48507" end="48523" title="Club of Pioneers" label="Club of Pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604439" start="48525" end="48555" title="List of Wrexham A.F.C. seasons" label="List of Wrexham A.F.C. seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q119449517" start="48557" end="48602" title="List of Wrexham A.F.C. records and statistics" label="List of Wrexham A.F.C. records and statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q129821066" start="48604" end="48634" title="List of Wrexham A.F.C. players" label="List of Wrexham A.F.C. players"/>
<link wikidata="Q129821079" start="48636" end="48653" title="List of Wrexham A.F.C. players (25–99 appearances)" label="25–99 Appearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q129821096" start="48655" end="48671" title="List of Wrexham A.F.C. players (1–24 appearances)" label="1–24 Appearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q113144658" start="48680" end="48698" title="Welcome to Wrexham" label="Welcome to Wrexham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413291" wikidata="Q3776487" url="?curid=413291" title="Statistical parameter">
<text>In statistics, as opposed to its general use in mathematics, a parameter is any quantity of a statistical population that summarizes or describes an aspect of the population, such as a mean or a standard deviation. If a population exactly follows a known and defined distribution, for example the normal distribution, then a small set of parameters can be measured which provide a comprehensive description of the population and can be considered to define a probability distribution for the purposes of extracting samples from this population.

A &quot;parameter&quot; is to a population as a &quot;statistic&quot; is to a sample; that is to say, a parameter describes the true value calculated from the full population (such as the population mean), whereas a statistic is an estimated measurement of the parameter based on a sample (such as the sample mean, which is the mean of gathered data per sampling, called sample). Thus a &quot;statistical parameter&quot; can be more specifically referred to as a population parameter.

==Discussion==
===Parameterised distributions===
Suppose that we have an indexed family of distributions. If the index is also a parameter of the members of the family, then the family is a parameterized family. Among parameterized families of distributions are the normal distributions, the Poisson distributions, the binomial distributions, and the exponential family of distributions. For example, the family of normal distributions has two parameters, the mean and the variance: if those are specified, the distribution is known exactly. The family of chi-squared distributions can be indexed by the number of degrees of freedom: the number of degrees of freedom is a parameter for the distributions, and so the family is thereby parameterized.

===Measurement of parameters===
In statistical inference, parameters are sometimes taken to be unobservable, and in this case the statistician&#x27;s task is to estimate or infer what they can about the parameter based on a random sample of observations taken from the full population. Estimators of a set of parameters of a specific distribution are often measured for a population, under the assumption that the population is (at least approximately) distributed according to that specific probability distribution. In other situations, parameters may be fixed by the nature of the sampling procedure used or the kind of statistical procedure being carried out (for example, the number of degrees of freedom in a Pearson&#x27;s chi-squared test). Even if a family of distributions is not specified, quantities such as the mean and variance can generally still be regarded as statistical parameters of the population, and statistical procedures can still attempt to make inferences about such population parameters.

===Types of parameters===
Parameters are given names appropriate to their roles, including the following:
*location parameter
*dispersion parameter or scale parameter
*shape parameter

Where a probability distribution has a domain over a set of objects that are themselves probability distributions, the term &quot;concentration parameter&quot; is used for quantities that index how variable the outcomes would be.
Quantities such as regression coefficients are statistical parameters in the above sense because they index the family of conditional probability distributions that describe how the dependent variables are related to the independent variables.

==Examples==
During an election, there may be specific percentages of voters in a country who would vote for each particular candidate – these percentages would be statistical parameters. It is impractical to ask every voter before an election occurs what their candidate preferences are, so a sample of voters will be polled, and a statistic (also called an estimator) – that is, the percentage of the sample of polled voters – will be measured instead. The statistic, along with an estimation of its accuracy (known as its sampling error), is then used to make inferences about the true statistical parameters (the percentages of all voters).

Similarly, in some forms of testing of manufactured products, rather than destructively testing all products, only a sample of products are tested. Such tests gather statistics supporting an inference that the products meet specifications.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="3" end="13" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413083" start="41" end="59" title="parameter" label="use in mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776487" start="63" end="72" title="Statistical parameter" label="parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q49918" start="94" end="116" title="statistical population" label="statistical population"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796622" start="185" end="189" title="mean" label="mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q159375" start="195" end="213" title="standard deviation" label="standard deviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="297" end="316" title="normal distribution" label="normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="459" end="483" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="515" end="521" title="Sample (statistics)" label="sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q49918" start="578" end="588" title="statistical population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949963" start="600" end="609" title="statistic" label="statistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="624" end="630" title="statistical sample" label="sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776487" start="674" end="684" title="Statistical parameter" label="true value"/>
<link wikidata="Q49918" start="734" end="749" title="population mean" label="population mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348165" start="848" end="859" title="sample mean" label="sample mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776487" start="1009" end="1029" title="Statistical parameter" label="population parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q856215" start="1105" end="1119" title="indexed family" label="indexed family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135227" start="1222" end="1242" title="parameterized family" label="parameterized family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135227" start="1250" end="1272" title="parametric family" label="parameterized families"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="1298" end="1317" title="normal distribution" label="normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q205692" start="1324" end="1344" title="Poisson distribution" label="Poisson distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q185547" start="1351" end="1372" title="binomial distribution" label="binomial distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188504" start="1383" end="1418" title="exponential family" label="exponential family of distributions"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="1447" end="1466" title="normal distribution" label="normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796622" start="1492" end="1496" title="mean" label="mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="1505" end="1513" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q243462" start="1588" end="1612" title="chi-squared distribution" label="chi-squared distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253731" start="1646" end="1664" title="degrees of freedom (statistics)" label="degrees of freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q938438" start="1817" end="1838" title="statistical inference" label="statistical inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="2006" end="2019" title="random sample" label="random sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336256" start="2497" end="2528" title="Pearson&amp;#x27;s chi-squared test" label="Pearson&amp;#x27;s chi-squared test"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796622" start="2606" end="2610" title="mean" label="mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="2615" end="2623" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621185" start="2907" end="2925" title="location parameter" label="location parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q845777" start="2927" end="2947" title="Statistical dispersion" label="dispersion parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289366" start="2951" end="2966" title="scale parameter" label="scale parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179293" start="2968" end="2983" title="shape parameter" label="shape parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158330" start="3115" end="3138" title="concentration parameter" label="concentration parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861030" start="3234" end="3256" title="regression coefficient" label="regression coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300258" start="3337" end="3373" title="conditional probability distribution" label="conditional probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q320723" start="3397" end="3416" title="dependent and independent variables" label="dependent variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130160" start="3819" end="3828" title="estimator" label="estimator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306280" start="3985" end="3999" title="sampling error" label="sampling error"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413303" wikidata="Q580084" url="?curid=413303" title="Ardakan">
<text>Ardakan () is a city in the Central District of Ardakan County, Yazd province, Iran, serving as capital of both the county and the district.

==Demographics==
===Population===
At the time of the 2006 National Census, the city&#x27;s population was 51,349 in 13,730 households. The following census in 2011 counted 56,776 people in 16,198 households. The 2016 census measured the population of the city as 75,271 people in 22,475 households.

==Overview==

Ardakan is the second major city of Yazd province. It was established in the 12th century in the Zardug region. Ardakan is 60 kilometres away from Yazd, and it has dry weather.

The word &quot;Ardakan&quot; in Persian means &quot;holy place&quot; or &quot;clean place&quot; (Modern Persian: &quot;arda+kan&quot; / Middle Persian: &quot;arta+gan&quot;) and the city has many historical religious attractions such as the Grand Mosque of Ardakan (Masjed-e Jame&#x27;), Zire-deh Mosque, Emam-Zadeh Mir Seyyed Mohammad and Tekyeh bazaar.

The most important shrine is Pir-e Sabz Chak Chak. Other shrines include Pir Shah Eshtad Izad, Pir Shah Tashtar Izad, Pir Shah Mehr Izad and Pir Shah Morad.

Ardakan is the birthplace of former Iranian president, Mohammad Khatami. It is also a famous type of carpet found around the world.

The city&#x27;s neighborhoods include Zeyn Aldin, Koshkeno, Bazarno, and Jannat Abad.

== Notable people ==
*Mohammad Khatami, Iran President 
*Reza Davari Ardakani philosopher
*, Shia Cleric
*Ali Khatami

==See also==

== Notes ==
== References ==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* Farshid Sāmāni, &quot;Ardakān, In a Thoughtful Mood&quot; (&quot;Ardakān, Sar dar Garibān&quot;), in Persian, Jadid Online, 16 April 2010.
* Audio slideshow (5 min 31 sec)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q580084" start="0" end="7" title="Ardakan" label="Ardakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060731" start="28" end="44" title="Central District (Ardakan County)" label="Central District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287822" start="48" end="62" title="Ardakan County" label="Ardakan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q170568" start="64" end="68" title="Yazd province" label="Yazd"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="79" end="83" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="553" end="559" title="Zardug" label="Zardug"/>
<link wikidata="Q182394" start="603" end="607" title="Yazd" label="Yazd"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="666" end="673" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q56356571" start="731" end="745" title="Modern Persian" label="Modern Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q32063" start="770" end="784" title="Middle Persian" label="Middle Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q747399" start="974" end="980" title="Tekyeh" label="Tekyeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q219760" start="981" end="987" title="bazaar" label="bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197554" start="1009" end="1015" title="Pir (Zoroastrianism)" label="shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544439" start="1019" end="1039" title="Chak Chak (place)" label="Pir-e Sabz Chak Chak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1131" end="1145" title="Pir Shah Morad" label="Pir Shah Morad"/>
<link wikidata="Q180795" start="1203" end="1219" title="Mohammad Khatami" label="Mohammad Khatami"/>
<link wikidata="Q180795" start="1390" end="1406" title="Mohammad Khatami" label="Mohammad Khatami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030163" start="1425" end="1445" title="Reza Davari Ardakani" label="Reza Davari Ardakani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724954" start="1474" end="1485" title="Ali Khatami" label="Ali Khatami"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413307" wikidata="Q5883857" url="?curid=413307" title="Holo">
<text>Holo may refer to:

* Holo, the theme formerly recommended by Google for the design of Android apps, introduced with Android version 4.0
* holo, the codename of SteamOS 3.0
* Hölö, a village in Södertälje Municipality, Sweden
* Hoklo people (also spelled &quot;Hō-ló&quot; or &quot;Holo&quot;), a Han ethnic group whose traditional homeland is in South China
**&quot;Holo&quot; or &quot;Hoklo&quot; the varieties in the Min Nan family of Chinese spoken by the Hoklo people
* Théodore Holo (b. 1948), Beninese politician and foreign minister of Benin from 1991 to 1992
* Holo-Man, fictional American superhero who starred in a 1978 single-issue comic book about holography, &quot;The Amazing Adventures of Holo-Man&quot;
* Holo (&quot;Spice and Wolf&quot;), the main female character of the &quot;Spice and Wolf&quot; light novel series
* Holo-Me, the name of the character customisation process in the video game 
* HOLO card, a public transit smart card used in Honolulu, Hawaiʻi

==See also==
* 
* Holos (disambiguation)
* Holocaust
* Holocene
* Holodomor
* Holography (disambiguation)
* Holon (disambiguation)
* Holotype, biological type
* Holism

* Rolo
* Solo (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5883857" start="0" end="4" title="Holo" label="Holo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117" end="136" title="Android version history#Android 4.0.x Ice Cream Sandwich" label="Android version 4.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q14944085" start="161" end="168" title="SteamOS" label="SteamOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431323" start="175" end="179" title="Hölö" label="Hölö"/>
<link wikidata="Q703914" start="228" end="240" title="Hoklo people" label="Hoklo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q36495" start="420" end="427" title="Min Nan" label="Min Nan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526434" start="475" end="488" title="Théodore Holo" label="Théodore Holo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883862" start="570" end="578" title="Holo-Man" label="Holo-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q385228" start="722" end="755" title="Holo (Spice and Wolf)" label="Holo (&amp;quot;Spice and Wolf&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107473457" start="916" end="925" title="HOLO card" label="HOLO card"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884320" start="1000" end="1022" title="Holos (disambiguation)" label="Holos (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="1025" end="1034" title="The Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="1037" end="1045" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q165058" start="1048" end="1057" title="Holodomor" label="Holodomor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884131" start="1060" end="1087" title="Holography (disambiguation)" label="Holography (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125113" start="1090" end="1112" title="Holon (disambiguation)" label="Holon (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061403" start="1115" end="1123" title="Holotype" label="Holotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="1143" end="1149" title="Holism" label="Holism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900223" start="1153" end="1157" title="Rolo" label="Rolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q82583" start="1160" end="1181" title="Solo (disambiguation)" label="Solo (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413315" wikidata="Q16792" url="?curid=413315" title="Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina">
<text>The Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina (, HDZ BiH) is a Christian democratic Croatian nationalist political party in Bosnia and Herzegovina, representing the Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is an associate member of the European People&#x27;s Party. Its headquarters is in Mostar.

==History==
The party was founded on 18 August 1990, with the first party convention held in Sarajevo. It has participated in all multiparty elections held in Bosnia and Herzegovina since 1991. It regularly won the support of the Croat electorate up to 2000 and took part in forming the government. It returned to power in 2002, where it remained until 2010. Since 2014, the party has once again been in power.

In the October 2002 general election, the party was part of the &quot;Croatian Coalition&quot; (&quot;Hrvatska koalicija&quot;) which won 9.5% of the popular vote and five out of 42 seats in the national House of Representatives and 16 of the 98 seats in the Federal House of Representatives.

In 2006, the party joined the Croatian National Assembly, an alliance of Bosnian Croat political parties, along with the Croatian Party of Rights of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Croat People&#x27;s Union.

Throughout its history, the HDZ BiH has had nine presidents, the current one being Dragan Čović since 5 June 2005. Four of the six Croat members of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina have come from the party, the most recent one also being Čović, serving in office from 2014 until 2018.

In the 2018 general election, the party was in a coalition with three other Bosnian Croat parties (Croatian Peasant Party of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatian Party of Rights of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatian Christian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina), winning 149,872 or 9.05% of the votes, five out of 42 seats in the national House of Representatives and 16 out of 98 in the Federal one.

==List of presidents==
==Elections==
=== Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina ===



===Parliament of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina===


===Presidency elections===
===Cantonal elections===
==See also==
*Croatian Democratic Union

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16792" start="4" end="55" title="Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16792" start="59" end="66" title="Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="HDZ BiH"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="73" end="93" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265120" start="94" end="114" title="Croatian nationalism" label="Croatian nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q68600" start="115" end="130" title="List of political parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="134" end="156" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431089" start="175" end="207" title="Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q208242" start="242" end="270" title="European People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="European People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q93347" start="295" end="301" title="Mostar" label="Mostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="397" end="405" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722278" start="731" end="752" title="2002 Bosnian general election" label="2002 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q320268" start="920" end="944" title="House of Representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651269" start="975" end="1007" title="House of Representatives of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Federal House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939577" start="1040" end="1066" title="Croatian National Assembly" label="Croatian National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789636" start="1131" end="1181" title="Croatian Party of Rights of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Croatian Party of Rights of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250158" start="1190" end="1215" title="Croat People&amp;#x27;s Union" label="Croat People&amp;#x27;s Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q559756" start="1301" end="1313" title="Dragan Čović" label="Dragan Čović"/>
<link wikidata="Q844944" start="1370" end="1406" title="Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q47516472" start="1519" end="1540" title="2018 Bosnian general election" label="2018 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q18415962" start="1611" end="1659" title="Croatian Peasant Party of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Croatian Peasant Party of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789636" start="1661" end="1711" title="Croatian Party of Rights of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Croatian Party of Rights of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908160" start="1713" end="1774" title="Croatian Christian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Croatian Christian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q738439" start="2142" end="2167" title="Croatian Democratic Union" label="Croatian Democratic Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413317" wikidata="Q290118" url="?curid=413317" title="Party for Bosnia and Herzegovina">
<text>The Party for Bosnia and Herzegovina (, abbreviated SBiH) is a centrist political party in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The party is one of the most prominent centrist and the most prominent unitarianist party in the country as it staunchly opposes federalism and devolution of political power along ethnic lines by the means of federal entities – i.e. Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska.

==List of presidents==
==Elections==
===Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina===
===Parliament of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina===
===Presidency elections===
===Cantonal elections===
==Notes==
==References==

=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q290118" start="4" end="36" title="Party for Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Party for Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q290118" start="52" end="56" title="Party for Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="SBiH"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="63" end="71" title="Centrism" label="centrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="72" end="87" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="91" end="113" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="154" end="162" title="Centrism" label="centrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="186" end="198" title="Unitary state" label="unitarianist"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="244" end="254" title="federalism" label="federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="259" end="269" title="devolution" label="devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="273" end="288" title="political power" label="political power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788249" start="295" end="301" title="Ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198" start="348" end="384" title="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="389" end="405" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413319" wikidata="Q1164533" url="?curid=413319" title="Serb Democratic Party (Bosnia and Herzegovina)">
<text>The Serb Democratic Party ( or СДС/SDS) is a Serb political party in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its current leader is Milan Miličević.

In the parliamentary elections of October 2006, the SDS lost its status as the leading party in Republika Srpska and the main Serb party in Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), led by the president of Republika Srpska Milorad Dodik. Despite making minor gains in the 2010 and 2014 elections, by 2018 the party had fallen to below 20% of the parliament, the lowest seat standing in its history.

The party is under sanctions from the United States for &quot;failing to arrest and turn over war crimes suspects to an international tribunal.&quot; The sanctions prohibit any transfer of funds and material from the United States to the SDS and vice versa. The party is on the list of &quot;Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons&quot; by the Office of Foreign Assets Control U.S. agency.

==History==
===Establishment===
Radovan Karadžić founded the Serb Democratic Party in 1990. The party aimed at unifying the Bosnian Serb community, as Jovan Rašković&#x27;s Serb Democratic Party did with the Serbs in Croatia, and staying part of Yugoslavia (as the &quot;Third Yugoslavia&quot; with Serbia and Montenegro) in the event of secession by those two republics from the federation.

===1991===
Throughout September 1991, the SDS began to establish various &quot;Serb Autonomous Regions&quot; throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. After the Bosnian parliament voted on sovereignty on 15 October 1991, a separate Serb Assembly was founded on 24 October 1991 in Banja Luka, in order to exclusively represent the Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The following month, Bosnian Serbs held a referendum which resulted in an overwhelming vote in favor of staying in a federal state with Serbia and Montenegro, as part of Yugoslavia. In December 1991, a top-secret document entitled ‘For the organization and activity of organs of the Serbs people in Bosnia-Herzegovina in extraordinary circumstances’ was drawn up by the SDS leadership. This was a centralized program for the takeover of each municipality in the country, through the creation of shadow governments and para-governmental structures through various &quot;crisis headquarters&quot;, and by preparing loyal Serbs for the takeover in co-ordination with the Yugoslav People&#x27;s Army (JNA).

== Ideology ==
Historically, the party had a strong ultranationalist, separatist and Islamophobic ideology. Recently, the party switched from far-right and adopted more moderate conservative views, with some of those views even going in favor of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole, and not just Republika Srpska, with perhaps one of the greatest promoters of that approach is Dragan Mektić, one of the party&#x27;s high-ranking officials.

==List of presidents==
==Electoral results==
===Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina===


===National Assembly of Republika Srpska===

===Presidential elections===


==Positions held==
Major positions held by Serb Democratic Party members:

==References==
==External links==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1164533" start="4" end="25" title="Serb Democratic Party (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="Serb Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164533" start="31" end="34" title="Serb Democratic Party (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="СДС"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164533" start="35" end="38" title="Serb Democratic Party (Bosnia and Herzegovina)" label="SDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="45" end="49" title="Serb" label="Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q68600" start="50" end="65" title="List of political parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="69" end="91" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="229" end="245" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258283" start="303" end="343" title="Alliance of Independent Social Democrats" label="Alliance of Independent Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594693" start="363" end="372" title="President of Republika Srpska" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q335688" start="393" end="406" title="Milorad Dodik" label="Milorad Dodik"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="608" end="621" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620015" start="926" end="958" title="Office of Foreign Assets Control" label="Office of Foreign Assets Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064662" start="1097" end="1109" title="Serbs of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnian Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277011" start="1124" end="1138" title="Jovan Rašković" label="Jovan Rašković"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276567" start="1146" end="1167" title="Serb Democratic Party (Croatia)" label="Serb Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="1272" end="1293" title="Serbia and Montenegro" label="Serbia and Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q13099331" start="1445" end="1468" title="Serb Autonomous Regions" label="Serb Autonomous Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q63685" start="1591" end="1604" title="National Assembly (Republika Srpska)" label="Serb Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q131127" start="1639" end="1649" title="Banja Luka" label="Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="1764" end="1774" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="2390" end="2417" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q38352698" start="2478" end="2494" title="Ultranationalism" label="ultranationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="2496" end="2506" title="Separatism" label="separatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q486296" start="2511" end="2523" title="Islamophobia" label="Islamophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="2568" end="2577" title="Far-right politics" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q116859677" start="2595" end="2616" title="Moderate conservatism" label="moderate conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q25462657" start="2801" end="2814" title="Dragan Mektić" label="Dragan Mektić"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413320" wikidata="Q1790358" url="?curid=413320" title="Lathbury">
<text>Lathbury is a village and civil parish in the City of Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire, England. It is about 1 km north of Newport Pagnell, on the opposite side of the River Great Ouse, and about 8 km (5 miles) north-east of Central Milton Keynes. A meander of the River Great Ouse almost surrounds the village and parish, and the Ouse Valley Way passes through the parish.

== History ==
The village name is an Old English language word, meaning &#x27;fortification built with laths or beams&#x27;. In the Domesday Book of 1086 the village was listed as &quot;Latesberie&quot;.

On the Dissolution of the Monasteries, the advowson of Latbbury Abbey was given to the Dean and Chapter of Christ Church, Oxford. The manor of Lathbury, and Lathbury Park house, has descended through various families, including Lord Vaux, the Earl of Essex and the Andrews baronets. The current Lathbury Park is a Grade II listed house dating from 1801, and incorporating elements from the earlier manor house. 

There was also once a &#x27;free school&#x27; in a chapel in the churchyard, founded in the reign of Queen Elizabeth I, leased to the schoolmaster by Christ Church. The school was pulled down in 1698 and its materials used to repair the ancient rectory.

The parish church, All Saints Church is a Grade I listed building, of 12th century origin.

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1790358" start="0" end="8" title="Lathbury" label="Lathbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="26" end="38" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q894090" start="46" end="67" title="City of Milton Keynes" label="City of Milton Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="69" end="84" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020231" start="121" end="136" title="Newport Pagnell" label="Newport Pagnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890368" start="223" end="244" title="Central Milton Keynes" label="Central Milton Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111331" start="329" end="344" title="Ouse Valley Way" label="Ouse Valley Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="410" end="430" title="Old English language" label="Old English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="505" end="518" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="585" end="615" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="Dissolution of the Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146818" start="621" end="629" title="advowson" label="advowson"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="685" end="706" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794671" start="806" end="815" title="Thomas Vaux, 2nd Baron Vaux of Harrowden" label="Lord Vaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q15286509" start="821" end="834" title="Henry Bourchier, 2nd Earl of Essex" label="Earl of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759112" start="843" end="859" title="Andrews baronets" label="Andrews baronets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="1092" end="1109" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q607241" start="1236" end="1243" title="rectory" label="rectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="1250" end="1256" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q17533629" start="1265" end="1282" title="All Saints Church, Lathbury" label="All Saints Church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413322" wikidata="Q752259" url="?curid=413322" title="Bulgarian Socialist Party">
<text>The Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP), also known as The Centenarian, is a centre-left, social democratic political party in Bulgaria. The BSP is a member of the Socialist International, Party of European Socialists, and Progressive Alliance. Although founded in 1990 in its modern form, it traces its political heritage back to the founding of the BRSDP in 1891. It is also Bulgaria&#x27;s largest party by membership numbers.

== History ==
The Centenarian moniker comes from the fact that the BSP is recognized as the successor of the Bulgarian Social Democratic Party, which was founded on 2 August 1891 on Buzludzha peak by Dimitar Blagoev, designated in 1903 as the Bulgarian Social Democratic Workers&#x27; Party (Narrow Socialists), and later as the Bulgarian Communist Party. After the political changes brought by the Revolutions of 1989, it abandoned Marxism–Leninism and refounded itself as the BSP in April 1990.

The party formed a government after the 1990 Bulgarian Constitutional Assembly election but was forced to resign after a general strike that December. A non-partisan government led by Dimitar Iliev Popov took over until the 1991 Bulgarian parliamentary election later in October. In the aftermath, the party was confined to opposition. As part of the Democratic Left coalition, a forerunner of the BSP for Bulgaria, it helped form a new government in 1995, headed by BSP leader Zhan Videnov as the prime minister of Bulgaria. Large-scale demonstrations in the cities and a general strike prevented the formation of a new socialist government after its term ended at the end of 1996. The country had entered into a spiral of hyperinflation, the most serious economic and financial crisis in its recent history, after the shock therapy and privatization policies, also followed to various degrees by other post-Communist countries.

In the 2001 Bulgarian presidential election, party chairman Georgi Parvanov was elected the president of Bulgaria on the second round, defeating on the second ballot incumbent candidate Petar Stoyanov from the Union of Democratic Forces (SDS). Parvanov resigned as party chairman and was succeeded by Sergey Stanishev. It was a break of the two-party system between the BSP and the SDS.

After two full terms out of power (1997–2001), the BSP-led Coalition for Bulgaria won the 2005 Bulgarian parliamentary election with 31.0% of the vote but without a governing majority, and formed the Stanishev Government, headed by the prime minister and BSP chairman Stanishev, with the centrist and social-liberal parties National Movement Simeon II and the Movement for Rights and Freedoms (DPS), respectively. In the 2006 Bulgarian presidential election, Parvanov was re-elected in a landslide, becoming the first Bulgarian president to do so in direct elections. In 2007, Bulgaria joined the European Union. The governing BSP-led coalition lost millions of euros of financial aid in the wake of allegations of widespread political corruption. The cabinet was also unable to react to the encroaching global financial crisis of 2007–2008 and its term ended with a budget deficit after several successive surplus years.

In the 2009 Bulgarian parliamentary election, the BSP was defeated by the new conservative party GERB, obtaining 37 out of 240 parliamentary seats (18%), and went into opposition. GERB assumed power through an anti-communist and anti-Turkish platform, calling the previous BSP-led government &quot;communist&quot; even though, as written in &quot;Jacobin&quot; by sociologist Jana Tsoneva, that government &quot;had introduced some of the most radical neoliberal policies.&quot; In the 2013 Bulgarian parliamentary election, the party took 30.6% of the votes, second is GERB with 26.5%. Plamen Oresharski, the party&#x27;s candidate for prime minister, and the Oresharski Government were elected with the parliament support of the BSP and the DPS. The appointment of the controversial media mogul Delyan Peevski as head of the state security agency DANS sparked large-scale protests on 14 June. Protests against the Oresharski cabinet continued until the government resigned in July 2014. In the 2017 Bulgarian parliamentary election, the BSP made big gains but not enough to govern, as GERB made smaller gains as well, and the party remained in opposition to the Third Borisov Government, which included the far right United Patriots.

The BSP supported the 2020–2021 Bulgarian protests and led the left-wing opposition for a failed non-confidence vote. The protests ended when the prime minister Boyko Borisov resigned, but results after the April 2021 Bulgarian parliamentary election proved to be fragmented. After failed attempts from the BSP to form a government in the aftermath of an inconclusive July 2021 Bulgarian parliamentary election, the political crisis continued, as no government without the participation of Borissov could be formed, despite an anti-GERB majority. In addition, Korneliya Ninova, the party leader since 2016, has faced internal struggle, as the party has not been in government since 2013; the BSP has hesitated, depending on public opinion, between backing and rejecting There Is Such a People, the populist party created ahead of the anti-government protests and with the most seats. A third snap election for November 2021, this time also at the presidential level (2021 Bulgarian general election), ensued to solve the crisis. Following the election, Ninova decided to step down again although she will remain the chairman of BSP until the next party congress which will be held in January.

BSP agreed to be a part of the Petkov Government, together with PP, ITN and DB, receiving the ministries of social care, healthcare, agriculture and economy, with Chairwoman Korneliya Ninova also receiving the position of Deputy Prime Minister.

During the January Congress, Ninova&#x27;s resignation was rejected, meaning that Ninova continued on as Chairwoman of the BSP, until the end of her mandate in 2024.

== Ideology ==
Founded as the legal successor to the Bulgarian Communist Party, the BSP describes itself as a democratic socialist party, espousing socialist policies and values, while supporting a social market economy. It has also been described as a populist, and social-democratic party. The party&#x27;s policies have oscillated during its existence from a customary understanding of socialism during the Videnov era, to a more social-liberal worldview under Stanishev, to a socially conservative strain of socialism under Ninova.

Like most Party of European Socialists (PES) member parties, the BSP has a pro-European stance, although it has taken some Eurosceptic positions and called for an end to sanctions against Russia. Some news outlets, such as Novinite, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, and &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, have described its orientation as soft Russophilia.

In recent times under the leadership of Korneliya Ninova and unlike the majority of PES parties, the BSP has been described as more conservative on social issues, and like European Union politics it is more divided, with some leaders, such as Ninova, opposing same-sex marriage in Bulgaria. Many party leaders opposed the Istanbul Convention because they were against educating children about sexuality if it also meant same-sex relationships, and after a long debate decided to vote against it, despite internal division about it. Former BSP leader and then-PES head Sergey Stanishev strongly supported the Istanbul Convention. Under Ninova&#x27;s leadership, BSP additionally shifted to a more nationalist position.

== Membership ==
The party is the largest in Bulgaria by number of members, having 105,000 members as of 2016, down from 130,000 in 2013, 150,000 in 2012, 210,000 in 2009, 250,000 in 1996, and around 1 million members during the late period of the People&#x27;s Republic of Bulgaria. In 2020, it had 80,236 members.

== List of chairmen ==
=== Videnov era ===
During the chairmanship of Zhan Videnov, the party followed the customary line for socialist parties – it rejected the large-scale privatization efforts of the SDS and instead moved toward a &quot;mass&quot; or &quot;social&quot; privatization campaign, which was intended to allow working and middle-class individuals (&quot;the masses&quot;) to obtain stocks in various enterprises earmarked for privatization, as opposed to those shares only being sold to private investors on the stock market. The party under Videnov opposed what was perceived as the strong political and economic over-reliance on the United States, and instead sought to foster more friendly relations with the neighbouring PASOK-ruled Greece and SPS-ruled FR Yugoslavia.

=== Parvanov era ===
Parvanov, who had also been on the Bulgarian-Greek Parliamentary Friendship Committee, and was later elected as president of Bulgaria, chose to keep a degree of public distancing between party and state institutions and instead resigned his membership in the party following his elections. Though the Bulgarian constitution requires the President to resign any leadership positions within political parties, it does not require the officeholder to give up his party membership completely. He instead hand-picked Sergey Stanishev as his successor for the position. During his chairmanship, however, he opposed the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia. He stated that this was not a position against NATO, but only against its military operation. He stated that he would support Bulgaria&#x27;s entry into NATO, but insisted that such an accession should only happen after negotiations with Russia. Though he was considered a member of the party&#x27;s liberal wing, Parvanov also reached out to its more left-wing members and restored the party membership of Todor Zhivkov, who ruled the country for over 30 years during the socialist period and who was still very popular among socialists.

After having successfully completed two presidential terms, he re-joined the socialist party and initially put himself forward for another mandate as chairman, but withdrew it before the party&#x27;s congress in 2012. Two years later, he was expelled from the party for &quot;damaging its prestige&quot;, which he condemned as an authoritarian decision by the party&#x27;s authorities. He then became the first former chairman to found his own separate party – the Alternative for Bulgarian Revival.

=== Stanishev era ===
Sergey Stanishev was noted in his policy shift away from the traditional understanding of the left, and toward a more pro-Western, pro-European and social-liberal worldview. Having formed what was dubbed a &#x27;liberal&#x27; tripartite coalition, he signed the accords for Bulgaria&#x27;s entry into the European Union and NATO, while also implementing economic reforms that were criticised as being neoliberal and contrary to socialism, such as the flat tax that replaced progressive taxation in the country. Because of this, he became highly polarizing within the socialist party, generating harsh internal opposition and leading to the defection of the party&#x27;s leftmost wing, the &#x27;Marxist platform&#x27;. Having decisively lost in the 2009 election, he was successful in managing to form a government after the 2013 election, however his approach backfired, as it required the parliamentary support of the pro-Turkish Movement for Rights and Freedoms and nationalist Attack, both of which proved incredibly controversial. This led to protests, culminating in the resignations of both Stanishev and the government. Following the end of his chairmanship, the party adopted what was popularly dubbed the &quot;anti-Stanishev amendment&quot;, which effectively barred him from returning to this position in the future. Stanishev then left Bulgarian politics and instead moved to the European level, where he was elected as the chairman for the Party of European Socialists.

=== Mikov era ===
Mihail Mikov entered into his chairmanship under a promise to &quot;consolidate and modernise&quot; the party, as well as &quot;protect its socialist and social democratic ideals&quot;, adding that the party&#x27;s foremost responsibility was &quot;the rehabilitation of the social state&quot;. However the unpopularity of the government led to a major decrease in support for the BSP, due to its association with the pro-Turkish Movement for Rights and Freedoms and nationalist Attack. In the 2014 Bulgarian parliamentary election the party obtained its worst result on record by that point. Mikov accepted responsibility for the result and chose to go into opposition. He nevertheless ran for re-election as Chairman of the Socialist Party, but lost to Korneliya Ninova, thus becoming the first incumbent socialist chairman to lose his bid for re-election. Ninova then became the first woman to be elected as the party&#x27;s chairperson.

=== Ninova era ===
Ninova&#x27;s initial approach to managing the party was to present for election independent popular candidates, who nevertheless shared much of the socialists&#x27; worldview, as the party&#x27;s candidates. This was exemplified by her decision to back Rumen Radev, previously the non-partisan head of the Bulgarian Air Force in the 2016 Bulgarian presidential election. Radev, though nominally running as an independent candidate, was still nominated by the socialists and ran with Iliana Iotova, a leading socialist, as Vice president. This proved to be a recipe for success, as Radev convincingly defeated GERB candidate Tsetska Tsacheva in the election and was elected as President of Bulgaria. Ninova then managed moderate improvements in the party&#x27;s electoral performance during the 2019 European Parliament election in Bulgaria. Despite this, the socialists were not able to overtake GERB and Ninova handed in her resignation, only to withdraw it shortly before it was due to be voted. The party also improved its results in the 2019 Bulgarian local elections, increasing its support across the board in the Bulgarian local scene and even winning some districts of the capital Sofia, a city known as a bastion of centre-right and right-wing politics. The socialists even nearly managed to win the position of Mayor of Sofia, with the party&#x27;s candidate Maya Manolova narrowly losing out to the incumbent Yordanka Fandakova.

However and much more controversially, around this time Ninova began to shift the party&#x27;s orientation toward traditionalism and social conservatism, advocating against same-sex marriage and the Istanbul Convention, as well as taking a harsh stance against perceived &#x27;gender ideology&#x27;.

These changes to the party&#x27;s philosophy also proved very internally divisive, and many factions formed to oppose Ninova within her own party, further galvanized by the fact that Ninova had taken part in privatization deals during the 90s. This internal opposition also accused Ninova of acting in a very authoritarian manner in attempting to crush internal dissent, comparing her to SDS leader Ivan Kostov. Because of this, the party suffered numerous defections. Several party branches disassociated themselves from the party, Maya Manolova refused to renew her membership and instead went on to form her own party Stand Up.BG, a significant portion of the party&#x27;s parliamentary caucus left to form the Bulgarian Progressive Line, while a portion of the party&#x27;s old-school membership left to form the Left Union for a Clean and Holy Republic, a broad left-wing alliance led by former BSP Chairman Zhan Videnov. Tatyana Doncheva&#x27;s Movement 21 also refused to align itself with its former mother party, the BSP, and instead chose to join Stand Up.BG in creating the Stand Up.BG! We are coming! alliance. A faction of those within the internal opposition that still remained in the party formed the &#x27;Socialism of the 21st century platform&#x27;, which stated that it would fight Ninova&#x27;s &#x27;usurpation&#x27; of the party and work to &#x27;restore the public image of socialism as the path to a more just and secure society&#x27;. According to this internal platform, the party under Ninova had become a leaderist power broker party, separated from its 150-year history.

Due to these and other reasons, the BSP obtained poor results during three consecutive snap parliamentary elections held in 2021, with the party obtaining its worst electoral result in its history. Due to this bad electoral performance, Ninova was asked, but refused to resign from her post. However, many party organizations, including the BSP&#x27;s own youth wing demanded that she resign, which she agreed to do the following day. However, Ninova later stated that her resignation was not yet valid and she would remain the party&#x27;s chairperson until a congress approved it at an undefined later date. Nevertheless, the BSP&#x27;s national council gave Ninova its approval for her to negotiate the BSP&#x27;s support for a government led by We Continue the Change, the new pro-Radev party that had won the November election.

In late November 2021, BSP agreed to enter the Petkov Government.

In August 2023, BSP leader Korneliya Ninova highlighted her party&#x27;s role in amending Bulgaria&#x27;s Protection Against Domestic Violence Act, asserting that the changes uphold the Constitution. The revised &quot;intimate relationship&quot; definition specifies male and female, extending protection to relationships lasting over 60 days. The amendment, adopted during an extraordinary parliamentary session, sparked debate on gender inclusivity and was met with criticisms regarding the timeline of protection.

=== Post-Ninova Interim Leadership period ===

Following the parties poor performance in June 2024 Bulgarian parliamentary election, a number of figures within the party, including the leader of the youth wing, Gabriel Vulkov, called on Ninova to resign. On the 11th of June, two days after the elections, Korneliya Ninova announced her intention to resign her position as Chairwoman of the party, clasifying the parties electoral results as &quot;catastrophic&quot;. Ninova announced that an acting chairperson from within the ranks of her deputies would be chosen in the following days by the parties National Council, who would be tasked with carrying out direct elections of the Chairperson in the autumn. She refused to confirm or deny if she would present her own candidacy in such an election. 

The National Council was scheduled to convene to discuss the question of electing an Acting Chairperson, among other questions relating to internal party affairs, on the 15th of June. Prior to the convention of the National Council, deputy-chairman of the party, Georgi Svilenski claimed there was a conspiracy within the party among the previous leadership in order to carry out a coup. Additionally, Korneliya Ninova wrote a post in which she clarified that together with her resignation she had tendered the resignation of the entire Executive Commission of the party and called on the National Council to not engage in revanchism, confirming that she herself would not be present at the meeting of the National Council.

Following the meeting of the National Council, it was announced that MP Atanas Zafirov was elected as acting Chairman, with a majority of 104 votes. The meeting of the National Council also chose to undo the appointment of Svilenski as head of the parliamentary group, instead choosing to appoint Borislav Gutsanov. In his first official statement, Zafirov denied the fact that a coup had taken place and promised to carry out fair elections for leadership positions within the party. He further confirmed that BSP would not support a government led by either GERB or DPS. The parties new leadership also made clear that it wished to reconcile with expelled members of BSP, as well as President Radev.

One of the first contentious decisions undertaken by the new leadership, was the removal of Kaloyan Metodiev from the Parliamentary Group. Metodiev, a former head of the SDS Youth Wing in the early 2000s, was seen as a close advisor to the parties former leader, Korneliya Ninova. Therefore, the vote to remove him created a division within the parliamentary group between the old and new leadership.

On 29 June, the parties control commission made a number of decisions which similarly seemed to attack the old leadership. For one, the Control Commission officially decided that Korneliya Ninova could not contest the upcoming Chairperson elections, as she had already served two terms in that capacity. The Control Commission further repealed the removal of Ivan Takov as head of the Sofia City organisation of the party, thus officially restoring him to that position.

Takov&#x27;s reinstatement was opposed by the recently elected leader of the BSP-Sofia organisation, Diana Toneva, who noted that she had already been legally registered as the leader of the organisation and argued that the Conference of the cities organisation which had elected her was legitimate.

Throughout July, the conflict between supporters and opponents of Ninova and conversely the new leadership intensified. Svilenski, a key Ninova ally, called on BSP members to support Ninova&#x27;s nomination in spite of the control council decision.

For their part, the new leadership intensified efforts to create a new left-wing alliance which would include political projects formed by dissident BSP members. This effort culminated prior to the annual rally of the Bulgarian Socialist Party at Buzludzha, where the formation of such a left-wing alliance was announced. Ninova, for her part, called for a boycott of the rally organised by the official leadership, and carried out her own event a few days later.

== Election results ==
=== National Assembly ===
=== European Parliament ===
=== President ===
== Symbols and logos ==
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q752259" start="4" end="29" title="Bulgarian Socialist Party" label="Bulgarian Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q752259" start="31" end="34" title="Bulgarian Socialist Party" label="BSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q752259" start="51" end="66" title="Bulgarian Socialist Party" label="The Centenarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="73" end="84" title="centre-left" label="centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="86" end="103" title="social democratic" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984783" start="104" end="131" title="political party in Bulgaria" label="political party in Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q159454" start="160" end="183" title="Socialist International" label="Socialist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q220945" start="185" end="213" title="Party of European Socialists" label="Party of European Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248622" start="219" end="239" title="Progressive Alliance" label="Progressive Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022865" start="347" end="352" title="Bulgarian Workers&amp;#x27; Social Democratic Party" label="BRSDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q9182522" start="536" end="569" title="Bulgarian Social Democratic Party (1891)" label="Bulgarian Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15987051" start="609" end="618" title="Buzludzha" label="Buzludzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092187" start="627" end="642" title="Dimitar Blagoev" label="Dimitar Blagoev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4090669" start="670" end="737" title="Bulgarian Social Democratic Workers&amp;#x27; Party (Narrow Socialists)" label="Bulgarian Social Democratic Workers&amp;#x27; Party (Narrow Socialists)"/>
<link wikidata="Q155000" start="756" end="781" title="Bulgarian Communist Party" label="Bulgarian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="826" end="845" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="Revolutions of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="860" end="876" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641962" start="965" end="1012" title="1990 Bulgarian Constitutional Assembly election" label="1990 Bulgarian Constitutional Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q49775" start="1046" end="1060" title="general strike" label="general strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q675887" start="1109" end="1128" title="Dimitar Iliev Popov" label="Dimitar Iliev Popov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477400" start="1149" end="1186" title="1991 Bulgarian parliamentary election" label="1991 Bulgarian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q971439" start="1323" end="1339" title="BSP for Bulgaria" label="BSP for Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q511954" start="1403" end="1415" title="Zhan Videnov" label="Zhan Videnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4404583" start="1423" end="1449" title="prime minister of Bulgaria" label="prime minister of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="1649" end="1663" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648240" start="1745" end="1758" title="Shock therapy (economics)" label="shock therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="1763" end="1776" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q969021" start="1829" end="1843" title="post-Communist" label="post-Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159895" start="1863" end="1899" title="2001 Bulgarian presidential election" label="2001 Bulgarian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57261" start="1916" end="1931" title="Georgi Parvanov" label="Georgi Parvanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946265" start="1948" end="1969" title="president of Bulgaria" label="president of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q81215" start="2042" end="2056" title="Petar Stoyanov" label="Petar Stoyanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q841253" start="2066" end="2092" title="Union of Democratic Forces (Bulgaria)" label="Union of Democratic Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q202117" start="2157" end="2173" title="Sergey Stanishev" label="Sergey Stanishev"/>
<link wikidata="Q233008" start="2197" end="2213" title="two-party system" label="two-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658987" start="2279" end="2283" title="1997 Bulgarian parliamentary election" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q682349" start="2284" end="2288" title="2001 Bulgarian parliamentary election" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534114" start="2334" end="2371" title="2005 Bulgarian parliamentary election" label="2005 Bulgarian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549637" start="2444" end="2464" title="Stanishev Government" label="Stanishev Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="2532" end="2540" title="centrist" label="centrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="2545" end="2559" title="social-liberal" label="social-liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q928435" start="2568" end="2595" title="National Movement Simeon II" label="National Movement Simeon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q164242" start="2604" end="2636" title="Movement for Rights and Freedoms" label="Movement for Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993031" start="2665" end="2701" title="2006 Bulgarian presidential election" label="2006 Bulgarian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2841" end="2855" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="2906" end="2910" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="2970" end="2990" title="political corruption" label="political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="3055" end="3084" title="financial crisis of 2007–2008" label="financial crisis of 2007–2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550406" start="3174" end="3211" title="2009 Bulgarian parliamentary election" label="2009 Bulgarian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="3245" end="3257" title="conservative" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q133968" start="3264" end="3268" title="GERB" label="GERB"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="3377" end="3391" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490771" start="3396" end="3408" title="anti-Turkish" label="anti-Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303428" start="3465" end="3474" title="Communist (insult)" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119666" start="3514" end="3521" title="Jacobin (magazine)" label="Jacobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="3619" end="3629" title="neoliberal" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915085" start="3653" end="3690" title="2013 Bulgarian parliamentary election" label="2013 Bulgarian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11832497" start="3754" end="3771" title="Plamen Oresharski" label="Plamen Oresharski"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415415" start="3828" end="3849" title="Oresharski Government" label="Oresharski Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277826" start="3964" end="3978" title="Delyan Peevski" label="Delyan Peevski"/>
<link wikidata="Q12279300" start="4016" end="4020" title="State Agency for National Security" label="DANS"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409978" start="4062" end="4101" title="Protests against the Oresharski cabinet" label="Protests against the Oresharski cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28128333" start="4163" end="4200" title="2017 Bulgarian parliamentary election" label="2017 Bulgarian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q192852" start="4313" end="4323" title="Opposition (politics)" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q29640995" start="4331" end="4355" title="Third Borisov Government" label="Third Borisov Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q27499882" start="4386" end="4401" title="United Patriots" label="United Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q97208898" start="4426" end="4454" title="2020–2021 Bulgarian protests" label="2020–2021 Bulgarian protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="4501" end="4520" title="non-confidence vote" label="non-confidence vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q57775" start="4565" end="4578" title="Boyko Borisov" label="Boyko Borisov"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785548" start="4611" end="4654" title="April 2021 Bulgarian parliamentary election" label="April 2021 Bulgarian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q106515109" start="4772" end="4814" title="July 2021 Bulgarian parliamentary election" label="July 2021 Bulgarian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q12283736" start="4964" end="4980" title="Korneliya Ninova" label="Korneliya Ninova"/>
<link wikidata="Q98098908" start="5174" end="5196" title="There Is Such a People" label="There Is Such a People"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="5202" end="5210" title="populist" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333366" start="5296" end="5309" title="snap election" label="snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q108208556" start="5371" end="5402" title="2021 Bulgarian general election" label="2021 Bulgarian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q110026114" start="5629" end="5646" title="Petkov Government" label="Petkov Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q108601789" start="5662" end="5664" title="We Continue the Change" label="PP"/>
<link wikidata="Q98098908" start="5666" end="5669" title="There is Such a People" label="ITN"/>
<link wikidata="Q62808154" start="5674" end="5676" title="Democratic Bulgaria" label="DB"/>
<link wikidata="Q12283736" start="5772" end="5788" title="Korneliya Ninova" label="Korneliya Ninova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4404583" start="5827" end="5841" title="Prime Minister of Bulgaria" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q155000" start="6064" end="6089" title="Bulgarian Communist Party" label="Bulgarian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q189280" start="6121" end="6141" title="democratic socialist" label="democratic socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="6159" end="6168" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="6209" end="6230" title="social market economy" label="social market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="6264" end="6272" title="Populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="6278" end="6295" title="Social democracy" label="social-democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="6444" end="6458" title="Social liberalism" label="social-liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="6491" end="6512" title="Social conservatism" label="socially conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q220945" start="6558" end="6586" title="Party of European Socialists" label="Party of European Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781399" start="6623" end="6635" title="pro-European" label="pro-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="6671" end="6682" title="Eurosceptic" label="Eurosceptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q109095440" start="6718" end="6742" title="sanctions against Russia" label="sanctions against Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064915" start="6771" end="6779" title="Novinite" label="Novinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="6787" end="6810" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="6828" end="6847" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q700386" start="6894" end="6905" title="Russophilia" label="Russophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12283736" start="6948" end="6964" title="Korneliya Ninova" label="Korneliya Ninova"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="7080" end="7094" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280155" start="7168" end="7197" title="same-sex marriage in Bulgaria" label="same-sex marriage in Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697391" start="7230" end="7249" title="Istanbul Convention" label="Istanbul Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242821" start="7328" end="7349" title="same-sex relationship" label="same-sex relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q202117" start="7476" end="7492" title="Sergey Stanishev" label="Sergey Stanishev"/>
<link wikidata="Q121932" start="7875" end="7909" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Bulgaria" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q511954" start="8014" end="8026" title="Zhan Videnov" label="Zhan Videnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="8684" end="8689" title="PASOK" label="PASOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="8696" end="8702" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q752521" start="8707" end="8710" title="Socialist Party of Serbia" label="SPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="8717" end="8730" title="Serbia and Montenegro" label="FR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159895" start="8855" end="8887" title="2001 Bulgarian presidential election" label="elected as president of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q202117" start="9266" end="9282" title="Sergey Stanishev" label="Sergey Stanishev"/>
<link wikidata="Q155723" start="9367" end="9393" title="NATO bombing of Yugoslavia" label="NATO bombing of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="9442" end="9446" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q28517" start="9802" end="9815" title="Todor Zhivkov" label="Todor Zhivkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q17173534" start="10400" end="10433" title="Alternative for Bulgarian Revival" label="Alternative for Bulgarian Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781399" start="10589" end="10601" title="Pro-Europeanism" label="pro-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="10606" end="10620" title="Social liberalism" label="social-liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23609046" start="10732" end="10777" title="2007 enlargement of the European Union" label="Bulgaria&amp;#x27;s entry into the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="10782" end="10786" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="10859" end="10869" title="Neoliberalism" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q825846" start="10909" end="10917" title="flat tax" label="flat tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q509331" start="10932" end="10947" title="progressive tax" label="progressive tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550406" start="11207" end="11220" title="2009 Bulgarian parliamentary election" label="2009 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415415" start="11262" end="11272" title="Oresharski Government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915085" start="11283" end="11296" title="2013 Bulgarian parliamentary election" label="2013 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q164242" start="11390" end="11422" title="Movement for Rights and Freedoms" label="Movement for Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q178049" start="11439" end="11445" title="Attack (political party)" label="Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409978" start="11506" end="11514" title="2013–2014 Bulgarian protests against the Oresharski cabinet" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q220945" start="11912" end="11940" title="Party of European Socialists" label="Party of European Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q11778487" start="11961" end="11973" title="Mihail Mikov" label="Mihail Mikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="12236" end="12248" title="Welfare state" label="social state"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415415" start="12288" end="12298" title="Oresharski Government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q164242" start="12391" end="12423" title="Movement for Rights and Freedoms" label="Movement for Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q178049" start="12440" end="12446" title="Attack (political party)" label="Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970185" start="12455" end="12492" title="2014 Bulgarian parliamentary election" label="2014 Bulgarian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q26257557" start="13176" end="13187" title="Rumen Radev" label="Rumen Radev"/>
<link wikidata="Q591198" start="13229" end="13248" title="Bulgarian Air Force" label="Bulgarian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022170" start="13256" end="13292" title="2016 Bulgarian presidential election" label="2016 Bulgarian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q433338" start="13406" end="13419" title="Iliana Iotova" label="Iliana Iotova"/>
<link wikidata="Q42178" start="13445" end="13459" title="Vice president" label="Vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656586" start="13547" end="13563" title="Tsetska Tsacheva" label="Tsetska Tsacheva"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946265" start="13599" end="13620" title="President of Bulgaria" label="President of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q55119918" start="13717" end="13762" title="2019 European Parliament election in Bulgaria" label="2019 European Parliament election in Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q65152203" start="13964" end="13994" title="2019 Bulgarian local elections" label="2019 Bulgarian local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="14112" end="14117" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837895" start="14244" end="14258" title="Mayor of Sofia" label="Mayor of Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12286345" start="14292" end="14305" title="Maya Manolova" label="Maya Manolova"/>
<link wikidata="Q444718" start="14343" end="14361" title="Yordanka Fandakova" label="Yordanka Fandakova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466570" start="14478" end="14492" title="Traditionalist conservatism" label="traditionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="14497" end="14516" title="social conservatism" label="social conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="14537" end="14554" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697391" start="14563" end="14582" title="Istanbul Convention" label="Istanbul Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q64717200" start="14617" end="14663" title="Anti-gender movement" label="against perceived &amp;#x27;gender ideology&amp;#x27;."/>
<link wikidata="Q362129" start="15064" end="15075" title="Ivan Kostov" label="Ivan Kostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q106201644" start="15286" end="15297" title="Stand Up.BG" label="Stand Up.BG"/>
<link wikidata="Q107504041" start="15379" end="15405" title="Bulgarian Progressive Line" label="Bulgarian Progressive Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q107453267" start="15482" end="15522" title="Left Union for a Clean and Holy Republic" label="Left Union for a Clean and Holy Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12296064" start="15592" end="15608" title="Tatyana Doncheva" label="Tatyana Doncheva"/>
<link wikidata="Q106223486" start="15616" end="15627" title="Movement 21" label="Movement 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q107600303" start="15750" end="15777" title="Stand Up.BG! We are coming!" label="Stand Up.BG! We are coming!"/>
<link wikidata="Q8881" start="15888" end="15917" title="Socialism of the 21st century" label="Socialism of the 21st century"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051266" start="16199" end="16208" title="Leaderism" label="leaderist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909647" start="16209" end="16221" title="Power broker (politics)" label="power broker"/>
<link wikidata="Q108601789" start="17016" end="17038" title="We Continue the Change" label="We Continue the Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q108208556" start="17081" end="17098" title="2021 Bulgarian general election" label="November election"/>
<link wikidata="Q110026114" start="17148" end="17165" title="Petkov Government" label="Petkov Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661656" start="17775" end="17817" title="June 2024 Bulgarian parliamentary election" label="June 2024 Bulgarian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q131314447" start="17897" end="17911" title="Gabriel Vulkov" label="Gabriel Vulkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q27914791" start="18752" end="18768" title="Georgi Svilenski" label="Georgi Svilenski"/>
<link wikidata="Q17409332" start="19286" end="19300" title="Atanas Zafirov" label="Atanas Zafirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273773" start="19511" end="19528" title="Borislav Gutsanov" label="Borislav Gutsanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="20704" end="20714" title="Sofia" label="Sofia City"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413323" wikidata="Q897740" url="?curid=413323" title="Union of Free Democrats">
<text>The Union of Free Democrats (, &quot;Sajuz na svobodnite demokrati&quot;) is a conservative political party in Bulgaria, led by Stefan Sofiyanski. It contested the 2001 elections as part of the United Democratic Forces electoral alliance, which picked up 51 of 240 seats. It joined the Bulgarian People&#x27;s Union, that at the 2005 Bulgarian parliamentary election won 5.7% of the popular vote and 13 out of 240 seats.

==Election results==
===National Assembly===

==References==
==External links==
*Official web site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q897740" start="4" end="27" title="Union of Free Democrats" label="Union of Free Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="92" end="107" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="111" end="119" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q713537" start="128" end="145" title="Stefan Sofiyanski" label="Stefan Sofiyanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q265322" start="194" end="218" title="United Democratic Forces" label="United Democratic Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q834030" start="286" end="315" title="Bulgarian People&amp;#x27;s Union" label="Bulgarian People&amp;#x27;s Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534114" start="329" end="366" title="2005 Bulgarian parliamentary election" label="2005 Bulgarian parliamentary election"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413325" wikidata="Q259800" url="?curid=413325" title="EDEK Socialist Party">
<text>The EDEK Socialist Party (, EDEK) is a Greek Cypriot nationalist, social-democratic political party in Cyprus.

==Overview==
The party was founded by Vassos Lyssarides in 1969 as the United Democratic Centre Union, EDEK (, ΕΔΕΚ). It was originally a strongly anti-imperialist democratic socialist party with roots in the struggle against British colonial rule, influenced by the philosophies of the Andreas Papandreou left-wing faction within Georgios Papandreou&#x27;s Centre Union, PASOK, and the 1968 movement.

EDEK, and Lyssarides personally, enjoyed very good relations with Third World socialist leaders and governments, including Hafez al-Assad of Syria, Muammar Gaddafi of Libya and Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt. 

Since the early 1980s, EDEK has evolved into a European-style social-democratic party. It has however not given up its nationalist orientations. The party changed its name to &quot;Movement for Social Democracy&quot; () in 2000.

EDEK is led by Marinos Sizopoulos and is a member of the Party of European Socialists and Socialist International.

==History==

===Formation and early years===

Members were drawn from the committee for re-establishment of democracy in Greece, and fighters from Lyssaridis&#x27;s group during the 1964 clashes between Greek and Turkish Cypriots. Lyssaridis was the personal physician of Archbishop Makarios III, the first president of independent Cyprus, whom the party supported. The party&#x27;s name was inspired by Greek&#x27;s Centre Union (EK) of Georgios Papandreou. It positioned itself in &quot;the space inbetween&quot; (neither left nor right). EDEK had links to the international Non-Aligned Movement and was opposed to the right-wing Colonels&#x27; regime in Greece. Many of the party&#x27;s members were part of the armed resistance to the 15 July 1974 coup against Makarios. The leader of the youth section of the party, Doros Loizou, was shot and killed in an attempt to murder Lyssaridis in August 1974.

Several members of the party&#x27;s youth section (EDEN) with Trotskyist tendencies were expelled between 1979 and 1984, who then formed Aristeri Pteryga (Left Wing).

During the late 1990s, EDEK negotiated with several minor parties, planning to merge all political forces between the communist AKEL and the conservative DISY into a major centrist party. It merged with two small groups, the Renewal Movement and the Independent Personalities Group, in February 2000. This was marked by its name change to &quot;Movement for Social Democracy&quot; (KISOS), which was also intended to bring the party closer to European social democratic parties in terms of both values and appearance. However, only two months after the merger, the members of the Renewal Movement left, citing a &quot;lack of trust&quot; vis-à-vis old EDEK members. Therefore, basically &quot;the new KISOS was the old EDEK&quot;.

===21st century===

In the 2001 general elections EDEK won 6.5% of the votes cast and 4 of the 56 seats in the House of Representatives of Cyprus. EDEK was one of the most outspoken opponents of the Annan Plan for the reunification of Cyprus, which was voted on, and ultimately rejected by the Greek Cypriot community in the 2004 referendum. In the elections of 21 May 2006, the first since the referendum, the party increased its vote share to 8.9%, and won 5 out of 56 seats.

EDEK backed Dimitris Christofias of the Progressive Party of Working People (AKEL) in the second round of the February 2008 presidential election. On the proposal of EDEK&#x27;s Political Bureau, 109 members of its Central Committee voted in favor of supporting Christofias, five voted against, and two abstained. In February 2010 EDEK quit from the government coalition due to its dispute concerning the decisions of Dimitris Christofias in the Cyprus Problem.

The party leader, Yiannakis Omirou, was elected as President of the House of Representatives of the Republic of Cyprus, following the 2011 general elections, in which EDEK obtained 8.93% of the votes and five seats in Parliament.

In the February 2013 presidential election, EDEK backed the independent candidate Yiorgos Lillikas. The former minister of foreign affairs in Tassos Papadopoulos&#x27; cabinet. In the second round, EDEK decided not to back any other candidate, neither the DISY candidate Nicos Anastasiades, or AKEL candidate Stavros Malas.

In January 2015, House President Yiannakis Omirou resigned from EDEK&#x27;s leadership. In March he was succeeded by his deputy Marinos Sizopoulos.

In November 2022, the party&#x27;s name was changed to EDEK Socialist Party.

==Election results==
===Parliament===

===European Parliament===

==Presidents of the Movement==

* 1969–2001: Dr. Vasos Lyssaridis
* 2001–2015: Yiannakis Omirou
* since 2015: Marinos Sizopoulos

==References==
==External links==
*Official website
*Cyprus Elections &amp; Politics</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q259800" start="4" end="24" title="EDEK Socialist Party" label="EDEK Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q259800" start="28" end="32" title="EDEK Socialist Party" label="EDEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220597" start="39" end="64" title="Greek Cypriot nationalism" label="Greek Cypriot nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="66" end="83" title="social-democratic" label="social-democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236039" start="84" end="109" title="List of political parties in Cyprus" label="political party in Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555001" start="150" end="167" title="Vassos Lyssarides" label="Vassos Lyssarides"/>
<link wikidata="Q189280" start="276" end="296" title="democratic socialism" label="democratic socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15240466" start="338" end="359" title="British Cyprus (1914–1960)" label="British colonial rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q219256" start="399" end="417" title="Andreas Papandreou" label="Andreas Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q311207" start="443" end="462" title="Georgios Papandreou" label="Georgios Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343608" start="470" end="482" title="Centre Union" label="Centre Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="484" end="489" title="PASOK" label="PASOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q257758" start="499" end="512" title="Protests of 1968" label="1968 movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785033" start="581" end="602" title="Third World socialist" label="Third World socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q118725" start="638" end="652" title="Hafez al-Assad" label="Hafez al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="656" end="661" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="663" end="678" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="692" end="710" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880743" start="968" end="986" title="Marinos Sizopoulos" label="Marinos Sizopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q220945" start="1010" end="1038" title="Party of European Socialists" label="Party of European Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q159454" start="1043" end="1066" title="Socialist International" label="Socialist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555001" start="1216" end="1226" title="Vassos Lyssarides" label="Lyssaridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q245794" start="1272" end="1277" title="Greek Cypriot" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q245807" start="1282" end="1298" title="Turkish Cypriots" label="Turkish Cypriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q153509" start="1352" end="1364" title="Makarios III" label="Makarios III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343608" start="1486" end="1498" title="Centre Union" label="Centre Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q311207" start="1507" end="1526" title="Georgios Papandreou" label="Georgios Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="1646" end="1666" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q504081" start="1701" end="1732" title="Greek military junta of 1967–74" label="Colonels&amp;#x27; regime in Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069434" start="1808" end="1825" title="1974 Cypriot coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="15 July 1974 coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876516" start="1890" end="1902" title="Doros Loizou" label="Doros Loizou"/>
<link wikidata="Q118868573" start="1927" end="1958" title="Attempted assassination of Vassos Lyssarides" label="an attempt to murder Lyssaridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181133" start="2038" end="2048" title="Trotskyism" label="Trotskyist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633735" start="2903" end="2925" title="2001 Cypriot legislative election" label="2001 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112381" start="2987" end="3021" title="House of Representatives of Cyprus" label="House of Representatives of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q564490" start="3075" end="3117" title="Annan Plan for Cyprus" label="Annan Plan for the reunification of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801044" start="3201" end="3216" title="2004 Cypriot Annan Plan referendums" label="2004 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485307" start="3225" end="3249" title="2006 Cypriot legislative election" label="elections of 21 May 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q57334" start="3367" end="3387" title="Dimitris Christofias" label="Dimitris Christofias"/>
<link wikidata="Q212158" start="3395" end="3430" title="Progressive Party of Working People" label="Progressive Party of Working People"/>
<link wikidata="Q261881" start="3465" end="3500" title="2008 Cypriot presidential election" label="February 2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57334" start="3617" end="3628" title="Demetris Christofias" label="Christofias"/>
<link wikidata="Q57334" start="3773" end="3793" title="Dimitris Christofias" label="Dimitris Christofias"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053482" start="3836" end="3852" title="Yiannakis Omirou" label="Yiannakis Omirou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568422" start="3952" end="3974" title="2011 Cypriot legislative election" label="2011 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152973" start="4056" end="4091" title="2013 Cypriot presidential election" label="February 2013 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q694791" start="4131" end="4147" title="Yiorgos Lillikas" label="Yiorgos Lillikas"/>
<link wikidata="Q200776" start="4191" end="4210" title="Tassos Papadopoulos" label="Tassos Papadopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112764" start="4320" end="4338" title="Nicos Anastasiades" label="Nicos Anastasiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053482" start="4407" end="4423" title="Yiannakis Omirou" label="Yiannakis Omirou"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880743" start="4502" end="4520" title="Marinos Sizopoulos" label="Marinos Sizopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555001" start="4716" end="4732" title="Vasos Lyssaridis" label="Vasos Lyssaridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053482" start="4746" end="4762" title="Yiannakis Omirou" label="Yiannakis Omirou"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880743" start="4777" end="4795" title="Marinos Sizopoulos" label="Marinos Sizopoulos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413328" wikidata="Q816863" url="?curid=413328" title="Democratic Party (Cyprus)">
<text>The Democratic Party (, &quot;Dimokratikó Kómma&quot; (DIKO)) is a Greek-Cypriot nationalist, centrist political party in Cyprus founded in 1976 by Spyros Kyprianou.

DIKO is variously described as centrist, centre-left or centre-right; internationally, it is a member of the Progressive Alliance, which groups together mainly centre-left parties. Among all Cypriot political parties, DIKO claims to be the most loyal follower of the policies of Archbishop Makarios, the founding father of the Republic of Cyprus. Its electoral stronghold is the Paphos District.

==Overview==
As stated in its founding declaration, the Democratic Party proposes the political philosophy of &quot;social centrism&quot;, which constitutes &quot;a total of attributes and values that offer in the state social cohesion, political prospect, improvement of terms of life and development of human culture, that should be shared between the entire population and not only between the privileged teams of the population&quot;. In June 2003, under the leadership of Tassos Papadopoulos, DIKO announced it was moving away from its traditional centre-right political positioning, and declared its intention of moving towards social democracy.

The party has developed a strict and hardline stance on the Cyprus problem and strongly opposed the Annan plan in 2004. DIKO also supports European integration and a non-aligned foreign policy, even though it showed support for Cyprus joining NATO&#x27;s Partnership for Peace. The Movement for Social Democracy (EDEK), together with DIKO, constitute the so-called &quot;space in-between&quot; (ενδιάμεσος χώρος) in Cypriot politics, in that they strongly differentiate themselves from both the right-wing Democratic Rally and the left-wing AKEL.

From 2000 to 2006, the party was led by Tassos Papadopoulos, who was President of Cyprus from 2003 to 2008. Papadopoulos was succeeded as DIKO leader by Marios Garoyian, who was President of the House of Representatives from 2008 to 2011. The party leadership was taken over by Nicolas Papadopoulos, son of Tassos, following an internal ballot in December 2013.

The Democratic Party&#x27;s traditional third place in legislative elections has allowed to it to assume the balance of power in parliament, where it has alternated between support for the communist Progressive Party of Working People (AKEL) and the conservative Democratic Rally (DISY). In the 2011 legislative election, the party won 15.8 percent of the vote and 9 out of 56 seats. The party&#x27;s decision not to field a candidate in the 2013 presidential election and to back conservative leader Nicos Anastasiades instead was controversial amongst members, and contributed to Marios Garoyian&#x27;s loss of the leadership to Nicolas Papadopoulos later in the year.

During the Seventh European Parliament, the sole DIKO MEP was attached to the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats group.

== Party leaders ==
==Election results==
===Parliament===

===European Parliament===

==References==

==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q816863" start="4" end="20" title="Democratic Party (Cyprus)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q816863" start="55" end="59" title="Democratic Party (Cyprus)" label="DIKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220597" start="67" end="92" title="Greek Cypriot nationalism" label="Greek-Cypriot nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="94" end="102" title="centrism" label="centrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236039" start="103" end="128" title="List of political parties in Cyprus" label="political party in Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q552389" start="148" end="164" title="Spyros Kyprianou" label="Spyros Kyprianou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="198" end="206" title="centrism" label="centrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="208" end="219" title="centre-left" label="centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="223" end="235" title="centre-right" label="centre-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248622" start="276" end="296" title="Progressive Alliance" label="Progressive Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q153509" start="457" end="465" title="Makarios III" label="Makarios"/>
<link wikidata="Q59133" start="546" end="561" title="Paphos District" label="Paphos District"/>
<link wikidata="Q200776" start="1041" end="1060" title="Tassos Papadopoulos" label="Tassos Papadopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="1117" end="1129" title="centre-right" label="centre-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="1198" end="1214" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q245831" start="1277" end="1291" title="Cyprus problem" label="Cyprus problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q564490" start="1317" end="1327" title="Annan plan" label="Annan plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048268" start="1356" end="1376" title="European integration" label="European integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q653277" start="1472" end="1493" title="Partnership for Peace" label="Partnership for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q259800" start="1499" end="1528" title="Movement for Social Democracy" label="Movement for Social Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q644973" start="1723" end="1739" title="Democratic Rally" label="Democratic Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q212158" start="1758" end="1762" title="AKEL" label="AKEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q200776" start="1805" end="1824" title="Tassos Papadopoulos" label="Tassos Papadopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q841760" start="1834" end="1853" title="President of Cyprus" label="President of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634360" start="1918" end="1933" title="Marios Garoyian" label="Marios Garoyian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112381" start="1960" end="1984" title="House of Representatives (Cyprus)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845852" start="2237" end="2253" title="balance of power (parliament)" label="balance of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q212158" start="2327" end="2362" title="Progressive Party of Working People" label="Progressive Party of Working People"/>
<link wikidata="Q644973" start="2391" end="2407" title="Democratic Rally" label="Democratic Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568422" start="2423" end="2448" title="2011 Cypriot legislative election" label="2011 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152973" start="2570" end="2596" title="2013 Cypriot presidential election" label="2013 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112764" start="2629" end="2647" title="Nicos Anastasiades" label="Nicos Anastasiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644021" start="2811" end="2838" title="Seventh European Parliament" label="Seventh European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="2854" end="2857" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="MEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q507343" start="2878" end="2926" title="Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats" label="Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413329" wikidata="Q2500788" url="?curid=413329" title="Latimer, Buckinghamshire">
<text>Latimer is a village in Buckinghamshire, England, on the border with Hertfordshire. It is within the civil parish of Latimer and Ley Hill (known as simply Latimer until 2013), which also includes the village of Ley Hill and the hamlet of Tyler&#x27;s Hill.

==History==
Latimer was originally joined with the adjacent village of Chenies. Both were anciently called Isenhampstead, at a time when there was a royal palace in the vicinity. However, in the reign of King Edward III of England the lands were split between two manorial barons: Thomas Cheyne in the village that later became known as &#x27;Chenies&#x27;, and William Latimer in this village. Latimer came into possession of the manor in 1326.

At the time of the English Civil War Latimer belonged to the Earl of Devonshire. When Charles I was captured by the Parliamentarian forces he was brought to Latimer on his way to London.

The triangular village green has two memorials. The first is a memorial to men who fought and died during the Boer War in South Africa. The base consists of local pudding-stones with the names of the 132 men inscribed on an obelisk of granite. It was officially unveiled by Lady Chesham on 4 July 1903. The other memorial to a horse called &quot;Villebois&quot;; a black charger which Lord Chesham brought back from South Africa. It died in February 1911 and a cairn of local pudding-stones was put up in memory in June 1912.

==Buildings==
Latimer House is an historic country house, the former home of Lord Chesham. It was used in the Second World War for interrogating German defectors and prisoners. It is now De Vere Latimer Estate, owned by De Vere hotels.

The small village includes 17th- and 18th-century cottages around the triangular village green with a pump on it. The church of St Mary Magdelane was rebuilt by Sir George Gilbert Scott in 1867. The rectory was built in the 18th century in grey and red brick. 

In Ley Hill there is a common and a Methodist Chapel. Tyler&#x27;s Hill is also in Latimer &amp; Ley Hill parish and includes St George&#x27;s Anglican Church. The graveyard at Tyler&#x27;s Hill which serves Ley Hill and Tyler&#x27;s Hill is run by Latimer and Ley Hill parish council.

==Railway==
Chalfont &amp; Latimer station is situated in nearby Little Chalfont on the Chiltern Line with London Underground services between Baker Street and Amersham, and Chiltern services to Aylesbury and Marylebone.

==Cultural references==
Latimer was the location used in the Department S episode, &quot;The Pied Piper of Hambledown&quot;, first aired on 30 September 1969. 

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2500788" start="0" end="7" title="Latimer, Buckinghamshire" label="Latimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="24" end="39" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="69" end="82" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="101" end="113" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q20948926" start="117" end="137" title="Latimer and Ley Hill" label="Latimer and Ley Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537955" start="211" end="219" title="Ley Hill" label="Ley Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q15054207" start="238" end="255" title="Tyler&amp;#x27;s Hill" label="Tyler&amp;#x27;s Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q589687" start="329" end="336" title="Chenies" label="Chenies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="407" end="412" title="monarchy" label="royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560" start="413" end="419" title="palace" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="467" end="488" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815782" start="522" end="530" title="Lord of the Manor" label="manorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="531" end="536" title="baron" label="baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862564" start="620" end="635" title="Baron Latimer" label="William Latimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="724" end="741" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q24952630" start="766" end="784" title="Earl of Devonshire" label="Earl of Devonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="791" end="800" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="821" end="836" title="roundhead" label="Parliamentarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="884" end="890" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160978" start="1434" end="1447" title="Latimer House" label="Latimer House"/>
<link wikidata="Q681007" start="1818" end="1842" title="Sir George Gilbert Scott" label="Sir George Gilbert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q800618" start="2218" end="2248" title="Chalfont &amp;amp; Latimer station" label="Chalfont &amp;amp; Latimer station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915288" start="2271" end="2286" title="Little Chalfont" label="Little Chalfont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671156" start="2294" end="2307" title="London to Aylesbury Line" label="Chiltern Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="2313" end="2331" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q616218" start="2349" end="2361" title="Baker Street tube station" label="Baker Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q800384" start="2366" end="2374" title="Amersham station" label="Amersham"/>
<link wikidata="Q567000" start="2380" end="2388" title="Chiltern Railways" label="Chiltern"/>
<link wikidata="Q213474" start="2401" end="2410" title="Aylesbury" label="Aylesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q123634" start="2415" end="2425" title="Marylebone" label="Marylebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131894" start="2489" end="2501" title="Department S (TV series)" label="Department S"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413332" wikidata="Q21509988" url="?curid=413332" title="Akel">
<text>Akel is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:

* George Akel (1935-2019), American Businessman
*Emad Akel (1965–1993), Hamas military commander
*Friedrich Akel (1871–1941), Estonian diplomat and politician
*Mohamed Akel (born 1993), Israeli football player
*Omar al-Akel (born 1980), Syrian football player

==Politics==
*Progressive Party of Working People (Ανορθωτικό Κόμμα Εργαζόμενου Λαού), a communist political party in Cyprus</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21509988" start="0" end="4" title="Akel" label="Akel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898942" start="110" end="119" title="Emad Akel" label="Emad Akel"/>
<link wikidata="Q571670" start="159" end="173" title="Friedrich Akel" label="Friedrich Akel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6890982" start="221" end="233" title="Mohamed Akel" label="Mohamed Akel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089861" start="272" end="284" title="Omar al-Akel" label="Omar al-Akel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212158" start="336" end="371" title="Progressive Party of Working People" label="Progressive Party of Working People"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413334" wikidata="Q1277321" url="?curid=413334" title="Earl of Kent">
<text>The peerage title Earl of Kent has been created eight times in the Peerage of England and once in the Peerage of the United Kingdom. In fiction, the Earl of Kent is also known as a prominent supporting character in William Shakespeare&#x27;s tragedy King Lear.

==Earls of Kent, first creation (1020)==
The Earldom Kent was first created by Cnut the Great for Godwin, Earl of Wessex. Upon his death, in 1053, it was inherited by his son, Leofwine Godwinson. Leofwine, who was killed in 1066 at the Battle of Hastings and his titles forfeited to the new King William.
*Godwin, Earl of Wessex (1020–1053), 1st Earl of Kent.
*Leofwine Godwinson (1053–1066), 4th son of above, 2nd Earl of Kent.

==Earls of Kent, second creation (1067)==
After William, Duke of Normandy conquered England, Odo, Bishop of Bayeux, his half-brother, was awarded the Earldom of Kent, the second creation. In 1076, Odo was found guilty of defrauding the crown, and most of his properties were forfeited to the crown, but he was not executed. In 1082, he was arrested for planning a military campaign to Rome and in 1088 his titles were forfeited. He died in 1097 at Palermo, on his way to join the First Crusade. 
*Odo, Earl of Kent, and Bishop of Bayeux (died 1097) (forfeit 1088).

==Earls of Kent, third creation (1141)==
William of Ypres was the principal lieutenant of King Stephen and was thus rewarded the Earldom of Kent. He was deprived of the title in 1155, by King Henry II.
*William de Ipres, Earl of Kent (c. 1095–1165) (deprived 1155)

==Earls of Kent, fourth creation (1227)==
Hubert de Burgh was a loyal supporter of King John and in 1227 was created Earl of Kent by John&#x27;s son and successor, King Henry III of England. He died in 1243, his Earldom becoming extinct, as the king had his issue from his first marriage disinherited.
*Hubert de Burgh, Earl of Kent (died 1243)

==Earls of Kent, fifth creation (1321)==
Edmund of Woodstock was sixth son of Edward I of England. He was created Earl of Kent in 1321. Following his execution for high treason, his son Edmund became Earl of Kent. Edmund died the following year and the Earldom of Kent was inherited by his younger brother John, 3rd Earl of Kent. John died aged 22 and all his land was passed to his sister Joan, Countess of Kent. The Earldom of Kent, as a royal earldom, became extinct. Joan married Sir Thomas Holland and was created Earl of Kent in her own right, in what is considered a separate creation of the Earldom of Kent (see below).
*Edmund of Woodstock, 1st Earl of Kent (1301–1330) (attainted 1330)
*Edmund, 2nd Earl of Kent (–1331) (restored 1331)
*John, 3rd Earl of Kent (1330–1352)
*Joan, 4th Countess of Kent (1352–1385)

== Earls of Kent, sixth creation (1360) ==
The earls of Kent of this creation used &quot;Baron Holand&quot; (1353) as a subsidiary title; it became abeyant 1408. The first earl of Kent by this creation was the husband of Joan of Kent of the fifth creation.

*Thomas Holland, 1st Earl of Kent (died 1360) 
*Thomas Holland, 2nd Earl of Kent (1350–1397)
*Thomas Holland, 3rd Earl of Kent (1372–1400)
*Edmund Holland, 4th Earl of Kent (1383–1408)

The line of the earls of Kent became extinct with the death of Edmund, the fourth earl.

==Earls of Kent, seventh creation (1461)==
*William Neville, Earl of Kent (died 1463)

==Earls of Kent, eighth creation (1465)==

The Greys were a baronial family with substantial property in Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire, and later around Ruthin in Wales. They rose to greater prominence during the Wars of the Roses. Edmund Grey, Lord Grey of Ruthin, started out a Lancastrian, but switched to the Yorkist side at the Battle of Northampton. He was a member of Edward IV&#x27;s council, became Lord Treasurer in 1463/4, was created Earl of Kent in 1465 and was keeper of the Tower of London in 1470. He remained loyal through Richard III&#x27;s accession, taking part in his coronation (1483).

Edmund&#x27;s son George, the 2nd Earl, had continued as a Yorkist, marrying Anne Woodville, a sister of Edward IV&#x27;s queen Elizabeth Woodville. (He was half-first cousin - both being grandsons of Reynold 3rd Lord Grey of Ruthin - to Queen Elizabeth&#x27;s first husband, Sir John Grey of Groby.) He later married Catherine Herbert, daughter of William Herbert, 1st Earl of Pembroke.

The third earl, Richard, was the son of the second earl and Anne Woodville. He wound up heavily in debt, probably through gambling, and was forced to alienate most of his property. A good part ended up in the crown&#x27;s hands; historians disagree regarding what this says about Henry VII&#x27;s relationship with the aristocracy.

He was succeeded as earl by his half-brother Henry, son of the second earl and Catherine Herbert. Henry tried, with little success, to reacquire the property Richard had sold, and had to live as a modest gentleman, never formally taking title as earl.

*Edmund Grey, 1st Earl of Kent (c. 1420–1490)
*George Grey, 2nd Earl of Kent (c. 1460–1503)
*Richard Grey, 3rd Earl of Kent (1481–1524)
*Henry Grey, 4th Earl of Kent (c. 1495–1562)
*Reginald Grey, 5th Earl of Kent (died 1573)
*Henry Grey, 6th Earl of Kent (1541–1615)
*Charles Grey, 7th Earl of Kent (c. 1545–1623)
*Henry Grey, 8th Earl of Kent (c. 1583–1639)
*Anthony Grey, 9th Earl of Kent (1557–1643)
*Henry Grey, 10th Earl of Kent (1594–1651)
*Anthony Grey, 11th Earl of Kent (1645–1702)
*Henry Grey, 12th Earl of Kent (1671–1740) (created Marquess of Kent in 1706, Duke of Kent in 1710) (all Kent titles were extinct on his death, though some others passed to Jemima Yorke, 2nd Marchioness Grey)

==Earls of Kent, ninth creation (1866)==
*Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh, Earl of Kent (1844–1900)

==References==
*G.W. Bernard, &quot;The Fortunes of the Greys, Earls of Kent, in the Early Sixteenth Century&quot;, &quot;The Historical Journal&quot;, 25 (1982), 671–685</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q51280089" start="4" end="11" title="peerage" label="peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277321" start="18" end="30" title="Earl of Kent" label="Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11009654" start="67" end="85" title="Peerage of England" label="Peerage of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q863009" start="102" end="131" title="Peerage of the United Kingdom" label="Peerage of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q181598" start="250" end="259" title="King Lear" label="King Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="341" end="355" title="Cnut the Great" label="Cnut the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q318142" start="360" end="382" title="Godwin, Earl of Wessex" label="Godwin, Earl of Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249624" start="438" end="456" title="Leofwine Godwinson" label="Leofwine Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q83224" start="498" end="516" title="Battle of Hastings" label="Battle of Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="558" end="565" title="William the Conqueror" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q318142" start="568" end="590" title="Godwin, Earl of Wessex" label="Godwin, Earl of Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249624" start="623" end="641" title="Leofwine Godwinson" label="Leofwine Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="740" end="765" title="William the Conqueror" label="William, Duke of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1077" end="1081" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="1140" end="1147" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="1172" end="1185" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q49961" start="1189" end="1206" title="Odo, Earl of Kent" label="Odo, Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394458" start="1299" end="1315" title="William of Ypres" label="William of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q60849" start="1348" end="1360" title="Stephen, King of England" label="King Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="1445" end="1458" title="Henry II of England" label="King Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394458" start="1461" end="1491" title="William of Ypres" label="William de Ipres, Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381324" start="1566" end="1581" title="Hubert de Burgh, Earl of Kent" label="Hubert de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="1607" end="1616" title="John, King of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="1688" end="1713" title="Henry III of England" label="King Henry III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381324" start="1827" end="1856" title="Hubert de Burgh, Earl of Kent" label="Hubert de Burgh, Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q956563" start="1911" end="1930" title="Edmund of Woodstock, 1st Earl of Kent" label="Edmund of Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="1948" end="1967" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4529906" start="2056" end="2062" title="Edmund, 2nd Earl of Kent" label="Edmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052929" start="2176" end="2198" title="John, 3rd Earl of Kent" label="John, 3rd Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q234156" start="2260" end="2282" title="Joan of Kent" label="Joan, Countess of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031944" start="2354" end="2372" title="Thomas Holland, 1st Earl of Kent" label="Sir Thomas Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q956563" start="2499" end="2536" title="Edmund of Woodstock, 1st Earl of Kent" label="Edmund of Woodstock, 1st Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818067" start="2550" end="2559" title="Attainder" label="attainted"/>
<link wikidata="Q4529906" start="2567" end="2591" title="Edmund, 2nd Earl of Kent" label="Edmund, 2nd Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052929" start="2617" end="2639" title="John, 3rd Earl of Kent" label="John, 3rd Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q234156" start="2653" end="2679" title="Joan of Kent" label="Joan, 4th Countess of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q20645880" start="2782" end="2794" title="Baron Holand" label="Baron Holand"/>
<link wikidata="Q201174" start="2841" end="2848" title="Abeyance" label="abeyant"/>
<link wikidata="Q234156" start="2914" end="2926" title="Joan of Kent" label="Joan of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031944" start="2952" end="2984" title="Thomas Holland, 1st Earl of Kent" label="Thomas Holland, 1st Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q933789" start="2999" end="3031" title="Thomas Holland, 2nd Earl of Kent" label="Thomas Holland, 2nd Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501872" start="3045" end="3077" title="Thomas Holland, 1st Duke of Surrey" label="Thomas Holland, 3rd Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589610" start="3091" end="3123" title="Edmund Holland, 4th Earl of Kent" label="Edmund Holland, 4th Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364228" start="3270" end="3299" title="William Neville, Earl of Kent" label="William Neville, Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23143" start="3418" end="3430" title="Bedfordshire" label="Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="3435" end="3450" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013633" start="3469" end="3475" title="Ruthin" label="Ruthin"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="3529" end="3546" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q916295" start="3649" end="3670" title="Battle of Northampton (1460)" label="Battle of Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q160341" start="3691" end="3700" title="Edward IV of England" label="Edward IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="3805" end="3820" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="3856" end="3867" title="Richard III of England" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q229214" start="4053" end="4072" title="Elizabeth Woodville" label="Elizabeth Woodville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439756" start="4201" end="4223" title="John Grey of Groby" label="Sir John Grey of Groby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261083" start="4274" end="4311" title="William Herbert, 1st Earl of Pembroke (1423–1469)" label="William Herbert, 1st Earl of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="4594" end="4603" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q936114" start="4901" end="4930" title="Edmund Grey, 1st Earl of Kent" label="Edmund Grey, 1st Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160474" start="4947" end="4976" title="George Grey, 2nd Earl of Kent" label="George Grey, 2nd Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326077" start="4993" end="5023" title="Richard Grey, 3rd Earl of Kent" label="Richard Grey, 3rd Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722230" start="5037" end="5065" title="Henry Grey, 4th Earl of Kent" label="Henry Grey, 4th Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308719" start="5082" end="5113" title="Reginald Grey, 5th Earl of Kent" label="Reginald Grey, 5th Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722233" start="5127" end="5155" title="Henry Grey, 6th Earl of Kent" label="Henry Grey, 6th Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078433" start="5169" end="5199" title="Charles Grey, 7th Earl of Kent" label="Charles Grey, 7th Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722236" start="5216" end="5244" title="Henry Grey, 8th Earl of Kent" label="Henry Grey, 8th Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q573308" start="5261" end="5291" title="Anthony Grey, 9th Earl of Kent" label="Anthony Grey, 9th Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606809" start="5305" end="5334" title="Henry Grey, 10th Earl of Kent" label="Henry Grey, 10th Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q253557" start="5348" end="5379" title="Anthony Grey, 11th Earl of Kent" label="Anthony Grey, 11th Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q336031" start="5393" end="5422" title="Henry Grey, 1st Duke of Kent" label="Henry Grey, 12th Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245053" start="5470" end="5482" title="Duke of Kent" label="Duke of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177177" start="5565" end="5599" title="Jemima Yorke, 2nd Marchioness Grey" label="Jemima Yorke, 2nd Marchioness Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q158143" start="5644" end="5683" title="Alfred, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh, Earl of Kent"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="413339" wikidata="Q2287274" url="?curid=413339" title="Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra">
<text>The Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra is an American orchestra based in Cincinnati, Ohio. Its primary concert venue is Music Hall. In addition to its symphony concerts, the orchestra gives pops concerts as the Cincinnati Pops Orchestra. The Cincinnati Symphony is the resident orchestra for the Cincinnati May Festival, the Cincinnati Opera, and the Cincinnati Ballet. Additionally, the orchestra supports the Cincinnati Symphony Youth Orchestra (CSYO), a program for young musicians in grades 9 to 12.

== History ==
Several orchestras had existed in Cincinnati between 1825 and 1872. The immediate precursor ensemble to the current orchestra was the Cincinnati Orchestra, founded in 1872. In 1893, Helen Herron Taft founded the Cincinnati Orchestra Association, and the name of the orchestra was formalised to the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra. The Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra gave its first concerts in 1895 at Pike&#x27;s Opera House. A year later, the orchestra moved to Music Hall. Its first conductor was Frank Van der Stucken, a Texas-born musician of Flemish ancestry, who served until 1907. In the early years, the orchestra welcomed such composers as Richard Strauss and Edward McDowell. The orchestra also performed the U.S. premiere of the Symphony No. 5 of Gustav Mahler.

For three years, the orchestra was disbanded due to labor disputes and financial problems. Upon its reorganisation in 1909, Leopold Stokowski, then a young organist from England, served as music director of the newly organised orchestra for three years, to 1912, his first music directorship. In 1911, the orchestra relocated from Music Hall to Emery Auditorium. Subsequent music directors included Ernst Kunwald through 1918, Eugène Ysaÿe (1918–1922), Fritz Reiner (1922–1933), and Eugene Goossens (1933–1947). The orchestra returned to Music Hall in 1936. Its musical landmarks during this period included the U.S. premiere of Mahler&#x27;s &quot;Symphony No. 3&quot; (1912), its first recordings (1917), first national tours, and the world premieres of Aaron Copland&#x27;s &quot;Fanfare for the Common Man&quot; and &quot;Lincoln Portrait&quot;.

Thor Johnson became music director in 1947, and led the orchestra in some of the first stereo recordings for Remington Records. Max Rudolf succeeded Johnson in 1958. Thomas Schippers became music director in 1970, building the orchestra&#x27;s reputation and making several well-received recordings, but he died in 1977, at 47, of lung cancer. Also in 1977, the Cincinnati Pops Orchestra was formed, with Erich Kunzel as its conductor. After Schippers&#x27; death, Walter Susskind served as artistic advisor of the orchestra from 1978 until his own death in 1980.

In 1980, Michael Gielen became music director; he held the post until 1986. Jesús López-Cobos became music director in 1986. His achievements included leading on a 1995 European tour, the orchestra&#x27;s first since 1969, and its first national television appearance on PBS. His 15-year music directorship remains the longest tenure with the orchestra. From September 2001 until his death in 2018, López-Cobos served as the orchestra&#x27;s emeritus music director.

== Recent history ==

From 2001 to 2011, the orchestra&#x27;s music director was Paavo Järvi. The orchestra made a number of recordings for the Telarc label during Järvi&#x27;s tenure. In January 2007, the orchestra reported financial difficulties, projecting a monetary deficit of about US$2 million for the current fiscal year. In 2009, those difficulties, in addition to the purchase of Telarc by the Concord Music Group, led to the termination of the orchestra&#x27;s recording contract. In late 2009, Cincinnati arts patron and philanthropist Louise Nippert announced a gift of $85 million (USD) for the orchestra. The orchestra was scheduled to receive directly about $3 million each year (around 75% of its annual distribution). 12% and 5% was allocated to the Cincinnati Opera and Ballet companies, respectively, with the intent of maintaining the Cincinnati Symphony as the resident orchestra for those organisations.
In December 2010, John Morris Russell was named the new conductor of the Cincinnati Pops, following the death in 2009 of Erich Kunzel. After the conclusion of his music directorship in 2011, Järvi was named music director laureate. In January 2011, as part of the interim period after the conclusion of Järvi&#x27;s music directorship and during the search for a new music director, the orchestra named a number of musicians to &quot;Creative Director&quot; posts to curate various concert series. For the 2011–2012 season, these musicians were:
* Rafael Frühbeck de Burgos, Creative Director of the Masterworks Series 
* Philip Glass, Creative Director of the Boundless Series
* Lang Lang, Creative Director of the Ascent Series
For the 2012–2013 season, Frühbeck de Burgos reprised his role as Creative Director of the Masterworks Series. For the other two series, new musicians were named as directors:
* Jennifer Higdon, Creative Director of the Boundless Series
* Branford Marsalis, Creative Director of the Ascent Series.

In 2010, the Orchestra launched its own record label, Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra Media. The inaugural album on the new label, &quot;American Portraits,&quot; was released internationally in January 2011. In November 2011, it became the first orchestra in the world to establish a tweeting zone at its concerts.

In March 2011, Louis Langrée first guest-conducted the orchestra. Based on this appearance, in April 2012, the orchestra named Langrée as its 13th music director, effective as of the 2013–2014 season, with an initial contract of four years. He took the title of music director-designate with immediate effect. In March 2015, the orchestra announced the extension of Langrée&#x27;s contract as music director through the 2019–2020 season. In February 2017, the orchestra further extended his contract through the 2021–2022 season. In January 2020, the orchestra announced the newest extension of Langrée&#x27;s contract, through the 2023–2024 season. In June 2021, the orchestra announced that Langrée would conclude his tenure as its music director at the close of the 2023–2024 season.

In 2015, Cristian Măcelaru first guest-conducted the orchestra in a Cincinnati Opera production of &quot;Il Trovatore&quot;. He returned for his subscription concert debut with the orchestra in January 2016.
In April 2024, the orchestra announced the appointment of conductor Mӑcelaru as its next music director, with him scheduled to hold the title of music director-designate in the 2024-2025 season, and subsequently scheduled to become music director in the 2025-2026 season, with an initial contract through the 2028-2029 season.

== Premieres ==
The following is a list of U.S. and world premieres of works at the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra and May Festival (MF):

==References==
==External links==
*Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra
*Music Hall: Cincinnati Finds Its Voice Music Hall documentary on WCET-TV</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2287274" start="4" end="33" title="Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra" label="Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="68" end="78" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="80" end="84" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9289351" start="115" end="125" title="Music Hall (Cincinnati)" label="Music Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229599" start="185" end="189" title="Pops orchestra" label="pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120290" start="206" end="231" title="Cincinnati Pops Orchestra" label="Cincinnati Pops Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120280" start="291" end="314" title="Cincinnati May Festival" label="Cincinnati May Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120283" start="320" end="336" title="Cincinnati Opera" label="Cincinnati Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120212" start="346" end="363" title="Cincinnati Ballet" label="Cincinnati Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q255115" start="696" end="713" title="Helen Herron Taft" label="Helen Herron Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457595" start="912" end="935" title="Pike&amp;#x27;s Opera House (Cincinnati)" label="Pike&amp;#x27;s Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q9289351" start="974" end="984" title="Music Hall (Cincinnati)" label="Music Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444369" start="1010" end="1031" title="Frank Van der Stucken" label="Frank Van der Stucken"/>
<link wikidata="Q242485" start="1058" end="1065" title="Flemish people" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="1160" end="1175" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q450467" start="1180" end="1195" title="Edward McDowell" label="Edward McDowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q240240" start="1251" end="1265" title="Symphony No. 5 (Mahler)" label="Symphony No. 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="1269" end="1282" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q297562" start="1409" end="1426" title="Leopold Stokowski" label="Leopold Stokowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q85930" start="1684" end="1697" title="Ernst Kunwald" label="Ernst Kunwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q312857" start="1712" end="1724" title="Eugène Ysaÿe" label="Eugène Ysaÿe"/>
<link wikidata="Q364179" start="1738" end="1750" title="Fritz Reiner" label="Fritz Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q945833" start="1768" end="1783" title="Eugene Aynsley Goossens" label="Eugene Goossens"/>
<link wikidata="Q223525" start="1934" end="1948" title="Symphony No. 3 (Mahler)" label="Symphony No. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="2041" end="2054" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629948" start="2068" end="2094" title="Fanfare for the Common Man" label="Fanfare for the Common Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832579" start="2111" end="2127" title="Lincoln Portrait" label="Lincoln Portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160447" start="2136" end="2148" title="Thor Johnson" label="Thor Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143003" start="2245" end="2262" title="Remington Records" label="Remington Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q63560" start="2264" end="2274" title="Max Rudolf (conductor)" label="Max Rudolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q558987" start="2302" end="2318" title="Thomas Schippers" label="Thomas Schippers"/>
<link wikidata="Q724158" start="2541" end="2553" title="Erich Kunzel" label="Erich Kunzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388568" start="2601" end="2616" title="Walter Susskind" label="Walter Susskind"/>
<link wikidata="Q213913" start="2710" end="2724" title="Michael Gielen" label="Michael Gielen"/>
<link wikidata="Q952160" start="2777" end="2794" title="Jesús López-Cobos" label="Jesús López-Cobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="2972" end="2975" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q700791" start="3250" end="3261" title="Paavo Järvi" label="Paavo Järvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142419" start="3313" end="3319" title="Telarc" label="Telarc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688880" start="3717" end="3731" title="Louise Nippert" label="Louise Nippert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249503" start="4114" end="4133" title="John Morris Russell" label="John Morris Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q549617" start="4644" end="4669" title="Rafael Frühbeck de Burgos" label="Rafael Frühbeck de Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q189729" start="4718" end="4730" title="Philip Glass" label="Philip Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q155713" start="4776" end="4785" title="Lang Lang (pianist)" label="Lang Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q289468" start="5004" end="5019" title="Jennifer Higdon" label="Jennifer Higdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q454819" start="5065" end="5082" title="Branford Marsalis" label="Branford Marsalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q285936" start="5455" end="5468" title="Louis Langrée" label="Louis Langrée"/>
<link wikidata="Q55553684" start="6237" end="6254" title="Cristian Măcelaru" label="Cristian Măcelaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120283" start="6296" end="6312" title="Cincinnati Opera" label="Cincinnati Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q203470" start="6333" end="6345" title="Il Trovatore" label="Il Trovatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947729" start="7033" end="7040" title="WCET-TV" label="WCET-TV"/>
</links>
</doc>
