<doc id="424157" wikidata="Q6223220" url="?curid=424157" title="John Brisben Walker">
<text>John Brisben Walker (September 10, 1847 – July 7, 1931) was a magazine publisher and automobile entrepreneur in the United States. In his later years, he was a resident of Jefferson County, Colorado.

== Biography ==
Walker was born on September 10, 1847, at his parents&#x27; country house on the Monongahela River, near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. On that river his grandfather owned a shipyard reputed to be where the keel boat used by the Lewis and Clark expedition was built, although this is disputed. [National Park Service Lewis and Clark Historic Trail, “Who Really Built the Leis and Clark Keelboat, Parts I and II” (January 29, 2019), nps.gov]

After a brief stint as a Georgetown College student, Walker transferred to West Point in 1865. In 1866 he was court-martialed[&quot;General Court Martial, Orders No. 109, Headquarters of the Army, Adjutant General&#x27;s Office, April 20, 1866&quot;] for deserting his post as a sentinel in cadet barracks before being relieved, suspended for ten weeks and set back a semester. [&quot;The Improbable First Century of Cosmopolitan Magazine&quot; (James Landers, University of Missouri Press, 2010, at page 53.)]  In 1868 he was again court-martialed, this time for stretching a seven-day New Year&#x27;s leave to seventeen days. [Landers at pp. 53-54; &quot;General Court Martial, Orders No. 112, Headquarters of the Army, Adjutant General&#x27;s Office, March 2, 1868&quot;]&quot;.&quot;  After being convicted, he resigned from the Military Academy without graduating.

Shortly thereafter, a family connection helped him find a place accompanying the newly-named Envoy of the United States to China, which was then recovering from a devastating 14-year civil war triggered by a man who claimed to be the son of God and a brother of Jesus that ended in 1865.  [&quot;Autumn in the Heavenly Kingdom&quot; (Stephen R. Platt, Vintage Books, 2012)]. 

In China Walker found a use for his military training, but what precisely he did is opaque.  Depending on the source consulted, he either served as a General in the Imperial Army [&quot;John Brisben Walker: A Man of Ideas, (&quot;Edna Fiore, Morrison Historical Society)], ], or served in the Military Department of the Imperial Government and translated into Chinese a manual of military tactics [&quot;New York Journal,&quot; August 26, 1896, p.3, col. 5 (Library of Congress, Chronicling American, loc.gov)] or, as Walker told an interviewer years later, served as an officer in the Army advising local commanders on reorganization of infantry units(&quot;Landers&quot;, at  p.54).  Whatever he did in China, the experience left a strong impression on Walker, prompting him to say years later that if China ever modernized its military system “it will not be long before the Yellow Dragon will be the most formidable battle ensign on earth” [&quot;The Rocky Mountain News&quot; [Denver, CO]&quot;,&quot; September 12, 1894, p.12, col. 7 (coloradohistoricnewspapers.org)].

In 1870, Walker arrived in Charleston, West Virginia, founded a weekly newspaper called the &quot;Charleston Heral&quot;d, and hired David Hunter Strother to be its editor (&quot;Charleston Gazette-Mail&quot;, November 2, 1913). Strother had experience as a writer and illustrator for Harpers Monthly under the name Porter Crayon (&quot;America&#x27;s Successful Men of Affairs&quot;, at p. 694 [Henry Hall, editor, Tribune Press, 1895]). On April 17, 1871, in Martinsburg, Berkeley County, West Virginia, Walker married Strother&#x27;s daughter, Emily (&quot;West Virginia Marriage Index, 1785-1971&quot;). 

With local financial backing, Walker purchased land extending from the Elk river west to a line which ran from the Kanawha river near the end of the present Delaware Avenue to about the end of Fayette Street at West Washington Street, and extending from the Kanawha river to the present West Washington street. This he designated as the J.B. Walker addition to the City of Charleston, but it was commonly called the West End. Walker laid off this section into a town site, with streets running in one direction and avenues in another. He named the streets for West Virginia counties, and the avenues for other states. His original plans, with a few changes in names, but little other variation, are still the plans of that part of the city. He made his first fortune developing the property as a residential and industrial community, only to lose everything in the Panic of 1873 when variius railroads went bankrupt, causingf the failure of the banks that had financed them. (Walker obituaries: &quot;Charleston Daily Mail&quot;, July 8, 1931; &quot;Charleston Gazette&quot;, July 8, 1931. 

After his real estate venture collapsed, Walker was asked by the editor of the &quot;Cincinnati Commercial-Gazette&quot; to do a series of articles on the mineral and manufacturing industries of the West and their future prospects.  Walker travelled throughout the West to do the necessary research and the articles were well received by the reading public.  Walker was then offered and accepted the job of managing editor of &quot;The Pittsburgh Telegraph,&quot; which led to him being hired in 1876 as managing editor of the &quot;Washington Daily Chronicle,&quot; the leading daily in the nation&#x27;s capital.  He moved his growing family to the District of Columbia and remained there until 1879 (&quot;America&#x27;s Successful Men of Affairs,&quot; at p. 694 [Henry Hall, editor, Tribune Press, 1895]). when he was appointed by the United States Agriculture Department as a Commissioner tasked with determining agriculture possibilities in arid regions of the West. (obituary,&quot;Charleston Daily Mail,&quot; July 8, 1931). 

Walker moved his family to Colorado and based on what he had learned as Commissioner decided to try his hand at farming.  He purchased 1,600 acres in north Denver and used what he knew about irrigation to grow alfalfa as a cash crop (&quot;John Brisben Walker: A Man of Ideas&quot; [Edna Fiore, Morrison Historical Society, 2018 (https://morrisonhistory.org]).  This turned out to be a lucrative business and within ten years his Berkeley Farm was the largest alfalfa grower in Colorado, harvesting nearly 3,000 tons annually and containing nearly 200 miles of main and lateral irrigation ditches. &quot;(Charleston Daily Mail,&quot; July 8, 1931). With his farming profits, he again turned to real estate development. 

In 1880, Walker bought 550 lots in Denver near the Platte River and over the ensuing years developed an amusement park on this property.  In 1887 more than 20,000 people came to the opening of River Front Park. It featured a racetrack, medieval castle, baseball park, toboggan slide, an exhibition hall, and a grandstand with a capacity of 5,000 people in which Walker staged Denver&#x27;s first rodeo.  A showboat on the river put on performances every evening during the summer, but the Sunday shows were cancelled after the manager and company were arrested and fined for violating Sunday blue laws.  Walker also bought waterlogged tracts in the Platte River valley that he devised a means of reclaiming.  His investment is these tracts was said to be $100,000 and they were bought by railroads for a price reputed to be $1,000,000. (&quot;America&#x27;s Successful Men of Affairs,&quot; at p. 694. [Henry Hall, editor, Tribune Press, 1895]; &quot;Charleston Gazette,&quot; July 8, 1931).

In 1888, Walker returned to his journalistic pursuits.  He sold his Berkeley Farm to a group of investors and In 1889 used part of the proceeds to buy for $360,000 &quot;The Cosmopolitan&quot;, an insolvent monthly magazine with a circulation of 16,000 &quot;(Charleston Gazette,&quot; July 8, 1931).  To undertake direct management of the magazine he moved himself and his family back East, to Orange, New Jersey. 

Shortly after buying the magazine, Walker, on a ferry on his way to his office, read in &quot;The World&quot; that its star reporter Nelly Bly was about to embark on a round-the-world trip in an attempt to complete it in less time that the 80 days in had taken the hero of Jules Verne&#x27;s popular novel published 16 years earlier.  Six hours after Walker arrived at his office, his 28-year-old literary editor, Elizabeth Bisland, was on a train to San Francisco to begin a race around the world in the opposite direction of Bly.   The race between Bisland and Bly was covered by newspapers across the United States and a boon to the country&#x27;s gambling houses.  Both completed their journey in under 80 days. Bly won by four days, finishing in 72, but the race achieved the object of giving a boost to circulation of &quot;The Cosmopolitan.&quot; (Matthew Goodman, &quot;Elizabeth Bisland&#x27;s Race Around the World,&quot; publicdomain.com).

In 1893 Walker increased his wealth by selling River Front Park to the City of Denver, shortly before the Panic of 1893 that might have lost him his fortune for a second time.  [&quot;The magnificent John Brisben Walker, father of Denver&#x27;s Entertainment Industry, (&quot;Rosemary Fetter, &quot;Colorado Gambler&quot;, May 19, 2010) (coloradogambler.com)].

In 1894, Walker and his family moved to Irvington, New York, a village on the shores of the Hudson River about 15 miles north of Manhattan that then had many of the wealthiest people in the country as residents.  He promptly commissioned the construction of a new headquarters for his now thriving magazine. The three-story stone Neo-Classical revival building remains the largest building in Irvington. 

The following year he had &quot;Cosmopolitan&quot; sponsor the second automobile race ever held in the United States.  The magazine offered an aggregate of $3,000 in prizes to whomever first completed the 52-mile round trip from City Hall, Manhattan, to the Ardsley County Club on the shore of the Hudson River in Irvington, and back.   On May 30, 1895, then called Decoration Day, six cars started up Broadway behind riders on horseback who cleared the road of pedestrians and onlookers for them.  One rider was arrested mid-race for knocking a bicyclist off his bike.  Only three cars made it out of Manhattan and only two of them could make it up the hill by the Club under their own power; all had to be pushed by spectators.  The two did manage to finish the race back at City Hall.  (&quot;New York Times&quot;, May 1, 1910, p. 67; &quot;Auto Racing&quot;, Encyclopedia of Recreation and Leisure (2004)(Encyclopedia.com); &quot;Cutting Edge Technology in Hastings:  The Automobile&quot; [Hastings Historical Society, [Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.], August 31, 2009 ).

Walker became enamored with the possibilities of the automobile, particularly steam powered vehicles made by the Stanley Brothers, one of whose cars had set a new speed record of 27.4 miles per hour in November 1898. (&quot;The Stanley Brothers - Two Heads Are Better Than One&quot; [Jim Hinckley, Legends of America, Oct. 2012] http://www.legendsofamerica.com/jh-stanleybrothers.html)

In early summer 1899, Walker succeeded in buying the Stanley Brothers company and patents for $250,000.   He partnered with Alonzo Barber, a fellow Irvington resident who made his fortune making and selling asphalt used to pave roads around the country, including Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, D.C.  The partnership was very short-lived, dissolving on July 18, 1899. In the split-up, Barber got the factory in Watertown, MA, that the Stanley Brothers company had built, together with most of the steamers under production. He sold the cars as “Locomobiles”.  Walker wound up with the rights to produce steamers and a piece of undeveloped land in Tarrytown, New York, on which he built a factory to build steamers to be sold as “Mobiles”, but it wasn&#x27;t until March 1900 that the first Mobile was ready for sale. (Len Larson, &quot;Dreams to Automobiles, pp. 384-386&quot; [Xlibris Corporation, 2008]).

Walker, accompanied by his 8-year-old son Justin, displayed the hill climbing prowess of autos (presumably a Mobile, although the exact make was not reported) on September 8, 1900 by driving one up Pike&#x27;s Peak to a height of 11,000 feet, reported to be highest altitude ever reached by an auto. (&quot;New York Times&quot;, September 10, 1900, p.3.) In August the following year one of his cars, driven by others, did reach the top. However gasoline powered cars were being improved rapidly and Barber quickly recognized that the future belonged to them.   In 1901 he sold the Locomobile factory and patents back to the Stanley Brothers. (Hinckley).  Two year later Walker came to the same realization and shut down Mobile Company of America. It had produced only 600 Mobiles, as contrasted to 5,000 Locomobile. (Larsen) With some short interruptions, Walker&#x27;s Tarrytown site continued to be used to build autos until June 1996, when General Motors finally stopped production of cars there and closed the facility.  

In 1905, when circulation of &quot;Cosmopolitan&quot; had increased to about 400,000 copies a month, Walker sold it to William Randolph Hearst for a sum variously reported as $400,000 and $1,000,000.  Not long after the sale, what seems to be a press release appeared in identical form in several newspapers around the country (See, e.g, &quot;Anaconda&quot; &quot;Standard&quot; (Anaconda, MT) January 21, 1906, p.7, col. 3; &quot;Olympia Daily Recorder&quot; (Olympia, WA), January 20, 1906, p. 2.) under the caption “Why It Was Sold”.  In pertinent part, it read:

“…a sudden change in public favor from steam to the French gasoline car left the company with branch houses from Boston to San Francisco and losses exceeding $1,700,000.  Mr. Walker personally assumed the indebtedness of the Mobile Company of America, and not only paid it off in full, but returned to every shareholder the amount of his investment, with interest. This action required the sale of the Cosmopolitan Magazine, Kingsland Point, and some other properties.  Mr. Walker will hereafter devote his fullest energies to the building up of the Twentieth Century Magazine.” &quot;(Twentieth Century Home&quot; was a short-lived magazine that Walker started while he owned &quot;Cosmopolitan&quot;.) 

After selling Cosmopolitan Walker returned to Colorado in 1906.  He was accompanied by a woman named Ethel Richmond, whom he identified as his wife, who came with four children, ages four to ten, all of whom later in life regularly identified Walker as their father and used his name as their family name.    However he was still married to Emily Strother. They were not divorced until July 1, 1914. (&quot;Colorado, Divorce Index 1851-1985).&quot;

Some sources say Ethel Richmond was Walker&#x27;s secretary but she first may have been a nanny for Walker and Emily&#x27;s family.  This is suggested by the fact that in November 1890, when Walker and Emily were then living in the east, they and their 11-year-old son James Randolph Walker made a trip to Colorado Springs and Ethel, then about 23-years-old, accompanied them.  (&quot;Colorado Springs Gazette&quot;, November 1, 1890, p.5, col. 2 [coloradohistoricnewspapers.org]).

On his return to Colorado with Ethel, Walker concentrated his efforts on developing real estate he earlier had accumulated around Morrison, a town not far from Denver.  For the most part, he had bought undeveloped land or platted lots for speculation, eventually owning about 4,000 acres around Morrison, including both Mount Falcon and nearby Mount Morrison, which overlooks the town of Morrison and features a natural geologic amphitheater that today is known as the Red Rocks Amphitheatre. (Sally White, &quot;John Brisben Walker, the Man and Mt. Morrison,&quot; Historically Jeffco, Vol. 18, Issue 26, pp. 4-8 (2005)).

On the crest of Mount Falcon, Walker built a stone castle designed by Jacques Benedict for himself, Ethel and family.  On Mount Morrison, assisted by his eldest son, John Jr., he began developing Red Rocks with the dream of making it a world-famous music venue. Road and walking paths were built and a platform constructed high up in the Rocks.  On May 31, 1906, a concert by Pietro Satriano and a 25-piece brass band in the amphitheater marked the grand opening of what Walker named The Garden of the Titans.   (&quot;Riots, Rock Bans and Redemption:  the Lesser Known History of Red Rocks,&quot; Derek Etsler, Colorado Public Radio, May 13, 2014 [cpr.org]).

In 1909, after two years of construction, a one-mile funicular railroad to the top of Red Rocks, funded by Walker and a group of Morrison businessmen, opened as the Mount Morrison Incline Railroad, giving visitors a spectacular view of the Rocky Mountains and surrounding area. In that same year, John Jr. became Morrison&#x27;s third mayor. (White, at footnote 29). Concerts in Red Rocks were a regular occurrence from 1906 to 1911. After her concert there in 1911, acclaimed opera singer Mary Garden declared that no opera house in the world had better acoustics than Red Rocks.  However, although he had some early success in his desire to make Red Rocks a renowned venue, this did not become a reality until long after Walker had lost ownership of the site. 

In 1909, he bought the “Swiss Cabin” in Morrison and converted it into a gambling casino.  It had earlier been the Evergreen Hotel and from 1884 to 1888 the home of Sacred Heart College, a Jesuit institution. (White) Walker gave the Jesuits property in Denver as a new site for the College, which today is Regis University.

He championed the idea of creating on a ridge east of that castle a Summer White House for Presidents of the United States, and in 1911 a foundation was built and cornerstone laid, but because of American involvement in World War I and a decline in Walker&#x27;s fortunes the project never progressed past that point.  (Mark Harden, &quot;The failed dream of a Colorado summer White House,&quot; Denver Business Journal, July 7, 2014. [bizjournal.com])

In 1912, an idea that Walker espoused took a step toward fruition when the Denver City Council agreed to create a system of mountain parks near Morrison.  In 1913, Denver Mayor Robert Speer managed to have a tax levy of one mill imposed to fund creation of the mountain parks system. (&quot;Robert W Speer, a City Builder&quot;, p.71 [The Robert W. Speer Memorial Association, 1919]).

On January 1, 1913 yet another crusade of Walker&#x27;s came to a successful end when Congress ordered the United States Postal System to allow parcels weighing more than four pounds to be mailed at reasonable rates. Until then, mailing even a small package cost an exorbitant amount and forwarding of larger packages was the fiefdom of four private express companies.  For years, Walker&#x27;s pen had been a loud voice urging Congress to end their monopoly.  An ironic twist was that Wells Fargo was one of the favored express companies, and members of the family from whom Walker bought his Irvington property had headed that company for years. [&quot;The Aid Which the Post Office Department Might Render to Commerce,&quot; &quot;The Cosmopolitan&quot;, Vol. 36, No. 4, p. 379 (Feb. 1904); &quot;A Plea for a Parcels Post,&quot; The Literary Digest, Vol. 40, Part I, p. 334 (Feb. 19, 1910); &quot;The People v. The Express Companies&quot;, Pearson&#x27;s Magazine, Vol. 24, p. 56 (July 1910); &quot;100 Years of Parcel Post&quot;, USPS Office of Inspector General, White Paper Report No. RARC-WP-14-004, footnote 6 (Dec. 20, 2013)]

Walker had envisioned Morrison as becoming a booming tourism venue, but the advent of World War I dimmed that prospect.  Walker was an early peace activist, organizing a World Congress of 100 outstanding men in 1912 to try to mold public opinion against war. (&quot;Denver Post,&quot; December 29, 1912). After WW I began, he became an outspoken advocate for peace and opponent of the United States entering the War or providing assistance to combatants, serving as Chairman of the Friends of Peace, an organization supported by many German-American societies.  (&quot;New York Times&quot;, August 22, 1915, p.2, col. 6; &quot;Brooklyn Daily Eagle&quot;, September 4, 1915, p.14).  

In 1916, Ethel died and was buried by Walker at the foot of Mount Falcon (&quot;John Brisben Walker&#x27;s Castle in the Sky&quot;, August 20, 2009 [arewethereyet-davisfarmmom.blogspot.com]). In April 1918, a lightning strike started a fire that destroyed the mansion Walker had built atop Mount Falcon (&quot;Colorado Transcript&quot; [Golden, CO], April 25, 1918, p.3)  Six months later, on October 28, 1918, in a home he owned in Denver, Walker, then 71, married 25-year-old Iris Calderhead, a firebrand women&#x27;s suffragist (&quot;Denver Post&quot;, November 9, 1918, p.6, col. 1}.

Walker&#x27;s various Colorado real estate ventures were adversely affected by the War, and did not recover after it ended.   The enactment of the first Federal Income Tax in 1913 might also have hurt his fortunes. 

Between 1918 and 1925, a series of sales, mortgage foreclosures and tax sales of Walker&#x27;s real estate holdings took place, to the extent that by 1925 more than 1,500 acres of Red Rocks Park and the Mount Morrison area had been acquired by a third party, who also took over the Casino and 180 acres surrounding it.  Two years later, another 700 acres central to Red Rocks was sold to an affiliate of the earlier acquirer. (&quot;White).&quot;  This parcel was condemned by the City of Denver in 1928 and acquired by it for the sum of $54,133 (&quot;Etsler&quot;).

The sorry state of Walker&#x27;s finances was highlighted in 1926 when his attempt to inaugurate bus service between Denver and Mount Falcon was rebuffed by the State Public Service Commission on the grounds that he was “unable to prove he possessed financial ability to insure service” on the line (&quot;Denver Post,&quot; December 3, 1926, p.40, col. 7).

From 1924 to 1927 Walker spent time in Texas trying to promote building durable dirt roads by use of a machine he had invented for removing water from clay so it would not freeze in winter, a method he said was much less expensive than other methods (footnote in &quot;White&quot;).

On July 7, 1931, in a room in Brooklyn Heights, with Iris by his side, Walker died.  He died broke but still  with big dreams.  At the time of his death he was pushing the idea of converting the elevated subway lines in New York City into elevated roads for buses (&quot;New York Times,&quot; July 8, 1931, p.23, col.1).

Walker&#x27;s first wife, Emily, survived him by four years, dying in January 1935 (&quot;Colorado Transcript&quot; [Golden, CO], January 10, 1935).  His relationship with his purported second wife, Ethel Richmond, remains a question. The 1900 Federal Census lists Ethel living in Inwood, a section of northern Manhattan, with two children, her mother and father, three servants, and a husband named John Ruthven, whom according to that Census she had married in 1891.  The 1902 New York City Directory lists Ethel Ruthven as “widow of John A., home Inwood” but three years later the 1905 the New York State Census taken on June 1 has Ethel living in Inwood with Ruthven four children. The following year Ethel arrives in Colorado as Walker&#x27;s “wife”.  

In 1910, while Walker was still legally married to Emily, Ethel and her four children, now all designated as “Walkers”, were living in a house on Shore Road in Brooklyn, N.Y., with Walker&#x27;s father. Five years later, a New York State Census lists Walker, Ethel, and four children living in Stapleton, Staten Island, N.Y.

There is no question that Ethel Ruthven and Ethel Richmond, Walker&#x27;s “second wife”, are the same person.  Ethel Ruthven&#x27;s parents are identified in the &quot;1910 Federal Census&quot; (Inwood-on-Hudson, N.Y. City Ward 12, N.Y.) as Charles E. and Marion Lee. The death notice of John Ruthven Walker, who died in Denver in 1943, (&quot;Denver Post,&quot; September 15, 1943, p. 26) named Ethel&#x27;s three other children (Herbert Lee Walker, Ethel Walker, Nathalie W. Richmond) as his siblings, her mother as his grandmother, and her sister, Maude R. F. Valle, as his aunt. (Nathalie called herself Mrs. Richmond even though she had married a Russian immigrant named Georgi Dobrovolsky.  Sibling Ethel&#x27;s middle name was Richmond.)

In an interview given to a California newspaper after she celebrated her 100th birthday, Maude confirmed that after divorcing her husband she had moved to Denver “to be with her sister, who was married to the remarkable John Brisben Walker” who “had owned Cosmopolitan Magazine” (&quot;Marin Independent Journal&quot; [Marin Co. California]&quot;,&quot; December 3, 1968).

==See also==
*Freelan Oscar Stanley &amp; Francis Edgar Stanley
*Stanley Motor Carriage Company

==References==
==Images==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6223220" start="0" end="19" title="John Brisben Walker" label="John Brisben Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="62" end="70" title="magazine" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="85" end="95" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="116" end="129" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q127978" start="172" end="198" title="Jefferson County, Colorado" label="Jefferson County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q643780" start="298" end="315" title="Monongahela River" label="Monongahela River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="322" end="346" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500942" start="24767" end="24788" title="Freelan Oscar Stanley" label="Freelan Oscar Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480826" start="24795" end="24816" title="Francis Edgar Stanley" label="Francis Edgar Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q507456" start="24818" end="24848" title="Stanley Motor Carriage Company" label="Stanley Motor Carriage Company"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424158" wikidata="Q1517186" url="?curid=424158" title="History of Czechoslovakia">
<text>With the collapse of the Austria-Hungary at the end of World War I, the independent country of Czechoslovakia (Czech, Slovak: &quot;Československo&quot;) was formed as a result of the critical intervention of U.S. President Woodrow Wilson, among others.

The Czechs and Slovaks were not at the same level of economic and technological development, but the freedom and opportunity found in an independent Czechoslovakia enabled them to make strides toward overcoming these inequalities. However, the gap between cultures was never fully bridged, and this discrepancy played a disruptive role throughout the seventy-five years of the union.

== Political history ==

===Historical background to 1918===


Although the Czechs and Slovaks speak languages that are very similar, the political and social situation of the Czech and Slovak peoples was very different at the end of the 19th century. The reason was the differing attitude and position of their overlords – the Austrians in Bohemia and Moravia, and the Hungarians in Slovakia – within Austria-Hungary. Bohemia was the most industrialized part of Austria and Slovakia was the most industrialized part of Hungary – however at very different levels of development.

Around the start of the 20th century, the idea of a &quot;Czecho-Slovak&quot; entity began to be advocated by some Czech and Slovak leaders after contacts between Czech and Slovak intellectuals intensified in the 1890s. Despite cultural differences, the Slovaks shared similar aspirations with the Czechs for independence from the Habsburg state.

In 1917, during World War I, Tomáš Masaryk created the Czechoslovak National Council together with Edvard Beneš and Milan Štefánik (a Slovak astronomer and war hero). Masaryk in the United States (and in United Kingdom and Russia too), Štefánik in France, and Beneš in France and Britain, worked tirelessly to secure Allied recognition. About 1.4 million Czech soldiers fought in World War I, 150,000 of which died.

More than 90,000 Czech and Slovak volunteers formed the Czechoslovak Legions in Russia, France and Italy, where they fought against the Central Powers and later with White Russian forces against Bolshevik troops. At times they controlled much of the Trans-Siberian railway, and they were indirectly involved in the shooting of the Russian Tsar and his family in 1918. Their goal was to win the support of the Allies for the independence of Czechoslovakia. They succeeded on all counts. When secret talks between the Allies and Austrian emperor Charles I (r. 1916–1918) collapsed, the Allies recognized, in the summer of 1918, the Czechoslovak National Council would be the kernel of the future Czechoslovak government.

===The First Republic (1918–1938)===

Provisional Czechoslovak Government, chaired by Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk, proclaimed the Independence of Czechoslovak Nation in Washington Declaration on 18 October 1918. Czechoslovakia was legally created by &quot;Law on the Creation of Independent Czechoslovak State (No. 11/1918 Coll.)&quot; in Prague on 28 October 1918 in Smetana Hall of the Municipal House, a physical setting strongly associated with nationalist feeling. The Slovaks officially joined the state two days later in the town of Martin. A temporary constitution was adopted, and Tomáš Masaryk was declared president on 14 November. The Treaty of St. Germain, signed in September 1919, formally recognized the new republic. Carpathian Ruthenia was added later by the Treaty of Trianon in June 1920. There were also various border conflicts between Poland and Czechoslovakia due to the annexation of the Trans-Olza region.

The new state was characterized by problems with its ethnic diversity, the separate histories of the Czech and Slovak peoples and their greatly differing religious, cultural, and social traditions. The Germans and Hungarians of Czechoslovakia openly agitated against the territorial settlements. Nevertheless, the new republic saw the passage of a number of progressive reforms in areas such as housing, social security, and workers&#x27; rights.

In 1929, the gross domestic product increased by 52% and industrial production by 41% as compared to 1913. In 1938, Czechoslovakia held 10th place in the world for industrial production.

The Czechoslovak state was conceived as a representative democracy. The constitution identified the &quot;Czechoslovak nation&quot; as the creator and principal constituent of the Czechoslovak state and established Czech and Slovak as official languages. The concept of the Czechoslovak nation was necessary in order to justify the establishment of Czechoslovakia before the world, otherwise the statistical majority of the Czechs as compared to Germans would be rather weak.

The operation of the new Czechoslovak government was distinguished by its political stability. Largely responsible for this were the well-organized political parties that emerged as the real centers of power. After 1933, Czechoslovakia remained the only democracy in central and eastern Europe.

===The Second Republic (1938–1939)===

Although Czechoslovakia was the only central European country to remain a parliamentary democracy during the entire period 1918 to 1938, it faced problems with ethnic minorities such as Hungarians, Poles and Sudeten Germans, which made up the largest part of the country&#x27;s German minority. The Germans constituted 3 to 3.5 million out of 14 million of the interwar population of Czechoslovakia and were largely concentrated in the Bohemian and Moravian border regions known as the Sudetenland.

The rise of Adolf Hitler and Nazi Germany in 1933, the German annexation (Anschluss) of Austria in 1938, the resulting revival of revisionism in Hungary, the agitation for autonomy in Slovakia and the appeasement policy of the Western powers of France and the United Kingdom left Czechoslovakia without effective allies.

After the acquisition of Austria, Czechoslovakia became Hitler&#x27;s next target. The German nationalist minority in Czechoslovakia, led by Konrad Henlein and fervently backed by Hitler, demanded a union of the predominantly German districts of the country with Germany. On 17 September 1938 Hitler ordered the establishment of Sudetendeutsches Freikorps, a paramilitary organization that took over the structure of Ordnersgruppe, an organization of ethnic-Germans in Czechoslovakia that had been dissolved by the Czechoslovak authorities the previous day due to its implication in terrorist activities. The organization was sheltered, trained and equipped by German authorities and conducting cross border terrorist operations into Czechoslovak territory. Relying on the Convention for the Definition of Aggression, Czechoslovak president Edvard Beneš and the government-in-exile later regarded 17 September 1938 as the beginning of the undeclared German-Czechoslovak war. This understanding has been assumed also by the contemporary Czech Constitutional court.

Hitler extorted the cession of the Bohemian, Moravian and Czech Silesian borderlands via the Munich Agreement on 29 September 1938 signed by Germany, Italy, France, and Britain. The Czech population in the annexed lands was forcibly expelled.

Finding itself abandoned by the Western powers, the Czechoslovak government agreed to abide by the agreement. Beneš resigned as president on 5 October 1938, fled to London and was succeeded by Emil Hácha. In early November 1938, under the First Vienna Award, Czechoslovakia was forced to cede the mainly Hungarian-populated southern Slovakia (one third of Slovakia) to Hungary. After an ultimatum on 30 September (but without consulting with any other countries), Poland obtained the disputed the Trans-Olza region as a territorial cession shortly after the Munich Agreement, on 2 October. The ultimatum was only sent after Czech request.

The Czechs in the greatly weakened Czechoslovak Republic were forced to grant major concessions to the non-Czech residents in the country. The executive committee of the Slovak People&#x27;s Party met at Žilina on 5 October 1938, and with the acquiescence of all Slovak parties except the Social Democrats formed an autonomous Slovak government under Jozef Tiso. Similarly, the two major factions in Subcarpathian Ruthenia, the Russophiles and Ukrainophiles, agreed on the establishment of an autonomous government that was constituted on 8 October 1938. In late November 1938, the truncated state, renamed Czecho-Slovakia (the so-called Second Republic), was reconstituted in three autonomous units: the Czech lands (i.e. Bohemia and Moravia), Slovakia, and Ruthenia.

On 14 March 1939, the Slovak State declared its independence under Jozef Tiso. Hitler forced Hácha to surrender what remained of Bohemia and Moravia to German control on 15 March 1939, establishing the German Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia. On the same day, the Carpatho-Ukraine (Subcarpathian Ruthenia) declared its independence and was immediately occupied and annexed by Hungary. Finally, following the Slovak–Hungarian Little War, Slovakia ceded an eastern land strip to Hungary.

===Second World War===

Beneš and other Czechoslovak exiles in London organized a Czechoslovak Government-in-Exile and negotiated to obtain international recognition for the government and a renunciation of the Munich Agreement. The government was recognized by the government of the United Kingdom with the approval of Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax on 18 July 1940. In July and December 1941, the Soviet Union and United States also recognized the exiled government, respectively.

Czechoslovak military units fought alongside Allied forces. In December 1943, Beneš&#x27;s government concluded a treaty with the Soviet Union. Beneš worked to bring Czechoslovak communist exiles in Britain into active cooperation with his government, offering far-reaching concessions, including nationalization of heavy industry and the creation of local people&#x27;s committees at the war&#x27;s end (which indeed occurred). In March 1945, he gave key cabinet positions to Czechoslovak communist exiles in Moscow.

The assassination of &quot;Reichsprotector&quot; Reinhard Heydrich in 1942 by a group of British-trained Czech and Slovak commandos led by Jan Kubiš and Jozef Gabčík led to reprisals, including the annihilation of the village of Lidice. All adult male inhabitants were executed, while females and children were transported to concentration camps. A similar fate met the village of Ležáky and later, at the end of war, Javoříčko.

On 8 May 1944, Edvard Beneš signed an agreement with Soviet leaders stipulating that former Czechoslovak territory liberated by Soviet armies would be placed under Czechoslovak civilian control.
From 21 September 1944, Czechoslovakia was liberated by the Soviet troops of the Red Army and the Romanian Army, supported by Czech and Slovak resistance, from the east to the west; only southwestern Bohemia was liberated by other Allied troops (i.e., the United States Army) from the west. In May 1945, American forces liberated the city of Plzeň. A civilian uprising against the Nazi garrison took place in Prague in May 1945. The resistance was assisted by the heavily armed Russian Liberation Army, i.e., Gen. Vlasov&#x27;s army, a force composed of Soviet POWs organised by the Germans who now turned against them.

The main brutality suffered in the lands of the pre-war Czechoslovakia came as an immediate result of the German occupation in the Protectorate, the widespread persecution of Jews, and, after the Slovak National Uprising in August 1944, repression in Slovakia. In spite of the oppressiveness of the government of the German Protectorate, Czechoslovakia did not suffer the degree of population loss that was witnessed during World War II in countries such as Poland and the Soviet Union, and it avoided systematic destruction of its infrastructure. Bratislava was taken from the Germans on 4 April 1945, and Prague on 9 May 1945 by Soviet troops. Both Soviet and Allied troops were withdrawn in the same year.

A treaty ceding Transcarpathia to the Soviet Union was signed in June 1945 between Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union, following an apparently rigged Soviet-run referendum in the territory. The Potsdam Agreement provided for the expulsion of Sudeten Germans to Germany under the supervision of the Allied Control Council. Decisions regarding the Hungarian minority reverted to the Czechoslovak government. In February 1946, the Hungarian government agreed that Czechoslovakia could expatriate as many Hungarians as there were Slovaks in Hungary wishing to return to Czechoslovakia.

===The Third Republic (1945–1948) and the Communist takeover (1948)===


The Third Republic came into being in April 1945. Its government, installed at Košice on 4 April, then moved to Prague in May, was a National Front coalition in which three socialist parties—the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia (KSČ), the Czechoslovak Social democratic Party, and the Czechoslovak National Socialist Party—predominated. Certain non-socialist parties were included in the coalition, among them the Catholic People&#x27;s Party (in Moravia) and the Democratic Party of Slovakia.

Following Nazi Germany&#x27;s surrender, some 2.9 million ethnic Germans were expelled from Czechoslovakia with Allied approval, their property and rights declared void by the Beneš decrees.

Czechoslovakia soon came to fall within the Soviet sphere of influence. The popular enthusiasm evoked by the Soviet armies of liberation (which was decided by compromise of Allies and Joseph Stalin at the Yalta conference in 1944) benefited the KSČ. Czechoslovaks, bitterly disappointed by the West at the Munich Agreement (1938), responded favorably to both the KSČ and the Soviet alliance. Reunited into one state after the war, the Czechs and Slovaks set national elections for the spring of 1946.

The democratic elements, led by President Edvard Beneš, hoped the Soviet Union would allow Czechoslovakia the freedom to choose its own form of government and aspired to a Czechoslovakia that would act as a bridge between East and West. Communists secured strong representation in the popularly elected National Committees, the new organs of local administration. In the May 1946 election, the KSČ won most of the popular vote in the Czech part of the bi-ethnic country (40.17%), and the more or less anti-Communist Democratic Party won in Slovakia (62%).

In sum, however, the KSČ only won a plurality of 38 percent of the vote at countrywide level. Edvard Beneš continued as president of the republic, whereas the Communist leader Klement Gottwald became prime minister. Most importantly, although the communists held only a minority of portfolios, they were able to gain control over most of the key ministries (Ministry of the Interior, etc.)

Although the communist-led government initially intended to participate in the Marshall Plan, it was forced by the Kremlin to back out. In 1947, Stalin summoned Gottwald to Moscow; upon his return to Prague, the KSČ demonstrated a significant radicalization of its tactics. On 20 February 1948, the twelve non-communist ministers resigned, in part to induce Beneš to call for early elections; however Beneš refused to accept the cabinet resignations and did not call elections. In the meantime, the KSČ marshalled its forces for the Czechoslovak coup d&#x27;état of 1948. The communist-controlled Ministry of the Interior deployed police regiments to sensitive areas and equipped a workers&#x27; militia. On 25 February Beneš, perhaps fearing Soviet intervention, capitulated. He accepted the resignations of the dissident ministers and received a new cabinet list from Gottwald, thus completing the communist takeover under the cover of superficial legality.

On 10 March 1948, the moderate foreign minister of the government, Jan Masaryk, was found dead in suspicious circumstances that have still not been definitively proved to constitute either suicide or political assassination.

===The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic (1948–1989)===
In February 1948, the Communists took power in the 1948 Czechoslovak coup d&#x27;état, and Edvard Beneš inaugurated a new cabinet led by Klement Gottwald.
Czechoslovakia was declared a &quot;people&#x27;s democracy&quot; (until 1960) – a preliminary step towards socialism and, ultimately, communism. Bureaucratic centralism under the direction of KSČ leadership was introduced. Dissident elements were purged from all levels of society, including the Roman Catholic Church. The ideological principles of Marxism-Leninism and socialist realism pervaded cultural and intellectual life.

The economy was committed to comprehensive central planning and the abolition of private ownership of capital. Czechoslovakia became a satellite state of the Soviet Union; it was a founding member of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (Comecon) in 1949 and of the Warsaw Pact in 1955. The attainment of Soviet-style command socialism became the government&#x27;s avowed policy.

Slovak autonomy was constrained; the Communist Party of Slovakia (KSS) was reunited with the KSČ (Communist Party of Czechoslovakia), but retained its own identity. Following the Soviet example, Czechoslovakia began emphasizing the rapid development of heavy industry. Although Czechoslovakia&#x27;s industrial growth of 170 percent between 1948 and 1957 was impressive, it was far exceeded by that of Japan (300 percent) and the Federal Republic of Germany (almost 300 percent) and more than equaled by Austria and Greece.

Beneš refused to sign the Communist Constitution of 1948 (the Ninth-of-May Constitution) and resigned from the presidency; he was succeeded by Klement Gottwald. Gottwald died in March 1953. He was succeeded by Antonín Zápotocký as president and by Antonín Novotný as head of the KSČ.

In June 1953, thousands of workers in Plzeň went on strike to demonstrate against a currency reform that was considered a move to solidify Soviet socialism in Czechoslovakia. The demonstrations ended without significant bloodshed, disappointing American Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles, who wished for a pretext to help the Czechoslovak people resist the Soviets. For more than a decade thereafter, the Czechoslovak communist political structure was characterized by the orthodoxy of the leadership of party chief Antonín Novotný, who became president in 1957 when Zápotocký died.

In the 1950s, the Stalinists accused their opponents of &quot;conspiracy against the people&#x27;s democratic order&quot; and &quot;high treason&quot; in order to oust them from positions of power. In all, the Communist Party tried 14 of its former leaders in November 1952 and sentenced 11 to death. Large-scale arrests of Communists and socialists with an &quot;international&quot; background, i.e., those with a wartime connection with the West, veterans of the Spanish Civil War, Jews, and Slovak &quot;bourgeois nationalists,&quot; were followed by show trials. The outcome of these trials, serving the communist propaganda, was often known in advance and the penalties were extremely heavy, such as in the case of Milada Horáková, who was sentenced to death together with Jan Buchal, Záviš Kalandra and Oldřich Pecl.

The 1960 Constitution declared the victory of socialism and proclaimed the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic (CSSR).

De-Stalinization had a late start in Czechoslovakia. In the early 1960s, the Czechoslovak economy became severely stagnant. The industrial growth rate was the lowest in Eastern Europe. As a result, in 1965, the party approved the New Economic Model, introducing free market elements into the economy. The KSČ &quot;Theses&quot; of December 1965 presented the party response to the call for political reform. Democratic centralism was redefined, placing a stronger emphasis on democracy. The leading role of the KSČ was reaffirmed, but limited. Slovaks pressed for federalization. On 5 January 1968, the KSČ Central Committee elected Alexander Dubček, a Slovak reformer, to replace Novotný as first secretary of the KSČ. On 22 March 1968, Novotný resigned from the presidency and was succeeded by General Ludvík Svoboda.

====The Prague Spring (1968)====
Dubček carried the reform movement a step further in the direction of liberalism. After Novotný&#x27;s fall, censorship was lifted. The press, radio, and television were mobilized for reformist propaganda purposes. The movement to democratize socialism in Czechoslovakia, formerly confined largely to the party intelligentsia, acquired a new, popular dynamism in the spring of 1968 (the &quot;Prague Spring&quot;). Radical elements found expression; anti-Soviet polemics appeared in the press; the Social Democrats began to form a separate party; and new unaffiliated political clubs were created.

Party conservatives urged the implementation of repressive measures, but Dubček counseled moderation and re-emphasized KSČ leadership. In addition, the Dubček leadership called for politico-military changes in the Soviet-dominated Warsaw Pact and Council for Mutual Economic Assistance. The leadership affirmed its loyalty to socialism and the Warsaw Pact, but also expressed the desire to improve relations with all countries of the world, regardless of their social systems.

A program adopted in April 1968 set guidelines for a modern, humanistic socialist democracy that would guarantee, among other things, freedom of religion, press, assembly, speech, and travel, a program that, in Dubček&#x27;s words, would give socialism &quot;a human face.&quot; After 20 years of little public participation, the population gradually started to take interest in the government, and Dubček became a truly popular national figure.

The internal reforms and foreign policy statements of the Dubček leadership created great concern among some other Warsaw Pact governments. As a result, the troops of the Warsaw Pact countries (except for Romania) mounted a Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia during the night of 20–21 August 1968. Two-thirds of the KSČ Central Committee opposed the Soviet intervention. Popular opposition was expressed in numerous spontaneous acts of non-violent resistance. In Prague and other cities throughout the republic, Czechs and Slovaks greeted Warsaw Pact soldiers with arguments and reproaches.

The Czechoslovak Government declared that the Warsaw Pact troops had not been invited into the country and that their invasion was a violation of socialist principles, international law, and the UN Charter. Dubček, who had been arrested on the night of 20 August, was taken to Moscow for negotiations. The outcome was the Brezhnev Doctrine of limited sovereignty, which provided for the strengthening of the KSČ, strict party control of the media, and the suppression of the Czechoslovak Social Democratic Party.

The principal Czechoslovak reformers were forcibly and secretly taken to the Soviet Union, where they signed a treaty that provided for the &quot;temporary stationing&quot; of an unspecified number of Soviet troops in Czechoslovakia. Dubček was removed as party First Secretary on 17 April 1969, and replaced by another Slovak, Gustáv Husák. Later, Dubček and many of his allies within the party were stripped of their party positions in a purge that lasted until 1971 and reduced party membership by almost one-third.

On 19 January 1969, the student Jan Palach set himself on fire in Prague&#x27;s Wenceslas Square to protest the invasion of Czechoslovakia by the Soviet Union. His death shocked many observers throughout the world.

====Aftermath====

The Slovak part of Czechoslovakia made major gains in industrial production in the 1960s and 1970s. By the 1970s, its industrial production was near parity with that of the Czech lands. Slovakia&#x27;s portion of per capita national income rose from slightly more than 60 percent of that of Bohemia and Moravia in 1948 to nearly 80 percent in 1968, and Slovak per capita earning power equaled that of the Czechs in 1971. The pace of Slovak economic growth has continued to exceed that of Czech growth to the present day (2003).

Dubcek remained in office only until April 1969. Gustáv Husák (a centrist, and one of the Slovak &quot;bourgeois nationalists&quot; imprisoned by his own KSČ in the 1950s) was named first secretary (title changed to general secretary in 1971). A program of &quot;Normalization&quot; – the restoration of continuity with the prereform period—was initiated. Normalization entailed thoroughgoing political repression and the return to ideological conformity. A new purge cleansed the Czechoslovak leadership of all reformist elements.

Anti-Soviet demonstrations in August 1969 ushered in a period of harsh repression. The 1970s and 1980s became known as the period of &quot;normalization,&quot; in which the apologists for the 1968 Soviet invasion prevented, as best they could, any opposition to their conservative regime. Political, social, and economic life stagnated. The population, cowed by the &quot;normalization,&quot; was quiet. The only point required during the Prague Spring that was achieved was the federalization of the country (as of 1969), which however was more or less only formal under the normalization. The newly created Federal Assembly (i.e., federal parliament), which replaced the National Assembly, was to work in close cooperation with the Czech National Council and the Slovak National Council (i.e., national parliaments).

In 1975, Gustáv Husák added the position of president to his post as party chief. The Husák regime required conformity and obedience in all aspects of life. Husák also tried to obtain acquiescence to his rule by providing an improved standard of living. He returned Czechoslovakia to an orthodox command economy with a heavy emphasis on central planning and continued to extend industrialization.

For a while the policy seemed successful; the 1980s, however, were more or less a period of economic stagnation. Another feature of Husák&#x27;s rule was a continued dependence on the Soviet Union. In the 1980s, approximately 50 percent of Czechoslovakia&#x27;s foreign trade was with the Soviet Union, and almost 80 percent was with communist countries.
Through the 1970s and 1980s, the regime was challenged by individuals and organized groups aspiring to independent thinking and activity. The first organized opposition emerged under the umbrella of Charter 77. On 6 January 1977, a manifesto called Charter 77 appeared in West German newspapers. The original manifesto reportedly was signed by 243 persons; among them were artists, former public officials, and other prominent figures.

The Charter had over 800 signatures by the end of 1977, including workers and youth. It criticized the government for failing to implement human rights provisions of documents it had signed, including the state&#x27;s own constitution; international covenants on political, civil, economic, social, and cultural rights; and the Final Act of the Conference for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Although not organized in any real sense, the signatories of Charter 77 constituted a citizens&#x27; initiative aimed at inducing the Czechoslovak Government to observe formal obligations to respect the human rights of its citizens.

Signatories were arrested and interrogated; dismissal from employment often followed. Because religion offered possibilities for thought and activities independent of the state, it too was severely restricted and controlled. Clergymen were required to be licensed. Unlike in Poland, dissent and independent activity were limited in Czechoslovakia to a fairly small segment of the population. Many Czechs and Slovaks emigrated to the West.

====The final years of the Communist era====
Although, in March 1987, Husák nominally committed Czechoslovakia to follow the program of Mikhail Gorbachev&#x27;s perestroika, it did not happen much in reality. On 17 December 1987, Husák, who was one month away from his seventy-fifth birthday, had resigned as head of the KSČ. He retained, however, his post of president of Czechoslovakia and his full membership on the Presidium of the KSČ. Miloš Jakeš, who replaced Husák as first secretary of the KSČ, did not change anything. The slow pace of the Czechoslovak reform movement was an irritant to the Soviet leadership.

The first anti-Communist demonstration took place on 25 March 1988 in Bratislava (the Candle demonstration in Bratislava). It was an unauthorized peaceful gathering of some 2,000 (other sources 10,000) Roman Catholics. Demonstrations also occurred on 21 August 1988 (the anniversary of the Soviet intervention in 1968) in Prague, on 28 October 1988 (establishment of Czechoslovakia in 1918) in Prague, Bratislava and some other towns, in January 1989 (death of Jan Palach on 16 January 1969), on 21 August 1989 (see above) and on 28 October 1989 (see above).

====Velvet Revolution (1989)====


The anti-Communist revolution started on 16 November 1989 in Bratislava, with a demonstration of Slovak university students for democracy, and continued with the well-known similar demonstration of Czech students in Prague on 17 November.

On 17 November 1989, the communist police violently broke up a peaceful pro-democracy demonstration, brutally beating many student participants. In the following days, Charter 77 and other groups united to become the Civic Forum, an umbrella group championing bureaucratic reform and civil liberties. Its leader was the dissident playwright Václav Havel. Intentionally eschewing the label &quot;party&quot;, a word given a negative connotation during the previous regime, Civic Forum quickly gained the support of millions of Czechs, as did its Slovak counterpart, Public Against Violence.

Faced with an overwhelming popular repudiation, the Communist Party all but collapsed. Its leaders, Husák and party chief Miloš Jakeš, resigned in December 1989, and Havel was elected President of Czechoslovakia on 29 December. The astonishing quickness of these events was in part due to the unpopularity of the communist regime and changes in the policies of its Soviet guarantor as well as to the rapid, effective organization of these public initiatives into a viable opposition.

=== Democratic Czechoslovakia (1989–1992) ===
A coalition government, in which the Communist Party had a minority of ministerial positions, was formed in December 1989. The first free elections in Czechoslovakia since 1946 took place in June 1990 without incident and with more than 95% of the population voting. As anticipated, Civic Forum and Public Against Violence won landslide victories in their respective republics and gained a comfortable majority in the federal parliament. The parliament undertook substantial steps toward securing the democratic evolution of Czechoslovakia. It successfully moved toward fair local elections in November 1990, ensuring fundamental change at the county and town level.

Civic Forum found, however, that although it had successfully completed its primary objective—the overthrow of the communist regime—it was ineffectual as a governing party. The demise of Civic Forum was viewed by most as necessary and inevitable.

By the end of 1990, unofficial parliamentary &quot;clubs&quot; had evolved with distinct political agendas. Most influential was the Civic Democratic Party, headed by Václav Klaus. Other notable parties that came into being after the split were the Czech Social Democratic Party, Civic Movement, and Civic Democratic Alliance.

=== Dissolution of Czechoslovakia ===
By 1992, Slovak calls for greater autonomy effectively blocked the daily functioning of the federal government. In the election of June 1992, Klaus&#x27;s Civic Democratic Party won handily in the Czech lands on a platform of economic reform. Vladimír Mečiar&#x27;s Movement for a Democratic Slovakia emerged as the leading party in Slovakia, basing its appeal on fairness to Slovak demands for autonomy. Federalists, like Havel, were unable to contain the trend toward the split. In July 1992, President Havel resigned. In the latter half of 1992, Klaus and Mečiar hammered out an agreement that the two republics would go their separate ways by the end of the year.

Members of Czechoslovakia&#x27;s parliament (the Federal Assembly), divided along national lines, barely cooperated enough to pass the law officially separating the two nations in late 1992. On 1 January 1993, the Czech Republic and Slovakia were simultaneously and peacefully established as independent states.

Relationships between the two states, despite occasional disputes about the division of federal property and the governing of the border, have been peaceful. Both states attained immediate recognition from the US and their European neighbors.

==Economic history==

At the time of the communist takeover, Czechoslovakia was devastated by WWII. Almost 1 million people, out of a prewar population of 15 million, had been killed. An additional 3 million Germans were expelled in 1946. In 1948, the government began to stress heavy industry over agricultural and consumer goods and services. Many basic industries and foreign trade, as well as domestic wholesale trade, had been nationalized before the communists took power. Nationalization of most of the retail trade was completed in 1950–1951.

Heavy industry received major economic support during the 1950s. Although the labor force was traditionally skilled and efficient, inadequate incentives for labor and management contributed to high labor turnover, low productivity, and poor product quality. Economic failures reached a critical stage in the 1960s, after which various reform measures were sought with no satisfactory results.

Hope for wide-ranging economic reform came with Alexander Dubcek&#x27;s rise in January 1968. Despite renewed efforts, however, Czechoslovakia could not come to grips with inflationary forces, much less begin the immense task of correcting the economy&#x27;s basic problems. 

The economy saw growth during the 1970s but then stagnated between 1978 and 1982. Attempts at revitalizing it in the 1980s with management and worker incentive programs were largely unsuccessful. The economy grew after 1982, achieving an annual average output growth of more than 3% between 1983 and 1985. Imports from the West were curtailed, exports boosted, and hard currency debt reduced substantially. New investment was made in the electronic, chemical, and pharmaceutical sectors, which were industry leaders in eastern Europe in the mid-1980s.

==See also==
* History of the Czech lands

==References==
==Further reading==
===Surveys===
* Bruegel, J. W. &quot;Czechoslovakia before Munich&quot; (1973). 
* Cabada, Ladislav, and Sarka Waisova, &quot;Czechoslovakia and the Czech Republic in World Politics&quot; (Lexington Books; 2012), foreign policy 1918 to 2010
* Felak, James Ramon. &quot;At the price of the Republic: Hlinka&#x27;s Slovak People&#x27;s Party, 1929–1938&quot; (U of Pittsburgh Press, 1995).
* Korbel, Josef. &quot;Twentieth Century Czechoslovakia: The Meaning of its History&quot; (1977)
* Mamatey, V. S., and R. Luža, eds. &quot;A History of the Czechoslovak Republic 1918-48&quot; (1973)
* Skilling, H. ed. &quot;Czechoslovakia, 1918-88. Seventy Years from Independence&quot; (1991) 
* Lukes, Igor. &#x27;Czechoslovakia between Stalin and Hitler&#x27;, Oxford University Press 1996, 
* Olivová, V. &quot;The Doomed Democracy: Czechoslovakia in a Disrupted Europe 1914-38&quot; (1972)
* Orzoff, Andrea. &quot;Battle for the Castle: The Myth of Czechoslovakia in Europe 1914-1948&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2009); online review
* Preclík, Vratislav. &quot;Masaryk a legie [Masaryk and legions]&quot;, published by Paris Karviná in association with Masaryk Democratic Movement, Prague. 2019, , pp. 17–25, 33–45, 70–96, 100–140, 159–184, 187–199
* Steiner, Eugen. &quot;The Slovak Dilemma&quot; (1973)
* Thomson, S. Harrison. &quot;Czechoslovakia in European history&quot; (Routledge, 2019).

===Pre 1918===
* Vyšný, Paul. &quot;Neo-Slavism and the Czechs 1898-1914&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 1977).

===1939–1989===
* Bryant, Chad. &#x27;Prague in Black: Nazi Rule and Czech Nationalism&#x27;, Harvard University Press 2007, 
* Douglas, R. M.: Orderly and Humane. The Expulsion of the Germans after the Second World War. Yale University Press, 2012. .
* Wolchik, Sharon L. &quot;Czechoslovakia in transition: politics, economics and society&quot; (Burns &amp; Oates, 1991).

===After 1989===
* Ash, Timothy Garton. &quot;We the People&quot; by Granta Books, 1990 ,
* Echikson, William. &quot;Lighting the Night: Revolution in Eastern Europe&quot; Pan Books, 1990 
* Simpson, John. &quot;Despatches from the Barricades&quot; Hutchinson, 1990 
* Heimann, Mary. &quot;Czechoslovakia: The State That Failed&quot; 2009 
* Skilling Gordon. &#x27;Czechoslovakia&#x27;s Interrupted Revolution&#x27;, Princeton University Press 1976, 
* Tauchen, Jaromír – Schelle, Karel etc. &quot;The Process of Democratization of Law in the Czech Republic (1989–2009).&quot; Rincon (USA), The American Institute for Central European Legal Studies 2009. 204 pp. ()

===Economic, social and cultural studies===
* Abrams, Bradley F. &quot;The struggle for the soul of the nation: Czech culture and the rise of communism&quot; (Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2004).
* Agnew, Hugh LeCaine. &quot;Origins of the Czech National Renascence&quot; (University of Pittsburgh Press, 1994).
* Beck, Dennis C. &quot;Setting the Stage for Revolution: The Efficacy of Czech Theatre, 1975–1989.&quot; &quot;Theatre Survey&quot; 44.2 (2003): 199–219.
* Beck, Dennis C. &quot;Dissident patriotism: subverting the State by excavating the nation in &quot;normalized&quot; Czechoslovakia.&quot; &quot;Toronto Slavic Quarterly&quot; 9: 200+ online.
* Cohen, Gary B. &quot;Cultural crossings in Prague, 1900: scenes from late Imperial Austria.&quot; &quot;Austrian History Yearbook&quot; 45 (2014): 1-30.
* Filipova, Marta. &quot;The construction of national identity in the historiography of Czech art.&quot; (PhD diss., University of Glasgow, 2009).
* Katz, Derek. &quot;Janáček beyond the Borders&quot; (U of Rochester Press, 2009).
* Kohák, Erazim. &quot;Hearth and Horizon: Cultural Identity and Global Humanity in Czech Philosophy&quot; (Filosofia 2008, )
* McFadden, Becka. &quot;Theft, Contestation and Affirmation in Contemporary Czech Theatre: Krepsko&#x27;s Ukradené ovace (The Stolen Ovation).&quot; &quot;Performance Research&quot; 19.2 (2014): 126–134.
* McShane, Roger Burnham, and Stanley Buchholz Kimball. &quot;Czech nationalism: a study of the national theatre movement, 1845-83&quot; (U of Illinois Press, 1964).
* Nolte, Claire. &quot;The Sokol in the Czech Lands to 1914: training for the nation&quot; (Springer, 2002).
* Paces, Cynthia Jean. &quot;Religious images and national symbols in the creation of Czech identity, 1890-1938&quot; (PhD thesis . Columbia University, 1998).
* Seton-Watson, Robert William. &quot;Racial problems in Hungary&quot; (1908) full text online
* Teichová, Alice. &quot;The Czechoslovak Economy 1918-1980&quot; (1988) 
* Wingfield, Nancy M. &quot;Flag Wars &amp; Stone Saints: How the Bohemian Lands Became Czech&quot; (2007), 353pp.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="55" end="66" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q140359" start="95" end="109" title="First Czechoslovak Republic" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="111" end="116" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="118" end="124" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="224" end="238" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="259" end="265" title="Czechs" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="270" end="277" title="Slovaks" label="Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="981" end="988" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="993" end="1000" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1042" end="1057" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="1115" end="1123" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q78492" start="1597" end="1610" title="Tomáš Masaryk" label="Tomáš Masaryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564079" start="1623" end="1652" title="Czechoslovak National Council" label="Czechoslovak National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q152274" start="1667" end="1679" title="Edvard Beneš" label="Edvard Beneš"/>
<link wikidata="Q319962" start="1684" end="1698" title="Milan Rastislav Štefánik" label="Milan Štefánik"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1750" end="1763" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1816" end="1822" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1848" end="1855" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q605324" start="2041" end="2061" title="Czechoslovak Legions" label="Czechoslovak Legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="2121" end="2135" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="2151" end="2171" title="White movement" label="White Russian forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="2180" end="2189" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="2235" end="2257" title="Trans-Siberian railway" label="Trans-Siberian railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356047" start="2300" end="2343" title="Shooting of the Romanov family" label="shooting of the Russian Tsar and his family"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="2394" end="2400" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q51068" start="2529" end="2538" title="Charles I of Austria" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2743" end="2778" title="Czechoslovak National Council#Upgrade to Provisional Government" label="Provisional Czechoslovak Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q78492" start="2791" end="2813" title="Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk" label="Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508048" start="2869" end="2891" title="Czechoslovak declaration of independence" label="Washington Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="3039" end="3045" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q48173" start="3068" end="3075" title="Smetana" label="Smetana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334312" start="3088" end="3103" title="Municipal House" label="Municipal House"/>
<link wikidata="Q27001" start="3240" end="3246" title="Martin, Slovakia" label="Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192924" start="3347" end="3368" title="Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1919)" label="Treaty of St. Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148511" start="3434" end="3453" title="Carpathian Ruthenia" label="Carpathian Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="3477" end="3494" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="Treaty of Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684359" start="3533" end="3583" title="border conflicts between Poland and Czechoslovakia" label="border conflicts between Poland and Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811448" start="3613" end="3623" title="Trans-Olza" label="Trans-Olza"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="4311" end="4335" title="representative democracy" label="representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="5000" end="5009" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="5013" end="5020" title="Central Europe" label="central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="5025" end="5039" title="eastern Europe" label="eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q663389" start="5289" end="5304" title="Sudeten Germans" label="Sudeten Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q17122804" start="5359" end="5374" title="Germans in Czechoslovakia (1918–1938)" label="German minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="5567" end="5578" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="5593" end="5605" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="5610" end="5622" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="5655" end="5664" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="5669" end="5676" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="5726" end="5733" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q620737" start="5782" end="5793" title="appeasement" label="appeasement"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5826" end="5832" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="5841" end="5855" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q57462" start="6044" end="6058" title="Konrad Henlein" label="Konrad Henlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q329530" start="6232" end="6258" title="Sudetendeutsches Freikorps" label="Sudetendeutsches Freikorps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6676" end="6719" title="War of aggression#The Convention for the Definition of Aggression" label="Convention for the Definition of Aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q152274" start="6744" end="6756" title="Edvard Beneš" label="Edvard Beneš"/>
<link wikidata="Q430161" start="6765" end="6784" title="Czechoslovak government-in-exile" label="government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128501" start="6939" end="6965" title="Constitutional Court of the Czech Republic" label="Czech Constitutional court"/>
<link wikidata="Q45551" start="7026" end="7039" title="Czech Silesia" label="Czech Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="7061" end="7077" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q156502" start="7405" end="7415" title="Emil Hácha" label="Emil Hácha"/>
<link wikidata="Q126604" start="7451" end="7469" title="First Vienna Award" label="First Vienna Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q188689" start="7599" end="7608" title="ultimatum" label="ultimatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q693985" start="8022" end="8048" title="Slovak People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Slovak People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q25797" start="8056" end="8062" title="Žilina" label="Žilina"/>
<link wikidata="Q154346" start="8203" end="8213" title="Jozef Tiso" label="Jozef Tiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7215510" start="8280" end="8291" title="Ukrainian Russophiles" label="Russophiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010024" start="8490" end="8505" title="Second Czechoslovak Republic" label="Second Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="8644" end="8656" title="Slovak State" label="Slovak State"/>
<link wikidata="Q152750" start="8831" end="8866" title="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia" label="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q950644" start="8889" end="8905" title="Carpatho-Ukraine" label="Carpatho-Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148511" start="8907" end="8929" title="Subcarpathian Ruthenia" label="Subcarpathian Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177109" start="9033" end="9060" title="Slovak–Hungarian War" label="Slovak–Hungarian Little War"/>
<link wikidata="Q430161" start="9194" end="9226" title="Czechoslovak Government-in-Exile" label="Czechoslovak Government-in-Exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="9323" end="9339" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="9396" end="9410" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q333426" start="9450" end="9462" title="Edward Wood, 1st Earl of Halifax" label="Lord Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="9511" end="9523" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="9528" end="9541" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="9893" end="9908" title="nationalization" label="nationalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="10164" end="10181" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="10237" end="10246" title="commandos" label="commandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q116589" start="10254" end="10263" title="Jan Kubiš (Operation Anthropoid)" label="Jan Kubiš"/>
<link wikidata="Q432927" start="10268" end="10280" title="Jozef Gabčík" label="Jozef Gabčík"/>
<link wikidata="Q154888" start="10344" end="10350" title="Lidice" label="Lidice"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="10441" end="10459" title="concentration camp" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q647287" start="10496" end="10502" title="Ležáky" label="Ležáky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665928" start="10533" end="10542" title="Luká" label="Javoříčko"/>
<link wikidata="Q152274" start="10560" end="10572" title="Edvard Beneš" label="Edvard Beneš"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="10821" end="10829" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="10996" end="11014" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q43453" start="11082" end="11087" title="Plzeň" label="Plzeň"/>
<link wikidata="Q164587" start="11218" end="11241" title="Russian Liberation Army" label="Russian Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="11301" end="11304" title="POW" label="POW"/>
<link wikidata="Q163780" start="11557" end="11581" title="Slovak National Uprising" label="Slovak National Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="11909" end="11919" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q15908455" start="12073" end="12079" title="Soviet annexation of Transcarpathia" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q277476" start="12266" end="12283" title="Potsdam Agreement" label="Potsdam Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q542945" start="12301" end="12329" title="expulsion of Sudeten Germans" label="expulsion of Sudeten Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="12807" end="12813" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202921" start="12861" end="12875" title="National Front (Czechoslovakia)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="12923" end="12956" title="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia" label="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q341111" start="13014" end="13051" title="Czechoslovak National Socialist Party" label="Czechoslovak National Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q12764483" start="13193" end="13209" title="Democratic Party (Slovakia, 1944)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="13282" end="13310" title="Expulsion of Germans after World War II" label="ethnic Germans were expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q165559" start="13400" end="13413" title="Beneš decrees" label="Beneš decrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="13416" end="13430" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="13600" end="13613" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="13621" end="13637" title="Yalta conference" label="Yalta conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="13661" end="13664" title="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia" label="KSČ"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="13722" end="13738" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q14567930" start="14221" end="14239" title="National Committee" label="National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q296054" start="14651" end="14667" title="Klement Gottwald" label="Klement Gottwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="14945" end="14958" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="14981" end="14988" title="Kremlin" label="Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137957" start="15399" end="15436" title="Czechoslovak coup d&amp;#x27;état of 1948" label="Czechoslovak coup d&amp;#x27;état of 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q315531" start="15894" end="15905" title="Jan Masaryk" label="Jan Masaryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q296054" start="16244" end="16260" title="Klement Gottwald" label="Klement Gottwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q465613" start="16298" end="16321" title="People&amp;#x27;s republic" label="people&amp;#x27;s democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190632" start="16421" end="16431" title="centralism" label="centralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181043" start="16486" end="16495" title="Dissident" label="Dissident"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="16559" end="16573" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="16612" end="16628" title="Marxism-Leninism" label="Marxism-Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180902" start="16633" end="16650" title="socialist realism" label="socialist realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="16736" end="16752" title="central planning" label="central planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q325261" start="16828" end="16843" title="satellite state" label="satellite state"/>
<link wikidata="Q191582" start="16937" end="16944" title="Comecon" label="Comecon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="16965" end="16976" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="17025" end="17034" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325836" start="17117" end="17144" title="Communist Party of Slovakia" label="Communist Party of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="17482" end="17487" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="17510" end="17537" title="Federal Republic of Germany" label="Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="17584" end="17591" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="17596" end="17602" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509109" start="17667" end="17692" title="Ninth-of-May Constitution" label="Ninth-of-May Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q296054" start="17748" end="17764" title="Klement Gottwald" label="Klement Gottwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q371854" start="17815" end="17832" title="Antonín Zápotocký" label="Antonín Zápotocký"/>
<link wikidata="Q156494" start="17853" end="17868" title="Antonín Novotný" label="Antonín Novotný"/>
<link wikidata="Q43453" start="17928" end="17933" title="Plzeň" label="Plzeň"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227524" start="18144" end="18176" title="Director of Central Intelligence" label="Director of Central Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q317243" start="18177" end="18189" title="Allen Dulles" label="Allen Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="18504" end="18514" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinists"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="18951" end="18968" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="18970" end="18974" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="18993" end="19002" title="bourgeois" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="19003" end="19015" title="nationalists" label="nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q177253" start="19040" end="19051" title="show trials" label="show trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q274152" start="19206" end="19221" title="Milada Horáková" label="Milada Horáková"/>
<link wikidata="Q247063" start="19276" end="19290" title="Záviš Kalandra" label="Záviš Kalandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502307" start="19314" end="19331" title="1960 Constitution of Czechoslovakia" label="1960 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q277560" start="19426" end="19442" title="De-Stalinization" label="De-Stalinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007063" start="19656" end="19674" title="New Economic Model" label="New Economic Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="19688" end="19699" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q193852" start="19834" end="19855" title="Democratic centralism" label="Democratic centralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="19990" end="20004" title="federal system" label="federalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q150543" start="20059" end="20075" title="Alexander Dubček" label="Alexander Dubček"/>
<link wikidata="Q310000" start="20230" end="20244" title="Ludvík Svoboda" label="Ludvík Svoboda"/>
<link wikidata="Q162401" start="20673" end="20686" title="Prague Spring" label="Prague Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q341148" start="20778" end="20794" title="Czech Social Democratic Party" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q191582" start="21126" end="21164" title="Council for Mutual Economic Assistance" label="Council for Mutual Economic Assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084040" start="21616" end="21628" title="socialism with a human face" label="a human face"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="22009" end="22016" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773668" start="22028" end="22061" title="Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia (1968)" label="Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="22590" end="22600" title="UN Charter" label="UN Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q223777" start="22717" end="22734" title="Brezhnev Doctrine" label="Brezhnev Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q157651" start="23237" end="23249" title="Gustáv Husák" label="Gustáv Husák"/>
<link wikidata="Q192893" start="23461" end="23471" title="Jan Palach" label="Jan Palach"/>
<link wikidata="Q847613" start="23509" end="23525" title="Wenceslas Square" label="Wenceslas Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q185573" start="23837" end="23848" title="Czech lands" label="Czech lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057397" start="23888" end="23903" title="national income" label="national income"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527264" start="24035" end="24048" title="earning power" label="earning power"/>
<link wikidata="Q157651" start="24242" end="24254" title="Gustáv Husák" label="Gustáv Husák"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853526" start="24456" end="24469" title="Normalization (Czechoslovakia)" label="Normalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q162401" start="25165" end="25178" title="Prague Spring" label="Prague Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="25205" end="25219" title="federal system" label="federalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529439" start="25460" end="25482" title="Czech National Council" label="Czech National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139204" start="25491" end="25514" title="National Council of the Slovak Republic" label="Slovak National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="25883" end="25899" title="central planning" label="central planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="25924" end="25941" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q729362" start="26548" end="26558" title="Charter 77" label="Charter 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="27942" end="27959" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="27967" end="27978" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q551665" start="28247" end="28258" title="Miloš Jakeš" label="Miloš Jakeš"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="28498" end="28508" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029489" start="28514" end="28548" title="Candle demonstration in Bratislava" label="Candle demonstration in Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q192893" start="28889" end="28899" title="Jan Palach" label="Jan Palach"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="29027" end="29041" title="anti-Communist" label="anti-Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755236" start="29480" end="29491" title="Civic Forum" label="Civic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q36233" start="29604" end="29616" title="Václav Havel" label="Václav Havel"/>
<link wikidata="Q294592" start="29828" end="29851" title="Public Against Violence" label="Public Against Violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q551665" start="29976" end="29987" title="Miloš Jakeš" label="Miloš Jakeš"/>
<link wikidata="Q57434" start="31468" end="31480" title="Václav Klaus" label="Václav Klaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q316526" start="31910" end="31925" title="Vladimír Mečiar" label="Vladimír Mečiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="32550" end="32564" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="32569" end="32577" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137957" start="32934" end="32952" title="Victorious February" label="communist takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q853348" start="33145" end="33155" title="Communist Czechoslovakia" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q162401" start="33887" end="33915" title="Prague Spring" label="Alexander Dubcek&amp;#x27;s rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416215" start="34165" end="34174" title="Era of Stagnation" label="stagnated"/>
<link wikidata="Q212036" start="34684" end="34710" title="History of the Czech lands" label="History of the Czech lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="37907" end="37931" title="Toronto Slavic Quarterly" label="Toronto Slavic Quarterly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424159" wikidata="Q347178" url="?curid=424159" title="Clifton Sprague">
<text>Clifton Albert Frederick &quot;Ziggy&quot; Sprague (January 8, 1896 – April 11, 1955) was a World War II–era officer in the United States Navy.

==Biography==
Sprague was born in Dorchester, Massachusetts, and attended the Roxbury Latin School. He entered the United States Naval Academy in 1914. There he was given the nickname &quot;Ziggy&quot;. Due to the American involvement in World War I he graduated and received his commission as an ensign one year early, on June 28, 1917, finishing forty-third out of 199. His wife was the sister of &quot;The Great Gatsby&quot; author F. Scott Fitzgerald. 

Admiral Clifton &quot;Ziggy&quot; Sprague was no relation to his Naval Academy classmate Admiral Thomas L. &quot;Tommy&quot; Sprague. Both Admirals Sprague were commanders in the Battle of Leyte Gulf.

==World War I==

His first assignment was on the gunboat , where he served as gunnery officer, communications officer, navigator, and executive officer. &quot;Wheeling&quot; served as a convoy escort in the Atlantic and Mediterranean during the war. While assigned to &quot;Wheeling&quot; he was promoted to lieutenant (junior grade) and lieutenant. After the war in October 1919, Sprague was assigned as the reserve commanding officer of the destroyer for two months. Thereafter he was assigned to the new battleship and served as 6th broadside battery officer for one year.

==1920 to 1940 – Naval Aviator==
On December 3, 1920, Sprague joined 33 other classmates at Naval Air Station Pensacola, Florida, as a student pilot. His first flight was on January 11, 1921, when he piloted a Curtiss N-9 aircraft for twenty minutes. Sprague earned the designation Naval Aviator No. 2934 on August 11, 1921. Due to his great proficiency, within two months he was designated as commanding officer of Aircraft Squadron 3 at Pensacola.

From March 1922 to November 1923, Sprague was assigned to Aircraft Squadron VS-1 with the Atlantic Fleet based on the seaplane tender . He reported to his next duty station Naval Air Station Anacostia, near Washington, D.C., in November 1923, where he served as a test pilot, operations officer, and executive officer. As a test pilot he conducted experimental and research work at the Naval Aircraft Factory in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, in 1923, where he contributed to the development of aircraft carrier catapult systems. From March 1926 to February 1928 he assisted inventor Carl Norden in the laboratory and as a test pilot at Naval Air Station Hampton Roads, Virginia, resulting in improvements to the Mark 1 carrier arresting gear system for and .

Sprague reported to &quot;Lexington&quot; in March 1928, where he assumed the duties of flight deck officer and assistant air officer. In January 1929 &quot;Lexington&quot; along with and &quot;Saratoga&quot; participated in Fleet Problem IX, a simulated aerial attack on the Panama Canal. Sprague&#x27;s tour on &quot;Lexington&quot; ended in April 1929. Returning to the U.S. Naval Academy in May 1929, Sprague served as executive officer of VN-8-D5. On June 10, 1930, he was promoted to lieutenant commander. His tour at the Naval Academy ended in November 1931.

Sprague served as squadron commander of VP-8 in Panama in December 1931 to April 1934. The squadron was based on the seaplane tender homeported at the Norfolk Navy Yard. In 1933 the squadron was moved to Hawaii, where Sprague became the first navy pilot to fly a thirteen-hour round-trip from Hawaii to Midway Island in February 1934. From May 1934 to July 1936, Sprague served as air operations officer at Naval Air Station Norfolk, Virginia, where his department serviced several aircraft carrier squadrons.

In July 1936, Sprague was assigned to the newly constructed aircraft carrier as air officer. After her commissioning, he piloted the first two landings ever made on &quot;Yorktown&quot;. In addition, he was the first pilot to test the catapult system on &quot;Yorktown&quot;. Sprague was promoted to commander in December 1937. He spent all of 1938 managing the Air Department and aircraft squadrons on &quot;Yorktown&quot;. In February 1939 &quot;Yorktown&quot; participated in Fleet Problem XX in the Caribbean. Shortly thereafter, Sprague left the carrier in June 1939. Sprague was ordered to the Naval War College in Newport, Rhode Island, in June 1939, where he spent three months in study before reporting to his first sea command, the 21-year-old oil tanker at Puget Sound Naval Shipyard, Bremerton, Washington. Sprague commanded &quot;Patoka&quot; until June 1940, when he was sent back to the Naval War College for two more months of study.

==World War II==

At Oakland, California, Sprague took command of the cargo ship , which was being converted into a seaplane tender in July 1940. &quot;Tangier&quot; was commissioned on August 25, 1941, and shortly thereafter transited to Bremerton, Washington, to load torpedoes. At her homeport in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, &quot;Tangier&quot; was mated with Fleet Patrol Wing Two. &quot;Tangier&quot; was berthed at F-10 on the northwest side of Ford Island on the morning of December 7, 1941. She was one of the first ships in the harbor to open fire and engaged several Japanese aircraft throughout the morning. &quot;Tangier&quot; was credited with downing three aircraft. As a result of his leadership at Pearl Harbor, Sprague was promoted to captain on January 3, 1942. In early 1942 &quot;Tangier&quot; saw service at New Caledonia.

Sprague was assigned as air officer of Gulf Sea Frontier, Miami, Florida, in June 1942. His duties involved improving defenses, keeping the sea lanes open, and countering the German U-boats on the Southeast coast of the United States. Upon achieving his goals he was transferred in March 1943. In April 1943, Sprague was transferred to Naval Air Center, Seattle, Washington, where he served as commander of the base and nearby Naval Air Station Sand Point. This duty ended abruptly when he was assigned as the commanding officer of the newly constructed fast fleet carrier in October 1943.

Arriving at Bethlehem Steel&#x27;s Fore River Yard near Boston, Massachusetts, Sprague took command of &quot;Wasp&quot; where she was commissioned on November 24, 1943. The carrier was quickly sent to the Pacific, where she joined the war against the Japanese. Her first combat missions were to destroy enemy aircraft, installations, and surface craft on Marcus and Wake Islands in May 1944. In June 1944 &quot;Wasp&quot; participated in the invasion of Saipan and the Battle of the Philippine Sea. On July 9, 1944, shortly before leaving &quot;Wasp&quot;, Sprague was promoted to rear admiral at age 48.

Sprague was designated as commander of Carrier Division 25 on July 23, 1944, with his flag in , replacing Rear Admiral Gerald F. Bogan. In September 1944 his task unit supported the Morotai landing.

Sprague&#x27;s greatest achievement came on October 25, 1944, when his Task Unit 77.4.3 (radio call sign Taffy III) consisting of 6 escort carriers, 3 destroyers, and 4 destroyer escorts fought off the 4 battleships, 6 heavy cruisers, 2 light cruisers, and 11 destroyers of Japanese Admiral Takeo Kurita&#x27;s vastly superior Center Force at the Battle off Samar near Samar Island in the Philippines. Taken by surprise by Kurita&#x27;s larger, faster ships, Sprague coolly maneuvered his force to take maximum advantage of the wind and weather while his pilots bombed and strafed the attacking ships, even making dry runs after their ammunition ran out. He ordered his escorts to lay smoke to cover the carriers, then ordered them to counterattack with torpedoes, culminating in toe-to-toe gun duels between Taffy III&#x27;s destroyers and destroyer escorts and Center Force&#x27;s battleships and cruisers. Taffy III was mauled by Center Force, with four ships sunk and most of the others damaged, but Sprague succeeded in turning Kurita back, preventing him from reaching his intended target—the vulnerable invasion shipping off Leyte Island—and sinking three of Center Force&#x27;s heavy cruisers. Sprague was awarded the Navy Cross for the leadership he displayed off Samar.

On February 19, 1945, Sprague assumed command of Carrier Division 26 embarked on for the invasion of Iwo Jima where his unit provided close air support for the Marines ashore. The next month he moved his flag back to &quot;Fanshaw Bay&quot; for the invasion of Okinawa. In April 1945, Sprague was given command of Carrier Division 2, a fast carrier Task Group and moved his flag to on June 1, 1945. His task group operated against the Japanese home islands of Kyūshū, Honshū, and Hokkaidō. Sprague received the notification of the end of hostilities while steaming 151 miles off the eastern coast of Honshū on August 15, 1945. Four days after the Japanese surrender, Sprague and &quot;Ticonderoga&quot; entered Tokyo Bay.

==Post War – Operation Crossroads and final duties==

Sprague returned to the West Coast on board in November 1945. He spent the next month in Washington, D.C., briefing naval leaders at the White House. In February 1946, Sprague was given command of Navy Air Group 1.6 of Joint Task Force 1 with his flag in at San Diego, California. During the next six months he supported the naval aviation forces in the Operation Crossroads nuclear tests on Bikini Atoll in the Marshall Islands.

At Corpus Christi, Texas, Sprague was assigned as Chief of Naval Air Basic Training in August 1946. In January 1948 he was redesignated as commander, Naval Air Advanced Training. His tour ended in April 1948. Sprague&#x27;s last seagoing command was as commander, Carrier Division Six with his flag in from May to October 1948. During this tour &quot;Kearsarge&quot; operated in the Mediterranean. On January 1, 1949, to February 1950, Sprague was commander of Naval Air Bases, Eleventh and Twelfth Naval District at Naval Air Station Coronado in San Diego, California. Reassigned in March 1950, Sprague was moved to Alaska, where he served as commandant of Seventeenth Naval District and commander of Alaskan Sea Frontier on Kodiak Island. It was from here that he embarked on a Boeing B-29 Superfortress and became the first U.S. Navy admiral to fly over the North Pole, on November 12, 1950.

==Retirement and death==
On August 9, 1951, Sprague requested voluntary retirement from the Navy and was officially retired on November 1, 1951. As was custom at the time, he was advanced to vice admiral at retirement in recognition of his Navy Cross. He had spent 34 years, 4 months, and 4 days on active duty. In March 1955, Sprague fell ill of a weak heart and was moved to the Naval Hospital, San Diego, California. On April 11, 1955, 59-year-old Sprague died from a massive heart attack. Two days later he was buried at Fort Rosecrans National Cemetery at Point Loma, San Diego, California.

==Decorations==

Here is the ribbon bar of Vice Admiral Clifton Sprague:

==Namesake==
The &quot;Oliver Hazard Perry&quot;-class guided-missile frigate was named after Vice Admiral Sprague. The unclassified citation for the Navy Cross was displayed in the wardroom until shortly before decommissioning.

==Books==
* 
*Thomas, Evan, (2007), &quot;Sea of Thunder: Four Naval Commanders and the Last Sea War&quot;, New York: Simon and Schuster, . 
*

==See also==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q347178" start="0" end="50" title="Clifton Sprague" label="Clifton Albert Frederick &amp;quot;Ziggy&amp;quot; Sprague"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="92" end="104" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="124" end="142" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024037" start="179" end="204" title="Dorchester, Massachusetts" label="Dorchester, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372418" start="223" end="243" title="Roxbury Latin School" label="Roxbury Latin School"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="260" end="287" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="383" end="394" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595679" start="442" end="448" title="Ensign (rank)" label="ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q214371" start="550" end="566" title="The Great Gatsby" label="The Great Gatsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="580" end="599" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425681" start="700" end="735" title="Thomas L. Sprague" label="Thomas L. &amp;quot;Tommy&amp;quot; Sprague"/>
<link wikidata="Q308999" start="782" end="802" title="Battle of Leyte Gulf" label="Battle of Leyte Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q110155210" start="883" end="898" title="gun" label="gunnery officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608176" start="900" end="922" title="communications officer" label="communications officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q254651" start="924" end="933" title="navigator" label="navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383594" start="939" end="956" title="executive officer" label="executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1012" end="1020" title="Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1025" end="1038" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824398" start="1113" end="1138" title="lieutenant (junior grade)" label="lieutenant (junior grade)"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="1143" end="1153" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q321162" start="1474" end="1501" title="Naval Air Station Pensacola" label="Naval Air Station Pensacola"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="1503" end="1510" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007843" start="1592" end="1603" title="Curtiss Model N" label="Curtiss N-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890793" start="1664" end="1677" title="United States Naval Aviator" label="Naval Aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297940" start="1923" end="1937" title="United States Fleet Forces Command" label="Atlantic Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q525365" start="1951" end="1966" title="seaplane tender" label="seaplane tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337220" start="2006" end="2033" title="Naval Support Facility Anacostia" label="Naval Air Station Anacostia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873394" start="2219" end="2241" title="Naval Aircraft Factory" label="Naval Aircraft Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181718" start="2414" end="2425" title="Carl Norden" label="Carl Norden"/>
<link wikidata="Q730242" start="2453" end="2463" title="test pilot" label="test pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627684" start="2467" end="2498" title="Naval Station Norfolk" label="Naval Air Station Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073511" start="2816" end="2832" title="Fleet Problem IX" label="Fleet Problem IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983433" start="3081" end="3101" title="Lieutenant commander (United States)" label="lieutenant commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="3206" end="3212" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999049" start="3309" end="3326" title="Norfolk Naval Shipyard" label="Norfolk Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="3451" end="3457" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q47863" start="3461" end="3474" title="Midway Atoll" label="Midway Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627684" start="3565" end="3590" title="Naval Station Norfolk" label="Naval Air Station Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q13543682" start="3969" end="3978" title="Commander (United States)" label="commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073511" start="4148" end="4164" title="Fleet Problem XX" label="Fleet Problem XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q575662" start="4269" end="4286" title="Naval War College" label="Naval War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297188" start="4437" end="4463" title="Puget Sound Naval Shipyard" label="Puget Sound Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q695417" start="4465" end="4474" title="Bremerton, Washington" label="Bremerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="4476" end="4486" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="4641" end="4648" title="Oakland" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="4650" end="4660" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="4920" end="4932" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="4934" end="4940" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485027" start="5065" end="5076" title="Ford Island" label="Ford Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937293" start="5366" end="5373" title="Captain (United States)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="5443" end="5456" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439894" start="5498" end="5515" title="Gulf Sea Frontier" label="Gulf Sea Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="5517" end="5522" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="5524" end="5531" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="5641" end="5647" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5795" end="5811" title="Naval Air Center" label="Naval Air Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="5813" end="5832" title="Seattle, Washington" label="Seattle, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q10323074" start="5886" end="5914" title="Magnuson Park (Seattle)" label="Naval Air Station Sand Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q27432" start="6062" end="6077" title="Bethlehem Steel" label="Bethlehem Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323171" start="6085" end="6100" title="Fore River Yard" label="Fore River Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="6106" end="6112" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="6114" end="6127" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="6184" end="6196" title="Ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q700705" start="6492" end="6510" title="Battle of Saipan" label="invasion of Saipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q504347" start="6519" end="6547" title="Battle of the Philippine Sea" label="Battle of the Philippine Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278830" start="6631" end="6643" title="Rear admiral (United States)" label="rear admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549114" start="6775" end="6790" title="Gerald F. Bogan" label="Gerald F. Bogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889417" start="6838" end="6853" title="Battle of Morotai" label="Morotai landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q253555" start="6988" end="7003" title="escort carriers" label="escort carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="7007" end="7017" title="destroyers" label="destroyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499623" start="7025" end="7042" title="destroyer escorts" label="destroyer escorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="7060" end="7071" title="battleships" label="battleships"/>
<link wikidata="Q898771" start="7075" end="7089" title="heavy cruisers" label="heavy cruisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q778129" start="7093" end="7107" title="light cruisers" label="light cruisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q187698" start="7147" end="7159" title="Takeo Kurita" label="Takeo Kurita"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348033" start="7203" end="7219" title="Battle off Samar" label="Battle off Samar"/>
<link wikidata="Q219737" start="7225" end="7237" title="Samar Island" label="Samar Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="7245" end="7256" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305405" start="7470" end="7477" title="Dry Run (testing)" label="dry run"/>
<link wikidata="Q211377" start="7988" end="8000" title="Leyte Island" label="Leyte Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q833465" start="8082" end="8092" title="Navy Cross" label="Navy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q180182" start="8226" end="8246" title="Battle of Iwo Jima" label="invasion of Iwo Jima"/>
<link wikidata="Q192660" start="8386" end="8405" title="Battle of Okinawa" label="invasion of Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940268" start="8451" end="8469" title="Carrier Strike Group 2" label="Carrier Division 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q13987" start="8597" end="8603" title="Kyūshū" label="Kyūshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q13989" start="8605" end="8611" title="Honshū" label="Honshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="8617" end="8625" title="Hokkaidō" label="Hokkaidō"/>
<link wikidata="Q141017" start="8848" end="8857" title="Tokyo Bay" label="Tokyo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="9003" end="9019" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="9133" end="9151" title="Joint Task Force 1" label="Joint Task Force 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="9172" end="9181" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="9183" end="9193" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="9268" end="9288" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="9289" end="9302" title="nuclear tests" label="nuclear tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q152225" start="9306" end="9318" title="Bikini Atoll" label="Bikini Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="9326" end="9342" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q49242" start="9348" end="9369" title="Corpus Christi, Texas" label="Corpus Christi, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9395" end="9428" title="Chief of Naval Air Basic Training" label="Chief of Naval Air Basic Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046363" start="9609" end="9629" title="Carrier Division Six" label="Carrier Division Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337216" start="9862" end="9888" title="Naval Amphibious Base Coronado" label="Naval Air Station Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439894" start="10047" end="10067" title="Alaskan Sea Frontier" label="Alaskan Sea Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q204387" start="10071" end="10084" title="Kodiak Island" label="Kodiak Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="10125" end="10150" title="Boeing B-29 Superfortress" label="Boeing B-29 Superfortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q934" start="10206" end="10216" title="North Pole" label="North Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925090" start="10432" end="10444" title="Vice admiral (United States)" label="vice admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981860" start="10622" end="10636" title="Bob Wilson Naval Hospital" label="Naval Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="10720" end="10732" title="Myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471945" start="10766" end="10798" title="Fort Rosecrans National Cemetery" label="Fort Rosecrans National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q462894" start="10802" end="10812" title="Point Loma" label="Point Loma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146814" start="10929" end="10966" title="Oliver Hazard Perry class frigate" label="&amp;quot;Oliver Hazard Perry&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q443767" start="11094" end="11102" title="wardroom" label="wardroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415555" start="11156" end="11168" title="Evan Thomas" label="Thomas, Evan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424160" wikidata="Q420596" url="?curid=424160" title="Cosmo">
<text>Cosmo may refer to:
== Business and media ==
* &quot;Cosmopolitan&quot; (magazine), a magazine for women, sometimes referred to as &quot;Cosmo&quot;
* &quot;Cosmo&quot; (book), 2012 short story collection
* Cosmo On-Line, a Brazilian generic Internet portal
* Cosmo Radio, a channel on Sirius Satellite Radio
* COSMO (German radio station), a public radio station
* Cosmo TV, alternate name of the cable and satellite television network Cosmopolitan Television
* Cosmo Oil Company (established 1986), Japanese petrochemical company
* Cosmo (restaurant), a chain of buffet restaurants in the United Kingdom
* Mazda Cosmo, any of several cars of this name
* Xda Cosmo, commercial name of the HTC Excalibur smartphone model
* Anki Cozmo, a miniature robot toy released in October 2016
* Planet Cosmo, a British-Irish children&#x27;s series about space

== Music ==
* Cosmo, a band formed by Fran Cosmo and his son Anton Cosmo in 2006
* Doug Clifford (born 1945), American rock drummer and member of the rock band Creedence Clearwater Revival, nicknamed &quot;Cosmo&quot;
* Cosmo Jarvis, stage name of English singer-songwriter and filmmaker Harrison Cosmo Krikoryan Jarvis
* &quot;Cosmo&quot; (Doug Clifford album), 1972
* &quot;Cosmo&quot; (Ozuna album), 2023
* &quot;Cosmo&quot; (song), 2014 single by Comoros / French rapper Soprano
* &quot;Cosmo&quot;, 2019 single by South Korean band Pentagon

== People and fictional characters ==
* Cosmo (name), a list of people and fictional characters with either the given name or surname
* Colleen &#x27;Cosmo&#x27; Murphy (born 1968), club disc jockey and music entrepreneur
* Cosmo Jarvis (born 1989), British actor and singer-songwriter

== Places ==
* Cosmo Township, Kearney County, Nebraska
* Cosmo Park, a recreation area in Columbia, Missouri

== Other uses ==
* Cosmos (plant), a wildflower of the family Asteraceae
* Cosmo (parrot), a parrot known for its cognitive abilities
* Cosmo (dog), dog which starred in &quot;Hotel for Dogs&quot;
* Cosmopolitan (cocktail), informally called a cosmo
* COSMO solvation model, calculation method for determining the electrostatic interaction of a molecule with a solvent
* Cosmo the Cougar, mascot of Brigham Young University
* WTC Cosmo Tower, a skyscraper in Osaka, Kansai, Japan
* New York Cosmos, a defunct soccer team

== See also ==
* Cosimo (disambiguation)
* Cosmas (disambiguation), includes Kosmas
* Cosmopolitan (disambiguation)
* Cosmos (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q420596" start="0" end="5" title="Cosmo" label="Cosmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q333644" start="47" end="82" title="Cosmopolitan (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Cosmopolitan&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124392487" start="151" end="175" title="Cosmo (book)" label="&amp;quot;Cosmo&amp;quot; (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174267" start="207" end="220" title="Cosmo On-Line" label="Cosmo On-Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174273" start="260" end="271" title="Cosmo Radio" label="Cosmo Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474419" start="311" end="339" title="COSMO (German radio station)" label="COSMO (German radio station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998331" start="437" end="460" title="Cosmopolitan Television" label="Cosmopolitan Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498318" start="463" end="480" title="Cosmo Oil Company" label="Cosmo Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174239" start="534" end="552" title="Cosmo (restaurant)" label="Cosmo (restaurant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q607198" start="608" end="619" title="Mazda Cosmo" label="Mazda Cosmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q702927" start="690" end="703" title="HTC Excalibur" label="HTC Excalibur"/>
<link wikidata="Q114771888" start="723" end="733" title="Anki Cozmo" label="Anki Cozmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q65078972" start="784" end="796" title="Planet Cosmo" label="Planet Cosmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478121" start="888" end="898" title="Fran Cosmo" label="Fran Cosmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q204289" start="911" end="922" title="Anton Cosmo" label="Anton Cosmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q545776" start="933" end="946" title="Doug Clifford" label="Doug Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136149" start="1070" end="1082" title="Cosmo Jarvis" label="Cosmo Jarvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174240" start="1172" end="1211" title="Cosmo (Doug Clifford album)" label="&amp;quot;Cosmo&amp;quot; (Doug Clifford album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123472321" start="1220" end="1251" title="Cosmo (Ozuna album)" label="&amp;quot;Cosmo&amp;quot; (Ozuna album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21186003" start="1260" end="1284" title="Cosmo (song)" label="&amp;quot;Cosmo&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47482795" start="1387" end="1395" title="Pentagon discography" label="Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16275242" start="1437" end="1449" title="Cosmo (name)" label="Cosmo (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146229" start="1533" end="1565" title="Colleen &amp;#x27;Cosmo&amp;#x27; Murphy" label="Colleen &amp;#x27;Cosmo&amp;#x27; Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136149" start="1621" end="1633" title="Cosmo Jarvis" label="Cosmo Jarvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174280" start="1699" end="1739" title="Cosmo Township, Kearney County, Nebraska" label="Cosmo Township, Kearney County, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q14693527" start="1742" end="1752" title="Cosmo Park" label="Cosmo Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q476937" start="1814" end="1828" title="Cosmos (plant)" label="Cosmos (plant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757385" start="1870" end="1884" title="Cosmo (parrot)" label="Cosmo (parrot)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174238" start="1931" end="1942" title="Cosmo (dog)" label="Cosmo (dog)"/>
<link wikidata="Q268057" start="1994" end="2017" title="Cosmopolitan (cocktail)" label="Cosmopolitan (cocktail)"/>
<link wikidata="Q904513" start="2047" end="2068" title="COSMO solvation model" label="COSMO solvation model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174281" start="2166" end="2182" title="Cosmo the Cougar" label="Cosmo the Cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201344" start="2221" end="2236" title="WTC Cosmo Tower" label="WTC Cosmo Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q646135" start="2277" end="2292" title="New York Cosmos (1970–1985)" label="New York Cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136046" start="2334" end="2357" title="Cosimo (disambiguation)" label="Cosimo (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130015930" start="2360" end="2383" title="Cosmas (disambiguation)" label="Cosmas (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q353236" start="2403" end="2432" title="Cosmopolitan (disambiguation)" label="Cosmopolitan (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q229275" start="2435" end="2458" title="Cosmos (disambiguation)" label="Cosmos (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424169" wikidata="Q257298" url="?curid=424169" title="Fokker 100">
<text>The Fokker 100 is a regional jet that was produced by Fokker in the Netherlands.

The Fokker 100 was based on the Fokker F28 with a fuselage stretched by to seat up to 109 passengers, up from 85.
It is powered by two newer Rolls-Royce Tay turbofans, and it has an updated glass cockpit and a wider wing and tail for increased maximum weights. The Fokker 70 is a shortened variant that can hold up to 85 passengers and was developed for shorter routes, which first flew in April of 1993. 
The program was announced in 1983 and it made its maiden flight on 30 November 1986.
The variant was approved on 20 November 1987, and first deliveries to Swissair started in February 1988.
American Airlines ordered 75, TAM Transportes Aéreos Regionais asked for 50, and USAir got 40.
Fokker had financial troubles and went bankrupt in March 1996, and production ended in 1997 after 283 deliveries.
Amsterdam-based Rekkof group wants to restart its production and update it with new engines, but has not reached its goal.
Since the 2000s, airlines have been retiring the aircraft, but large numbers remain in operation in Australia, with smaller numbers in Iran and various other countries.
In July 2019, 101 aircraft remained in service with 19 airlines around the world.

==Design==
The F28 Mark 0100, &quot;Fokker 100&quot;, is based on the Fokker F28 Mark 4000 re-engined with two Rolls-Royce RB.183 Tay high bypass-ratio turbofans and a fuselage stretched by .
Its wing is wider by , has new flaps and larger ailerons, and its extended leading and trailing edges improve aerodynamics and increase the wing chord.
The landing gear is strengthened and has new wheels and brakes, and the horizontal stabilizer is widened by .
Maximum weights are increased, while fuel capacity, maximum speed, and ceiling remain the same, and passenger capacity went from 85 to 109.
The flight deck went digital with a flight management system, an autopilot/flight director including CAT III autoland, thrust management system, electronic flight instrument displays, and full ARINC avionics.

The new wing was claimed to be 30% more efficient in cruise, while retaining the simplicity of a fixed leading edge. The cockpit was updated with a Rockwell Collins DU-1000 electronic flight instrument system. The Fokker 100 retained the twin rear fuselage-mounted engines and T-tail configuration of the Fokker Fellowship, like the Douglas DC-9 family. The F100 lacks the auxiliary overhead windows above the cockpit wind shields of the F28.

==Development==
A type certificate was applied for on 25 March 1983. The program was announced in 1983. A pair of prototypes was built. On 30 November 1986, the first prototype, &quot;PH-MKH&quot;, flew for the first time, while the second, &quot;PH-MKC&quot;, followed on 25 February 1987.

The variant was approved on 20 November 1987. In February 1988, the first deliveries of the Tay 620-15-powered versions started to Swissair. Major customers included American Airlines with 75 ordered, TAM Transportes Aéreos Regionais with 50, and USAir with 40, their aircraft powered by the more powerful Tay 650-15. The March 1989 American Airlines order, valued at an estimated , was not only the largest single order ever placed at Fokker, but also the largest-ever order from a Netherlands company.

During the early 1990s, Fokker and DASA explored a commercial relationship for regional aircraft. DASA purchased 40% of Fokker in 1993. By 1995, though, both Fokker and DASA were suffering financial difficulties, leading to DASA leaving the regional aircraft market. In June 1996, DASA sold the majority of Dornier to Fairchild Aircraft, leading to the creation of Fairchild Dornier, emerging as the third-largest regional aircraft manufacturer.

Although the Fokker 100 was successful, Fokker accumulated losses for several years, contributing to its collapse in 1996. Fokker 100 production stopped in early 1997.

===Potential revival===
Discussions regarding the potential for either portions or the entirety of Fokker being purchased by Bombardier Inc. are known to have taken place, but talks ultimately fell through without a deal being reached. Dutch firm Stork B.V. has since acquired the maintenance business for the type and has since been providing services to existing operators, having adopted the name Fokker Aviation. Like any number of regional airliner designs, the Fokker 70/100 was being increasingly squeezed from below by stretched versions of the Bombardier and Embraer regional jets; this intense competitive pressure had also been responsible for killing off plans for the Fairchild Dornier 728 family, along with an unnamed design being considered by ATR. At one point, a proposal was made for a stretched version of the Fokker 100, known as the &quot;Fokker 130&quot;, however this was never built.

In 1999, an Amsterdam-based group, Rekkof Restart (&quot;Rekkof&quot; is &quot;Fokker&quot; spelled backwards), announced it had entered into negotiations with the intention of reopening both the Fokker 70 and 100 lines. During the 2000s, the Netherlands Aircraft Company (otherwise known as NG Aircraft) was formed for the purpose of restarting production, although the ambition has suffered some delays, including some false starts. In March 2010, NG Aircraft stated that it had securing funding from the Ministry of Economic Affairs to adapt an existing Fokker 100 to serve as a prototype for a planned improved new-build series; that same month, the company announced its interest in converting existing aircraft to a proposed new-build equivalent standard, in addition to its primary focus of constructing wholly new Fokker 100s. In March 2011, it was announced that the government of Brazil had formed a partnership for the revival of the Fokker 100.

In July 2014, Maarten Van Eeghen, chief executive of NG Aircraft, revealed more details about the pending revival and the new generation of aircraft that would be produced. Dubbed the &quot;F120NG&quot;, it would be a new-build aircraft, seating a maximum of 125 to 130 passengers, that would be essentially a stretched model of the base Fokker 100. It would adopt a new powerplant, the Pratt &amp; Whitney PurePower PW1X17G turbofan engine rated at 17,600 lb thrust, which is claimed to result in the new-generation airliner burning 50% less fuel per seat than the original Fokker 100. It was claimed in 2014 that the earliest entry-to-service date for the F120NG would have been 2019, based on a five-year development and testing programme after obtaining official clearance to proceed.

==Operational history==

By 1991, Fokker had produced 70 units and had orders for more than 230. The aircraft joined the American Airlines fleet in August 1991. In 1993, an extended-range version of the Fokker 100, outfitted with additional fuel tanks in the centre fuselage, was introduced; it was followed by a quick-change passenger/freighter version in 1994, designated as the Fokker 100QC. In 1993, a shortened version of the airliner was introduced, designated as the Fokker 70; this aircraft was intended as a replacement for the earlier Fokker F28 and featured the removal of 4.70 m (15.42 ft) of the fuselage and reduced seating to 80. Third-party aircraft companies, such as Phoenix Aero Solutions, have since offered their conversion programs to produce freighters from former airliner-configuration Fokker 100s. While studies were conducted on a proposed 130-seat Fokker 130, this proposal ultimately did not reach further stages of development.

In 2000, to counter upstart Legend Airlines, American refitted five Fokker 100s in a 56-seat all-business class configuration to circumvent Wright Amendment long-haul flight restrictions from Dallas Love Field. The airline later added a sixth 56-seat Fokker, but after the September 11 attacks, the Love Field service was cancelled and these aircraft were grounded. In late 2002, American Airlines decided to retire its entire 74-aircraft fleet early, citing high operating costs; the jets would be phased out in 2004 and replaced with smaller, but more economical regional jets operated by its American Eagle regional affiliates.

In 2003, a Fokker 100EJ (Executive Jet) variant was introduced; these were remanufactured aircraft produced by Fokker Services as conversions from used Fokker 100 airliners. Priced around $12 million, the Fokker 100EJ seated between 19 and 31 passengers in three different luxury configurations, all of which featured galleys, while two were outfitted with shower-equipped master suites; additional features include an auxiliary fuel system to extend the aircraft&#x27;s range by roughly . By late 2009, a total of six Fokker 100s were in VIP service, while a further two were used in a 50-seat corporate layout.

The Great Recession in the late 2000s prompted airlines to retire the Fokker 100 in large numbers; some later returned to operations, while a considerable portion were broken up, instead. In March 2009, Mexicana announced that the confirmation of an agreement with Boeing to lease 25 Boeing 717s as a replacement for its fleet of 25 Fokker 100s. In September 2009, one of the last Asian operators of the type, Mandarin Airlines, phased out the last of its Fokker 100s. According to maintenance and servicing company Fokker Services, Fokker 100 airliners constructed during the 1990s had been anticipated to be serviceable until 2035, while the type was expected to remain competitive without modification until at least 2020.

In August 2009, Australian airline Skywest Airlines announced that it would be outfitting its fleet of Fokker 100 and Fokker 70 aircraft with a new satellite navigation system; these had the advantage of enabling shorter approaches at night and in bad weather, saving time and fuel, and increasing safety and schedule reliability, as well as increasing the number of airports usable by the type.

From 2015, the French DGA Essais en Vol had used the Fokker 100 as a flying testbed; it is referred to as the &quot;ABE-NG&quot;, standing for &quot;&quot;. It has replaced the DGA&#x27;s previous testbed of choice, the Dassault Falcon 20 business jet, and has been outfitted with various systems of the Dassault Rafale fighter aircraft for testing purposes, including the Rafale&#x27;s nose section, Thales RBE2 active electronically scanned array radar and optronics equipment, and Reco NG targeting pod under the fuselage and a complement of MBDA Mica air-to-air missiles. The first aircraft, which was formerly used by Régional, is to be followed by four more used Fokker 100s.

In June 2015, Austrian Airlines, then one of the largest operators of the Fokker 100, announced its approval of a plan to procure used Embraer 195 regional jets to replace its inventory of Fokker 100 and Fokker 70 jets, which had an average age of 21 years across the fleet. In November 2015, Alliance Airlines announced that it would acquire the entire Austrian Airlines Fokker fleet of fifteen Fokker 100 and six Fokker 70 airliners.

Shortly after the crash of Bek Air Flight 2100 on 27 December 2019, the Government of Kazakhstan indefinitely suspended Fokker 100 operations in Kazakh airspace. On 17 April 2020, citing the airline&#x27;s failure to correct the safety violations discovered during the investigation, the Aviation Administration of Kazakhstan (AAK) recalled the company&#x27;s air operator&#x27;s certificate and the airworthiness certificates of its remaining Fokker 100 aircraft.

==Operators==
===Current operators===
====Airlines====
As of August 2019, 126 aircraft were still in operational use with airlines. Many of them are used in Australia by Alliance Airlines and QantasLink supporting the domestic mining industry, with low use rates for an airline, around 1,200 hours per year.
====Governments====
* French government (1)
* Slovak government (2)

===Former operators===

==Accidents and incidents==
* 
*
* 
* 29 June 2007: An Ivorian government Fokker 100 carrying Prime Minister Guillaume Soro, members of his delegation, and 20 journalists was taxiing on the runway at Bouaké Airport when it was targeted by rocket and Kalashnikov fire. One rocket struck and exploded in the cabin, another one missed, and a third bounced off the fuselage and did not detonate. Soro was not injured, but four people were killed and ten others wounded. Those who died were Security Chief Drissa Ouattara, the Prime Minister&#x27;s bodyguard Siaka Diomandé, and &quot;Protocole d’État&quot; members Sékou Doumbia and Souleymane Sérifou. Arrests were subsequently reported.
* 
* 

==Specifications==
==See also==

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q257298" start="4" end="14" title="Fokker 100" label="Fokker 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993068" start="20" end="32" title="regional jet" label="regional jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q155896" start="54" end="60" title="Fokker" label="Fokker"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="68" end="79" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q725319" start="114" end="124" title="Fokker F28" label="Fokker F28"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698540" start="132" end="148" title="fuselage stretch" label="fuselage stretch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456020" start="223" end="238" title="Rolls-Royce RB.183 Tay" label="Rolls-Royce Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q15038173" start="272" end="285" title="glass cockpit" label="glass cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q257298" start="347" end="356" title="Fokker 100" label="Fokker 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="538" end="551" title="maiden flight" label="maiden flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q694098" start="643" end="651" title="Swissair" label="Swissair"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="678" end="695" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q690789" start="708" end="740" title="TAM Transportes Aéreos Regionais" label="TAM Transportes Aéreos Regionais"/>
<link wikidata="Q208046" start="759" end="764" title="USAir" label="USAir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284133" start="903" end="909" title="Rekkof" label="Rekkof"/>
<link wikidata="Q725319" start="1332" end="1342" title="Fokker F28" label="Fokker F28"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698540" start="1353" end="1362" title="re-engine" label="re-engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456020" start="1373" end="1395" title="Rolls-Royce RB.183 Tay" label="Rolls-Royce RB.183 Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698540" start="1430" end="1446" title="fuselage stretch" label="fuselage stretch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384332" start="1594" end="1604" title="chord (aeronautics)" label="wing chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096168" start="1678" end="1699" title="horizontal stabilizer" label="horizontal stabilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q657919" start="1892" end="1916" title="flight management system" label="flight management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q371949" start="1931" end="1946" title="Flight director (aeronautics)" label="flight director"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630510" start="1965" end="1973" title="autoland" label="autoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872503" start="1975" end="1992" title="Autothrust" label="thrust management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067034" start="2001" end="2029" title="Electronic flight instrument system" label="electronic flight instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854414" start="2049" end="2054" title="ARINC" label="ARINC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754137" start="2169" end="2181" title="leading edge" label="leading edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q461210" start="2214" end="2230" title="Rockwell Collins" label="Rockwell Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067034" start="2239" end="2274" title="electronic flight instrument system" label="electronic flight instrument system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414362" start="2343" end="2349" title="T-tail" label="T-tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="2399" end="2411" title="Douglas DC-9" label="Douglas DC-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418690" start="2528" end="2544" title="type certificate" label="type certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="2721" end="2731" title="maiden flight" label="first time"/>
<link wikidata="Q704874" start="3342" end="3346" title="DASA" label="DASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136766" start="3625" end="3643" title="Fairchild Aircraft" label="Fairchild Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q333498" start="4048" end="4063" title="Bombardier Inc." label="Bombardier Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1339416" start="4170" end="4180" title="Stork B.V." label="Stork B.V."/>
<link wikidata="Q49029" start="4604" end="4632" title="Fairchild Dornier 728 family" label="Fairchild Dornier 728 family"/>
<link wikidata="Q459083" start="4683" end="4686" title="ATR (aviation)" label="ATR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284133" start="4868" end="4874" title="Rekkof" label="Rekkof"/>
<link wikidata="Q723397" start="5029" end="5038" title="Fokker 70" label="Fokker 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284133" start="5076" end="5104" title="Netherlands Aircraft Company" label="Netherlands Aircraft Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986560" start="5340" end="5368" title="Ministry of Economic Affairs (Netherlands)" label="Ministry of Economic Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="5723" end="5729" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q940491" start="6178" end="6215" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney PW1000G" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney PurePower PW1X17G"/>
<link wikidata="Q723397" start="7055" end="7064" title="Fokker 70" label="Fokker 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q725319" start="7126" end="7136" title="Fokker F28" label="Fokker F28"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517732" start="7568" end="7583" title="Legend Airlines" label="Legend Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340505" start="7637" end="7651" title="business class" label="business class"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038183" start="7680" end="7696" title="Wright Amendment" label="Wright Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q613569" start="7732" end="7749" title="Dallas Love Field" label="Dallas Love Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="7813" end="7833" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15670994" start="8135" end="8149" title="American Eagle (airline brand)" label="American Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q497741" start="8490" end="8496" title="Galley (kitchen)" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863" start="8529" end="8535" title="shower" label="shower"/>
<link wikidata="Q956495" start="8711" end="8714" title="VIP" label="VIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="8790" end="8805" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q53085" start="8989" end="8997" title="Mexicana de Aviación (1921–2010)" label="Mexicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="9051" end="9057" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401" start="9070" end="9080" title="Boeing 717" label="Boeing 717"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150302" start="9196" end="9213" title="Mandarin Airlines" label="Mandarin Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q608421" start="9548" end="9564" title="Virgin Australia Regional Airlines" label="Skywest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q179435" start="9661" end="9681" title="satellite navigation" label="satellite navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029559" start="9932" end="9949" title="Direction générale de l&amp;#x27;armement" label="DGA Essais en Vol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318674" start="9986" end="9993" title="testbed" label="testbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474251" start="10130" end="10148" title="Dassault Falcon 20" label="Dassault Falcon 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062135" start="10149" end="10161" title="business jet" label="business jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q190973" start="10214" end="10229" title="Dassault Rafale" label="Dassault Rafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415077" start="10311" end="10322" title="RBE2" label="Thales RBE2"/>
<link wikidata="Q164400" start="10323" end="10358" title="active electronically scanned array" label="active electronically scanned array"/>
<link wikidata="Q836383" start="10402" end="10415" title="targeting pod" label="targeting pod"/>
<link wikidata="Q585436" start="10455" end="10464" title="MBDA Mica" label="MBDA Mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q243249" start="10465" end="10483" title="air-to-air missile" label="air-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139054" start="10533" end="10541" title="Régional" label="Régional"/>
<link wikidata="Q781770" start="10607" end="10624" title="Austrian Airlines" label="Austrian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495319" start="10728" end="10739" title="Embraer 195" label="Embraer 195"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622310" start="10886" end="10903" title="Alliance Airlines" label="Alliance Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453539" start="11057" end="11076" title="Bek Air Flight 2100" label="Bek Air Flight 2100"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814905" start="11102" end="11126" title="Government of Kazakhstan" label="Government of Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q272730" start="11182" end="11190" title="airspace" label="airspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q407701" start="11390" end="11421" title="air operator&amp;#x27;s certificate" label="air operator&amp;#x27;s certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946885" start="11430" end="11455" title="airworthiness certificate" label="airworthiness certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="11653" end="11662" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622310" start="11666" end="11683" title="Alliance Airlines" label="Alliance Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347762" start="11688" end="11698" title="QantasLink" label="QantasLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144585" start="11714" end="11738" title="Mining in Australia" label="domestic mining industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717151" start="11991" end="12005" title="List of heads of government of Ivory Coast" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q313994" start="12006" end="12020" title="Guillaume Soro" label="Guillaume Soro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519198" start="12097" end="12111" title="Bouaké Airport" label="Bouaké Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q327394" start="12136" end="12142" title="rocket propelled grenade" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q37116" start="12147" end="12158" title="AK-47" label="Kalashnikov"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424171" wikidata="Q1428753" url="?curid=424171" title="Technobabble">
<text>Technobabble (a portmanteau of &quot;technology&quot; and &quot;babble&quot;), also called technospeak, is a type of nonsense that consists of buzzwords, language, or technical jargon. It is common in science fiction. Use of technobabble in the &quot;Star Trek&quot; universe is referred to treknobabble.

== See also ==

* Academese
* Bullshit
* Bogdanov affair
* Dihydrogen monoxide parody
* Flux capacitor
* Fedspeak
* Neologism
* Officialese
* Psychobabble
* Reverse the polarity
* Rubber science
* Sokal affair
* Turbo encabulator
* Pseudoscience
==References==
== External links ==

* Technology Column called Technobabble 
*Technobabble Generators
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1428753" start="0" end="12" title="Technobabble" label="Technobabble"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="16" end="27" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428753" start="91" end="102" title="Technobabble" label="technospeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q600499" start="117" end="125" title="nonsense" label="nonsense"/>
<link wikidata="Q82550" start="143" end="151" title="buzzword" label="buzzword"/>
<link wikidata="Q17951" start="177" end="183" title="jargon" label="jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="201" end="216" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="251" end="260" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428753" start="291" end="304" title="Technobabble" label="treknobabble."/>
<link wikidata="Q108551482" start="324" end="333" title="Academese" label="Academese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063516" start="336" end="344" title="Bullshit" label="Bullshit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132713" start="347" end="362" title="Bogdanov affair" label="Bogdanov affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q20117" start="365" end="391" title="Dihydrogen monoxide parody" label="Dihydrogen monoxide parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q19932" start="394" end="408" title="Flux capacitor" label="Flux capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441143" start="411" end="419" title="Fedspeak" label="Fedspeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="422" end="431" title="Neologism" label="Neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424126" start="434" end="445" title="Officialese" label="Officialese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410171" start="448" end="460" title="Psychobabble" label="Psychobabble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580478" start="463" end="483" title="Reverse the polarity" label="Reverse the polarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375838" start="486" end="500" title="Rubber science" label="Rubber science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049105" start="503" end="515" title="Sokal affair" label="Sokal affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853895" start="518" end="535" title="Turbo encabulator" label="Turbo encabulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="538" end="551" title="Pseudoscience" label="Pseudoscience"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424173" wikidata="Q1934584" url="?curid=424173" title="2000 Greek parliamentary election">
<text>Parliamentary elections were held in Greece on 9 April 2000. The ruling PASOK of Prime Minister Costas Simitis was narrowly re-elected, defeating the conservative New Democracy party. Simitis formed his third cabinet.

This election is a landmark, as it is the last elector where the presentation of the election booklet was necessary. Since the local elections of 2002, the Special Electoral Number has been established and the participation of the voter is done by showing any identification document (ID card, driving license, etc.).

They were also characterized by the large electoral reversal in favour of PASOK, 44% against 43% of New Democracy, a difference of 73,133 votes. New Democracy was ahead for over three hours of the count and with the integration of Athens B in the narional results, PASOK took the lead, resulting in speculation about fraud.

==Results==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="37" end="43" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="72" end="77" title="PASOK" label="PASOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q155390" start="96" end="110" title="Costas Simitis" label="Costas Simitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="163" end="176" title="New Democracy (Greece)" label="New Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112468" start="199" end="216" title="Third Cabinet of Costas Simitis" label="his third cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813465" start="769" end="777" title="Athens B" label="Athens B"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424183" wikidata="Q1518129" url="?curid=424183" title="2004 Greek parliamentary election">
<text>Parliamentary elections were held in Greece on 7 March 2004. The New Democracy Party of Kostas Karamanlis won the elections, ending eleven years of rule by PASOK. PASOK was led into the elections by George Papandreou, who succeeded retiring Prime Minister Costas Simitis as party leader in February.

==Background==
Greek politics were strongly dynastic. Kostas Karamanlis is the nephew of Konstantinos Karamanlis, who was six times (1955, 1956, 1958, 1961, 1974, 1977) Prime Minister and twice President of Greece (1980–1985, 1990–1995), and the founder of New Democracy after the restoration of democracy in 1974. George Papandreou is the son of Andreas Papandreou, three times (1981, 1985, 1993) Prime Minister and the founder of PASOK, and the grandson of Georgios Papandreou, a liberal centrist who entered national politics in the 1920s and was twice Prime Minister (1944, 1963). Athens daily &quot;Kathimerini&quot; quoted a voter during the campaign as saying: &quot;We Greeks like to know where our leaders come from. We feel we know these families as well as we know our own.&quot;

==Campaign==
In January New Democracy was leading PASOK in opinion polls by 7%. But Papandreou&#x27;s election to the party leadership allowed PASOK to regain ground. During February Papandreou campaigned on &quot;the need for change&quot; in Greece, hoping to neutralise the strong sentiment for a change of government. By late February New Democracy&#x27;s lead in the opinion polls had been cut to 3%.

The Athens daily &quot;Kathemerini&quot; commented: &quot;Now, two weeks before the elections, all opinion polls show PASOK 3 to 4.5 percentage points behind ND. This raises the question of whether PASOK can snatch victory away from ND. The fact is that much is unclear. For example, although PASOK has little support, its leader has a good image in public opinion polls.&quot;

The electoral campaign concluded on in the traditional manner, with huge televised mass rallies in the centre of Athens by each of the major parties. On the evening of 4 March Karamanlis addressed an estimated 200,000 at the ND&#x27;s concluding rally. PASOK claimed that twice that number attended their rally on 6 March, but these numbers cannot be independently verified. At the ND rally, Karamanlis said that PASOK had been in power too long and had grown lazy and corrupt. At the PASOK rally, Papandreou evoked the memory of his father but said that he would lead a government dedicated to reform and change, as well as action against corruption.

Since publication of opinion polls is banned in the last two weeks of Greek election campaigns, it was not possible to predict the outcome of the election, except to say that ND appeared to have been leading when the last polls were published, and that most commentators expected the result in terms of votes to be close. Greek electoral law ensures, through a complex algorithm of parliamentary seat redistribution, that a party polling a plurality of the vote (that is, more than any other party but also more than 40%) is practically guaranteed a majority in Parliament.

A &quot;threshold&quot; of 3% of the total popular vote is also required by law for a party to be eligible for representation in Parliament. This provision kept all but the four top-polling parties from securing parliamentary seats.

==Opinion polls==
==Results==

The result of the election was not as close as observers expected. It appears that ND regained its earlier lead over PASOK in the two weeks after the last opinion polls, and that the election of George Papandreou as PASOK leader was not sufficient to overcome the desire of the electorate for a change after a long period of PASOK rule.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="37" end="43" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="65" end="84" title="New Democracy (Greece)" label="New Democracy Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q188978" start="88" end="105" title="Kostas Karamanlis" label="Kostas Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="156" end="161" title="PASOK" label="PASOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q151917" start="199" end="216" title="George Papandreou" label="George Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q155390" start="256" end="270" title="Costas Simitis" label="Costas Simitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q156806" start="390" end="413" title="Konstantinos Karamanlis" label="Konstantinos Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377230" start="470" end="484" title="Prime Minister of Greece" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409203" start="495" end="514" title="President of Greece" label="President of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="558" end="571" title="New Democracy (Greece)" label="New Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204796" start="582" end="606" title="metapolitefsi" label="restoration of democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q219256" start="648" end="666" title="Andreas Papandreou" label="Andreas Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="733" end="738" title="PASOK" label="PASOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q311207" start="760" end="779" title="Georgios Papandreou" label="Georgios Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q144999" start="905" end="916" title="Kathimerini" label="Kathimerini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="1503" end="1509" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="1991" end="1997" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424185" wikidata="Q449502" url="?curid=424185" title="Michael Giles">
<text>Michael Rex Giles (born 1 March 1942) is an English drummer, percussionist, and vocalist, best known as one of the co-founders of King Crimson in 1968. Prior to the formation of King Crimson, he was part of the eccentric pop trio Giles, Giles and Fripp along with his brother, bassist Peter, and guitarist Robert Fripp. They were active between 1967–1968.

==Life and career==
Giles was born in Waterlooville, Hampshire, England.

His drumming technique is complex and polyrhythmic, based primarily on the jazz tradition, but also on the then developing progressive rock tradition. His playing dictated much of the compositional structure of the first King Crimson album, &quot;In the Court of the Crimson King&quot;. Giles&#x27;s compositional ear is evidenced by his ability to weave seamless tempo changes and subtle melodic deviations into his drumming throughout the album.
Giles and Ian McDonald both left King Crimson in January 1970, though Giles played on the band&#x27;s second album, &quot;In the Wake of Poseidon&quot;, as part of a temporary line-up before the remaining members had a set new line-up in place. He and McDonald recorded an album called &quot;McDonald and Giles&quot;, which was lighter in style than King Crimson, but still technically demanding. Giles then worked as a session player for the duration of the 1970s, appearing on albums by Anthony Phillips, Leo Sayer, and Kevin Ayers. He also played on McDonald&#x27;s 1999 solo album &quot;Driver&#x27;s Eyes&quot;.

Giles only solo album, &quot;Progress&quot;, was recorded at his home studio in 1978, but not released until 2003.

In 2002, he co-founded the 21st Century Schizoid Band, a group composed of former King Crimson musicians, with the exception of his son-in-law, guitarist and vocalist Jakko Jakszyk, who later joined King Crimson. After one studio session and a single tour, Giles passed the drum stool to another former King Crimson drummer, Ian Wallace.

In late 2008, an experimental group focused on improvisation was announced, Michael Giles&#x27; MAD Band, with Adrian Chivers and Dan Pennie.

He was often cited by Rush drummer Neil Peart as an influence.

==Selected discography==
===Giles, Giles and Fripp===
* 1968 &quot;One in a Million/Newly Weds, Thursday Morning/Elephant Song&quot; (Singles)
* 1968 &quot;The Cheerful Insanity of Giles, Giles and Fripp&quot;
* 2001 &quot;The Brondesbury Tapes&quot;
* 2001 &quot;Metamorphosis&quot;

===King Crimson===
* 1969 &quot;In the Court of the Crimson King&quot; 
* 1970 &quot;In the Wake of Poseidon&quot;

===McDonald &amp; Giles===
* 1970 &quot;McDonald and Giles&quot;

===Leo Sayer===
* 1973 &quot;Silverbird&quot; 
* 1974 &quot;Just a Boy&quot; 
* 1975 &quot;Another Year&quot;

===Kevin Ayers===
* 1974 &quot;The Confessions of Dr. Dream and Other Stories&quot;

===Roger Glover &amp; Guests===
* 1974 &quot;The Butterfly Ball and the Grasshopper&#x27;s Feast&quot;

===Neil Sedaka===
* 1974 &quot;Live At The Royal Festival Hall&quot;

===Anthony Phillips===
* 1978 &quot;Wise After the Event&quot; 
* 1979 &quot;Sides&quot;

===Greg Lake===
* 1980 &quot;Greg Lake&quot;
* 2015 &quot;Ride the Tiger&quot; (by Greg Lake &amp; Geoff Downes)

===Ian McDonald===
* 1999 &quot;Drivers Eyes&quot;

===Penguin Cafe Orchestra===
* 1984 - &quot;Broadcasting From Home&quot;

===Bryan Ferry===
* 1993 - &quot;Taxi (Title Track)

===21st Century Schizoid Band===
* 2002 &quot;Official Bootleg Volume One&quot; 
* 2002 &quot;Live in Japan – Official Bootleg Volume Two&quot;

===Solo===
* 2009 &quot;Progress&quot; (recorded in 1978)

===Movie score===
* 1996 &quot;Ghost Dance&quot; (recorded in 1983, with Jamie Muir and David Cunningham)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q449502" start="0" end="17" title="Michael Giles" label="Michael Rex Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="130" end="142" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273116" start="230" end="252" title="Giles, Giles and Fripp" label="Giles, Giles and Fripp"/>
<link wikidata="Q706798" start="285" end="290" title="Peter Giles (musician)" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q203185" start="306" end="318" title="Robert Fripp" label="Robert Fripp"/>
<link wikidata="Q937631" start="395" end="408" title="Waterlooville" label="Waterlooville"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="410" end="419" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q212799" start="678" end="710" title="In the Court of the Crimson King" label="In the Court of the Crimson King"/>
<link wikidata="Q464833" start="889" end="901" title="Ian McDonald (musician)" label="Ian McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q521754" start="1001" end="1024" title="In the Wake of Poseidon" label="In the Wake of Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110753" start="1171" end="1189" title="McDonald and Giles" label="McDonald and Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q453600" start="1368" end="1384" title="Anthony Phillips" label="Anthony Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q363074" start="1386" end="1395" title="Leo Sayer" label="Leo Sayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q280077" start="1401" end="1412" title="Kevin Ayers" label="Kevin Ayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24063138" start="1470" end="1488" title="Drivers Eyes" label="Driver&amp;#x27;s Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947959" start="1526" end="1534" title="Progress (Michael Giles album)" label="Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967950" start="1640" end="1666" title="21st Century Schizoid Band" label="21st Century Schizoid Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519476" start="1780" end="1793" title="Jakko Jakszyk" label="Jakko Jakszyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864685" start="1938" end="1949" title="Ian Wallace (drummer)" label="Ian Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="2117" end="2121" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q313668" start="2130" end="2140" title="Neil Peart" label="Neil Peart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273116" start="2187" end="2209" title="Giles, Giles and Fripp" label="Giles, Giles and Fripp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498829" start="2315" end="2362" title="The Cheerful Insanity of Giles, Giles and Fripp" label="The Cheerful Insanity of Giles, Giles and Fripp"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="2447" end="2459" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q212799" start="2476" end="2508" title="In the Court of the Crimson King" label="In the Court of the Crimson King"/>
<link wikidata="Q521754" start="2529" end="2552" title="In the Wake of Poseidon" label="In the Wake of Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110753" start="2563" end="2583" title="McDonald &amp;amp; Giles" label="McDonald &amp;amp; Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110753" start="2600" end="2618" title="McDonald and Giles" label="McDonald and Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q363074" start="2629" end="2638" title="Leo Sayer" label="Leo Sayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516636" start="2655" end="2665" title="Silverbird (album)" label="Silverbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995533" start="2686" end="2696" title="Just a Boy" label="Just a Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770406" start="2717" end="2729" title="Another Year (Leo Sayer album)" label="Another Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q280077" start="2740" end="2751" title="Kevin Ayers" label="Kevin Ayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727341" start="2768" end="2814" title="The Confessions of Dr. Dream and Other Stories" label="The Confessions of Dr. Dream and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q216700" start="2825" end="2837" title="Roger Glover" label="Roger Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018091" start="2867" end="2918" title="The Butterfly Ball and the Grasshopper&amp;#x27;s Feast" label="The Butterfly Ball and the Grasshopper&amp;#x27;s Feast"/>
<link wikidata="Q312743" start="2929" end="2940" title="Neil Sedaka" label="Neil Sedaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6657005" start="2957" end="2988" title="Live at the Royal Festival Hall (Neil Sedaka album)" label="Live At The Royal Festival Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q453600" start="2999" end="3015" title="Anthony Phillips" label="Anthony Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296331" start="3032" end="3052" title="Wise After the Event" label="Wise After the Event"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508454" start="3073" end="3078" title="Sides (Anthony Phillips album)" label="Sides"/>
<link wikidata="Q343075" start="3089" end="3098" title="Greg Lake" label="Greg Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605866" start="3115" end="3124" title="Greg Lake (album)" label="Greg Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q346822" start="3185" end="3197" title="Geoff Downes" label="Geoff Downes"/>
<link wikidata="Q464833" start="3203" end="3215" title="Ian McDonald (musician)" label="Ian McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q24063138" start="3232" end="3244" title="Drivers Eyes (Ian McDonald album)" label="Drivers Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634392" start="3255" end="3277" title="Penguin Cafe Orchestra" label="Penguin Cafe Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925843" start="3296" end="3318" title="Broadcasting From Home" label="Broadcasting From Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q216179" start="3329" end="3340" title="Bryan Ferry" label="Bryan Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689597" start="3359" end="3363" title="Taxi (Bryan Ferry album)" label="Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967950" start="3382" end="3408" title="21st Century Schizoid Band" label="21st Century Schizoid Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609741" start="3425" end="3452" title="Official Bootleg V.1" label="Official Bootleg Volume One"/>
<link wikidata="Q6657695" start="3473" end="3516" title="Live in Japan (21st Century Schizoid Band album)" label="Live in Japan – Official Bootleg Volume Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947959" start="3548" end="3556" title="Progress (Michael Giles album)" label="Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5557071" start="3614" end="3625" title="Ghost Dance (film)" label="Ghost Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q714309" start="3656" end="3666" title="Jamie Muir" label="Jamie Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232725" start="3671" end="3687" title="David Cunningham (musician)" label="David Cunningham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424188" wikidata="Q3161488" url="?curid=424188" title="James Whitney (politician)">
<text>Sir James Pliny Whitney (October 2, 1843 – September 25, 1914) was a Canadian politician and lawyer in the province of Ontario. He served as Conservative member of the legislature for Dundas in Eastern Ontario from 1888 and as the sixth premier of Ontario from 1905 until his death in 1914. He is the only premier of Ontario to have died while in office.

== Early life ==
Whitney was born in Williamsburgh Township in 1843 and attended Cornwall Grammar School before articling at the law office of John Sandfield Macdonald in the 1860s, but did not resume his legal studies until 1871. He was called to the bar in 1875, and practised law in Morrisburg.
Whitney was active in the Militia at Cornwall, serving as a Private in a volunteer company during the Trent Affair and then a Sergeant with the Cornwall Volunteer Infantry during the Fenian Raids. He continued to serve in the militia, being appointed Captain of No. 7 (Morrisburg) Company of the Dundas Reserve Militia in 1880. He was promoted to Major in 1885, and eventually promoted to Lieutenant Colonel in command of the Dundas Reserve Militia in 1889, an appointment he held until his death.

== Early political career ==
Whitney was elected to the Ontario legislature in 1888. He became leader of Ontario&#x27;s Conservative Party in 1896. His mentor was William Ralph Meredith, who deeply influenced many of Whitney&#x27;s later measures as premier like worker&#x27;s compensation and dealing with the University of Toronto.

== Premiership ==
In the 1905 election, he led his party to victory for the first time in 33 years by defeating the tired Liberal government of George William Ross.
Whitney&#x27;s government laid the basis for Ontario&#x27;s industrial development by creating the Hydro-Electric Power Commission of Ontario, with Sir Adam Beck as its chairman and driving force. His government created the Ontario Railway and Municipal Board in 1906 and also passed significant temperance and workmen&#x27;s compensation legislation. 

Early in his premiership, Whitney sought to remedy the troubled University of Toronto by improving its finances and finding a successor to its unpopular president James Loudon. According to his biographer, &quot;The legislation for the University of Toronto has to be ranked as one of the major achievements of Whitney&#x27;s entire period as Premier of Ontario. It provided the institution with a foundation for growth in the twentieth century and it represented a complete break with almost every aspect of Liberal policy towards the University of Toronto.&quot;

He also supported the anti-Catholic and anti-French-Canadian sentiments of supporters of the Orange Order in his caucus (such as George Howard Ferguson) by passing Regulation 17, which banned the teaching of French in schools beyond the first three years of school. The measure inflamed French-Canadian opinion across Canada, particularly in Quebec, and divided the country as it entered World War I.

== Death and legacy ==
Whitney died in office shortly after he had won the 1914 election. Whitney had a suspected heart attack during his convalescence in New York City in 1913 and returned to Toronto staying at Toronto General Hospital.

A 1920s government building across from Queen&#x27;s Park is named the Whitney Block after him. A statue of him stands on the Queen&#x27;s Park grounds. Whitney Hall, a residential building at nearby University College, of the University of Toronto, is also named after him.

==Further reading==
*Charles W. Humphries, &#x27;Honest Enough to be Bold&#x27;: the Life and Times of Sir James Pliny Whitney. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1985. ISBN 9781487590369. 
* Charles W. Humphries, &quot;James P. Whitney and the University of Toronto,&quot; in Profiles of a Province: Studies in the History of Ontario, (Toronto: Ontario Historical Society, 1967), 118-125.

==References==
== External links ==
* 
* Ontario Plaques - Sir James Pliny Whitney
* Sir James Whitney fonds, Archives of Ontario</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3161488" start="0" end="23" title="James Whitney (politician)" label="Sir James Pliny Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="69" end="77" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="119" end="126" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q826977" start="141" end="153" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314760" start="184" end="190" title="Dundas County, Ontario" label="Dundas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560704" start="237" end="255" title="premier of Ontario" label="premier of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314760" start="393" end="415" title="Dundas County, Ontario" label="Williamsburgh Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171963" start="437" end="460" title="Cornwall Grammar School" label="Cornwall Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q938623" start="499" end="523" title="John Sandfield Macdonald" label="John Sandfield Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q11883244" start="642" end="652" title="Morrisburg, Ontario" label="Morrisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q956690" start="691" end="699" title="Cornwall, Ontario" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166330" start="756" end="768" title="Trent Affair" label="Trent Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499849" start="798" end="825" title="Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry Highlanders" label="Cornwall Volunteer Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996302" start="837" end="849" title="Fenian Raids" label="Fenian Raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809086" start="1209" end="1228" title="Ontario legislature" label="Ontario legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017340" start="1316" end="1338" title="William Ralph Meredith" label="William Ralph Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586375" start="1513" end="1526" title="1905 Ontario general election" label="1905 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553186" start="1610" end="1617" title="Ontario Liberal Party" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q553340" start="1632" end="1651" title="George William Ross" label="George William Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q910426" start="1752" end="1794" title="Hydro-Electric Power Commission of Ontario" label="Hydro-Electric Power Commission of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q520050" start="1805" end="1814" title="Adam Beck" label="Adam Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094842" start="1877" end="1912" title="Ontario Municipal Board" label="Ontario Railway and Municipal Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q333247" start="1949" end="1959" title="Temperance movement" label="temperance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184466" start="1964" end="1991" title="workmen&amp;#x27;s compensation" label="workmen&amp;#x27;s compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="2071" end="2092" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138238" start="2170" end="2182" title="James Loudon" label="James Loudon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2600" end="2608" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="2618" end="2633" title="French-Canadian" label="French-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="2666" end="2678" title="Orange Institution" label="Orange Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141552" start="2702" end="2724" title="George Howard Ferguson" label="George Howard Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q949389" start="2737" end="2750" title="Regulation 17" label="Regulation 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="2860" end="2875" title="French-Canadian" label="French-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="2915" end="2921" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2961" end="2972" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586376" start="3050" end="3063" title="1914 Ontario general election" label="1914 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3130" end="3143" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444359" start="3187" end="3211" title="Toronto General Hospital" label="Toronto General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419018" start="3254" end="3271" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park (Toronto)" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551334" start="3414" end="3432" title="University College (Toronto)" label="University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="3441" end="3462" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424189" wikidata="Q257387" url="?curid=424189" title="Vitali set">
<text>In mathematics, a Vitali set is an elementary example of a set of real numbers that is not Lebesgue measurable, found by Giuseppe Vitali in 1905. The Vitali theorem is the existence theorem that there are such sets. Each Vitali set is uncountable, and there are uncountably many Vitali sets. The proof of their existence depends on the axiom of choice. 

== Measurable sets ==
Certain sets have a definite &#x27;length&#x27; or &#x27;mass&#x27;. For instance, the interval [0, 1] is deemed to have length 1; more generally, an interval [&quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;], &quot;a&quot; ≤ &quot;b&quot;, is deemed to have length &quot;b&quot; − &quot;a&quot;. If we think of such intervals as metal rods with uniform density, they likewise have well-defined masses. The set [0, 1] ∪ [2, 3] is composed of two intervals of length one, so we take its total length to be 2. In terms of mass, we have two rods of mass 1, so the total mass is 2.

There is a natural question here: if &quot;E&quot; is an arbitrary subset of the real line, does it have a &#x27;mass&#x27; or &#x27;total length&#x27;? As an example, we might ask what is the mass of the set of rational numbers between 0 and 1, given that the mass of the interval [0, 1] is 1. The rationals are dense in the reals, so any value between and including 0 and 1 may appear reasonable.

However the closest generalization to mass is sigma additivity, which gives rise to the Lebesgue measure. It assigns a measure of &quot;b&quot; − &quot;a&quot; to the interval [&quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;], but will assign a measure of 0 to the set of rational numbers because it is countable. Any set which has a well-defined Lebesgue measure is said to be &quot;measurable&quot;, but the construction of the Lebesgue measure (for instance using Carathéodory&#x27;s extension theorem) does not make it obvious whether non-measurable sets exist. The answer to that question involves the axiom of choice.

== Construction and proof ==
A Vitali set is a subset formula_1 of the interval formula_2 of real numbers such that, for each real number formula_3, there is exactly one number formula_4 such that formula_5 is a rational number. Vitali sets exist because the rational numbers formula_6 form a normal subgroup of the real numbers formula_7 under addition, and this allows the construction of the additive quotient group formula_8 of these two groups which is the group formed by the cosets formula_9 of the rational numbers as a subgroup of the real numbers under addition. This group formula_8 consists of disjoint &quot;shifted copies&quot; of formula_6 in the sense that each element of this quotient group is a set of the form formula_9 for some formula_3 in formula_7. The uncountably many elements of formula_8 partition formula_7 into disjoint sets, and each element is dense in formula_7. Each element of formula_8 intersects formula_2, and the axiom of choice guarantees the existence of a subset of formula_2 containing exactly one representative out of each element of formula_8. A set formed this way is called a Vitali set.

Every Vitali set formula_1 is uncountable, and formula_23 is irrational for any formula_24.

===Non-measurability===

A Vitali set is non-measurable. To show this, we assume that formula_1 is measurable and we derive a contradiction. Let formula_26 be an enumeration of the rational numbers in formula_27 (recall that the rational numbers are countable). From the construction of formula_1, we can show that the translated sets formula_29, formula_30 are pairwise disjoint. (If not, then there exists distinct formula_31 and formula_32 such that formula_33, a contradiction.) 

Next, note that 
:formula_34
To see the first inclusion, consider any real number formula_3 in formula_2 and let formula_37 be the representative in formula_1 for the equivalence class formula_39; then 
formula_40 for some rational number formula_41 in formula_27 which implies that formula_3 is in formula_44.

Apply the Lebesgue measure to these inclusions using sigma additivity:
:formula_45

Because the Lebesgue measure is translation invariant, formula_46 and therefore
:formula_47

But this is impossible. Summing infinitely many copies of the constant formula_48 yields either zero or infinity, according to whether the constant is zero or positive. In neither case is the sum in formula_49. So formula_1 cannot have been measurable after all, i.e., the Lebesgue measure formula_51 must not define any value for formula_48.

==Properties==
No Vitali set has the property of Baire. 

By modifying the above proof, one shows that each Vitali set has Banach measure 0. This does not create any contradictions since Banach measures are not countably additive, but only finitely additive.

== Role of the axiom of choice ==
The construction of Vitali sets given above uses the axiom of choice. The question arises: is the axiom of choice needed to prove the existence of sets that are not Lebesgue measurable? The answer is yes, provided that inaccessible cardinals are consistent with the most common axiomatization of set theory, so-called ZFC.

In 1964, Robert Solovay constructed a model of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory without the axiom of choice where all sets of real numbers are Lebesgue measurable. This is known as the Solovay model. In his proof, Solovay assumed that the existence of inaccessible cardinals is consistent with the other axioms of Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory, i.e. that it creates no contradictions. This assumption is widely believed to be true by set theorists, but it cannot be proven in ZFC alone.

In 1980, Saharon Shelah proved that it is not possible to establish Solovay&#x27;s result without his assumption on inaccessible cardinals.

==See also==
* 
* 

==References==
==Bibliography==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q257387" start="18" end="28" title="Vitali set" label="Vitali set"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="66" end="77" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q827230" start="91" end="110" title="Lebesgue measure" label="Lebesgue measurable"/>
<link wikidata="Q739969" start="121" end="136" title="Giuseppe Vitali" label="Giuseppe Vitali"/>
<link wikidata="Q257387" start="150" end="164" title="Vitali set" label="Vitali theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2694495" start="172" end="189" title="existence theorem" label="existence theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128796" start="235" end="246" title="Uncountable set" label="uncountable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128796" start="262" end="278" title="uncountably many" label="uncountably many"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="336" end="351" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q185148" start="464" end="472" title="interval (mathematics)" label="interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="1149" end="1164" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q673444" start="1250" end="1255" title="Dense set" label="dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q709149" start="1383" end="1399" title="sigma additivity" label="sigma additivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q827230" start="1425" end="1441" title="Lebesgue measure" label="Lebesgue measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="1621" end="1630" title="countable" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631152" start="1785" end="1822" title="Carathéodory&amp;#x27;s extension theorem" label="Carathéodory&amp;#x27;s extension theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="1925" end="1940" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q185148" start="2014" end="2022" title="interval (mathematics)" label="interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="2036" end="2047" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="2155" end="2170" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q743179" start="2236" end="2251" title="normal subgroup" label="normal subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q32043" start="2288" end="2296" title="addition" label="addition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138961" start="2347" end="2361" title="quotient group" label="quotient group"/>
<link wikidata="Q751969" start="2425" end="2430" title="coset" label="coset"/>
<link wikidata="Q215382" start="2549" end="2557" title="disjoint sets" label="disjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128796" start="2720" end="2736" title="uncountable set" label="uncountably many"/>
<link wikidata="Q381060" start="2759" end="2768" title="partition of a set" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q673444" start="2819" end="2824" title="dense set" label="dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="2895" end="2910" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211071" start="2984" end="2998" title="representative (mathematics)" label="representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="3423" end="3432" title="countable" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q709149" start="4023" end="4039" title="sigma additivity" label="sigma additivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q803931" start="4528" end="4545" title="property of Baire" label="property of Baire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853764" start="4614" end="4628" title="Banach measure" label="Banach measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="4838" end="4853" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331373" start="5004" end="5025" title="inaccessible cardinal" label="inaccessible cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191849" start="5103" end="5106" title="ZFC" label="ZFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395607" start="5118" end="5132" title="Robert M. Solovay" label="Robert Solovay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558851" start="5289" end="5302" title="Solovay model" label="Solovay model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319773" start="5382" end="5392" title="Consistency" label="consistent"/>
<link wikidata="Q448592" start="5599" end="5613" title="Saharon Shelah" label="Saharon Shelah"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424198" wikidata="Q188978" url="?curid=424198" title="Kostas Karamanlis">
<text>Konstantinos A. Karamanlis (; born 14 September 1956), commonly known as Kostas Karamanlis (, ), is a Greek retired politician who served as prime minister of Greece from 2004 to 2009. He was also president of the centre-right New Democracy party, founded by his uncle Konstantinos Karamanlis, from 1997 to 2009, and as member of the Hellenic Parliament from 1989 to 2023.

Karamanlis was first elected as a member of the Hellenic Parliament for New Democracy in 1989 and became president of the party in 1997. After leading the opposition in the Hellenic Parliament for seven years and his narrow defeat in the 2000 parliamentary election, he served as the 181st Prime Minister of Greece for two consecutive terms, winning the 2004 election, with an all-time record number of votes, and again in 2007. However, he asked for mid-term general elections in 2009, as his party enjoyed a narrow parliamentary majority that could not guarantee a stable government needed to handle the Greek financial crisis. Eventually, Karamanlis was defeated and resigned as president of New Democracy after twelve years as the party&#x27;s leader, being active in politics though as a member of the parliament. On 21 February 2023, it was announced that he would not be a parliamentary candidate and that he would retire from politics after the 2023 election.

==Political career==
Kostas Karamanlis, a nephew of former Greek President Konstantinos Karamanlis, was born in Athens and studied at University of Athens Law School and at the private Deree College, continuing with postgraduate studies in the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University (Boston) in the United States, where he gained a master&#x27;s degree and a doctorate in political sciences, international relations and diplomatic history.

Karamanlis served in New Democracy&#x27;s organisational and ideological sectors from 1974 to 1979 and from 1984 to 1989. He is the author of a book, &quot;Eleftherios Venizelos and Foreign Relations of Greece, 1928–32&quot;, on the Greek politician Eleftherios Venizelos. 
He has also edited and prefaced various historical publications.

Karamanlis was elected a New Democracy deputy for Thessaloniki in 1989, but in 2004 he was elected for Larissa. He was elected party leader in 1997 following New Democracy&#x27;s defeat in the 1996 election. He defeated the ruling Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK) at the 2004 elections.

He served as one of the Vice Presidents of the European People&#x27;s Party (EPP) between 1999 and 2006.

Karamanlis was the first Greek Prime Minister to be born after World War II. He married Natasa Pazaïti in 1998; they have two children (a boy and a girl, twins), born on 13 June 2003.
===Prime minister===
Aided by the unpopularity of the incumbent PASOK government led by Costas Simitis (a party that had been in power between 1981 and 1989 and from 1993 to 2004) ND defeated the Socialists&#x27; George Andreas Papandreou in 2004. 

Karamanlis stated that the priorities of his government were education, economic policy, agricultural policy, lowering the high level of unemployment (standing at 11.2%) and a more transparent and effective state administration. Economic policy centered on tax cuts, investment incentives, privatization, and market deregulation. While early problems included a large public debt (about 112% of GDP) and a budget deficit (5.3% of the GDP) in excess of Eurozone stability rules, Karamanlis&#x27;s government halved the budget deficit to 2.6% by 2006.

Another key issue was the 2004 Summer Olympics scheduled to be held in Athens in the first year of his government: several key buildings were unfinished at the time of the election, the security budget had increased to €970 million and authorities announced that a roof would no longer be constructed over the main swimming venue. The main Olympic Stadium, the designated facility for the opening and closing ceremonies, was completed only two months before the games opened, with the sliding over of a futuristic glass roof designed by Spanish architect Santiago Calatrava. Other facilities, such as the streetcar line linking the city and the airport were largely unfinished just two months before the games. The subsequent pace of preparation, however, made the rush to finish the Athens venues one of the tightest in Olympics history and everything was finished just in time for the Opening Ceremony. At the end, the Games were held exactly as planned and were globally hailed as a spectacular success. Nonetheless and as a result of the delays, large cost overruns resulted in a deficit in the national accounts above EU stipulations. The ND government and the previous government of Costas Simitis criticized each other for the messy preparations. PASOK criticized the New Democracy government for using the Olympics as a pretext to renege on promises. 
Under the weight of the huge costs (estimated at €7bn), the deficit shot up to 5.3%. Karamanlis declared that &quot;Social policy was done with borrowed cash, military spending did not show up on the budget, debts were created in secret&quot;.

====Financial audit of 2004====
In March 2004, while PASOK was still in government, Eurostat refused to validate the fiscal data transmitted by the Greek government and asked for a revision, as it had done previously -twice- in 2002, then resulting in a revision which changed the government balance from a surplus to a deficit.

A worse blow came in May 2004, when the European Commission harshly accused Greece of &quot;imprudent&quot; and &quot;sloppy&quot; fiscal policies, pointing out that since Greek economic growth had been an annual 4% in 2000–2003, a declining fiscal position could only be the result of government mismanagement, including concerns by the EU regarding the 103% public debt to GDP ratio which Karamanlis had inherited from the previous PASOK regime. With this report, the Commission effectively called into question the quality of Greek economic data, as Eurostat had done in March.

The New Democracy government under Karamanlis, elected on April of that year, decided to conduct a Financial Audit of the Greek economy, before sending revised data to Eurostat. The audit concluded that the PASOK administration and prime minister Costas Simitis had falsified Greece&#x27;s macroeconomic statistics, on the basis of which the European institutions accepted Greece to join the Eurozone. PASOK contested the accusations and claimed that 2006 Eurostat changes to the system of defense expenditure calculation legitimized the practices of the Costas Simitis government. New Democracy responded that the defense expenditures covered by those changes constituted only a small part of much more substantial expenditures that were fraudulently concealed by the previous PASOK government.

In social policy, the retirement age was raised from 58 to 60 for those with 35 years of insurance, while early retirement went up from 55 to 60 for those who entered the labor market after 1993. Supplementary pensions were also cut. In addition, mothers with under-aged children could retire at 55 instead of 50, while paid maternity leave was extended to 6 months in the private sector. 

Rising unemployment and the threat of inflation undermined Karamanlis&#x27; promises to kick-start the economy and sparked strikes, especially one in 2006 by rubbish collectors, causing severe disruption in the economy – particularly the one in July 2005 at the height of the tourist season.

In early 2006, it was revealed that the cellular phone of Kostas Karamanlis, as well as those of several other members of the government and officials of the armed forces, had been wiretapped for several months during and after the 2004 Athens Olympics. The investigation into this matter by the Greek organization for communications privacy was closed with the argument that if this investigation would carry on, the information revealed would be dangerous for the national security of Greece.

The government has undertaken a €210 million program to bolster broadband internet connectivity in provincial Greece, which was approved by the European Commission in 2006 with the commendation that it constituted &quot;the most ambitious broadband development programme that any EU member has ever undertaken&quot;.

In matters of social policy, Karamanlis&#x27;s government has followed a largely liberal policy. In the spring of 2006, the Ministry of Education repealed a law continuously in effect from 1936 (including 20 years of socialist rule), which required approval by the local Orthodox Christian Metropolitan for the building of non-Orthodox houses of worship.

At the outset of the year, prime minister Karamanlis announced the initiative of his government for a new amendment to the Constitution. He stated that one of the central issues of this amendment will be the legalisation of private universities in Greece, operating on a non-profit basis. Greece has for years experienced a mass exodus of &quot;educational immigrants&quot; to other countries&#x27; Higher Education institutions, where they move to study; this creates a chronic problem for Greece, in terms of loss of capital as well as human resources, since many of those students opt to seek employment in the countries they studied, after getting their degrees (it is characteristic Greece is by far the leading country in the world in terms of students abroad as a percentage of the general population, with 5250 students per million, compared to second Malaysia&#x27;s 1780 students per million inhabitants). Proponents of non-state owned Universities claim that the State&#x27;s constitutionally mandated monopoly on Higher Education is responsible for these problems.

Attempted changes in Greek higher education have encountered fierce opposition from the other parties, as well as from the majority of the academic community, both professors and students. An attempt to pass several changes concerning the operation of Greek universities resulted in large-scale demonstrations, bringing together tens of thousands of protesters, and, finally, the closure of most institutions by protesting students in the summer of 2006. The semester&#x27;s exam period was lost and postponed until the fall, while the government shelved the changes and claimed that no bill would be put to a parliamentary vote before a more extensive dialogue had been held with students. However, without any further dialogue, the legislation was passed in 2007.

====2007 re-election====

In the 2007 general election, Karamanlis was re-elected with a diminished majority, following the 2007 Greek forest fires that ravaged much of western Peloponnese and southern Euboea. He pledged to continue with his reform and privatization programme as well as to form a new Cabinet.

On 19 September 2007, he presented a new cabinet.

====2009 elections====
In the 2009 general election, Karamanlis and New Democracy were voted out of the government. He stepped down on 30 November after elections within the New Democracy party for the election of new party leader.

==Criticism==
The prime minister came under criticism during the wildfires of 2007. With hundreds of thousands of acres burning and many deaths, the government had faced growing scrutiny for its response to the fires. In the days following the fires and the seeming lack of a substantial fire-fighting response adequate to stop the blazes, the government suggested the process was not natural and the work of arsonists.

A group of Pakistani men has claimed that they were abducted by Greek and British intelligence agents in the wake of the 7 July 2005 London bombings. The governments of Greece, Pakistan, and Britain have denied accusations that they were involved in the alleged detention of 28 Pakistanis for several days in Athens and Ioannina after the 7 July bombings in London. The prosecutor assigned to the case said he had no evidence of who committed the abductions, but the main opposition party PASOK called for the resignation of Greek public order minister Georgios Voulgarakis. An unnamed human rights group (possibly biased) also called for the resignation of the Prime Minister, Kostas Karamanlis over the allegations. 

A number of serious scandals involving Karamanlis&#x27; closest ministers and members of his party surfaced during his term, damaging his public image severely. Karamanlis was largely elected in 2004 due to his plea to &quot;clear&quot; public life from corruption.

Another criticism against Karamanlis and his cabinet involved the 2008 riots, which started after the killing of 15-year-old Alexandros Grigoropoulos by a police officer. Police said Grigoropoulos was in a group of four teenagers who used hard language to a few policemen by a car. One officer was charged, and Reuters noted that &quot;Greece has a tradition of violence at student rallies and fire bomb attacks by anarchist groups.&quot; Amnesty International called for a speedy investigation. The death of Grigoropoulos resulted in large demonstrations and widespread riots in major Greek and foreign cities.

After he left office, many in Greece continued to blame the New Democracy governments of Karamanlis for economic difficulties. Financial markets and Greece&#x27;s EU partners chastised the country for vastly underestimated budget deficits under his watch.

==See also==
* Cabinet of Greece

==References==
==External links==
*Kostas Karamanlis on the &quot;Charlie Rose Show&quot;, 16 September 2005 






|-
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188978" start="0" end="26" title="Kostas Karamanlis" label="Konstantinos A. Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188978" start="73" end="90" title="Kostas Karamanlis" label="Kostas Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377230" start="141" end="165" title="Prime Minister of Greece" label="prime minister of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="214" end="226" title="Centre-right politics" label="centre-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="227" end="240" title="New Democracy (Greece)" label="New Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156806" start="269" end="292" title="Konstantinos Karamanlis" label="Konstantinos Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="334" end="353" title="Hellenic Parliament" label="Hellenic Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566034" start="463" end="467" title="June 1989 Greek legislative election" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934584" start="612" end="639" title="2000 Greek legislative election" label="2000 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q744101" start="658" end="688" title="List of Prime Ministers of Greece" label="181st Prime Minister of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518129" start="728" end="741" title="2004 Greek legislative election" label="2004 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204824" start="797" end="801" title="2007 Greek legislative election" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q863595" start="834" end="859" title="2009 Greek legislative election" label="general elections in 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q956475" start="980" end="1002" title="Greek government-debt crisis" label="Greek financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q84081612" start="1327" end="1340" title="May 2023 Greek legislative election" label="2023 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q156806" start="1418" end="1441" title="Konstantinos Karamanlis" label="Konstantinos Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="1455" end="1461" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q547867" start="1477" end="1497" title="University of Athens" label="University of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983711" start="1528" end="1541" title="Deree College" label="Deree College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073441" start="1587" end="1623" title="Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy" label="Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49120" start="1627" end="1643" title="Tufts University" label="Tufts University"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1645" end="1651" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q205545" start="2052" end="2073" title="Eleftherios Venizelos" label="Eleftherios Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="2192" end="2204" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q178405" start="2245" end="2252" title="Larissa" label="Larissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="2373" end="2403" title="Panhellenic Socialist Movement" label="Panhellenic Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518129" start="2419" end="2433" title="2004 Greek legislative election" label="2004 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q208242" start="2483" end="2511" title="European People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="European People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2605" end="2617" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337135" start="2630" end="2644" title="Natasa Pazaïti" label="Natasa Pazaïti"/>
<link wikidata="Q155390" start="2814" end="2828" title="Costas Simitis" label="Costas Simitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q151917" start="2939" end="2964" title="George Andreas Papandreou" label="George Andreas Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="3037" end="3046" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q582577" start="3048" end="3063" title="economic policy" label="economic policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q396198" start="3065" end="3084" title="agricultural policy" label="agricultural policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="3113" end="3125" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q720829" start="3157" end="3168" title="Open government" label="transparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689423" start="3233" end="3241" title="Tax cut" label="tax cuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="3266" end="3279" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q902410" start="3285" end="3304" title="Deregulation" label="market deregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="3344" end="3355" title="public debt" label="public debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="3428" end="3436" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="3553" end="3573" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189663" start="3867" end="3882" title="Olympic Stadium (Athens)" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="4132" end="4141" title="Tram" label="streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682100" start="4583" end="4596" title="cost overruns" label="cost overruns"/>
<link wikidata="Q155390" start="4716" end="4730" title="Costas Simitis" label="Costas Simitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q828395" start="5003" end="5016" title="Social policy" label="Social policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q937312" start="5046" end="5063" title="military spending" label="military spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="5095" end="5100" title="Government debt" label="debts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="5822" end="5833" title="public debt" label="public debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079603" start="6196" end="6208" title="revised data" label="revised data"/>
<link wikidata="Q828395" start="6844" end="6857" title="social policy" label="social policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413228" start="6863" end="6877" title="retirement age" label="retirement age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551299" start="7037" end="7059" title="Social pension" label="Supplementary pensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q772989" start="7161" end="7181" title="Parental leave" label="paid maternity leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="7239" end="7251" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="7270" end="7279" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="7355" end="7362" title="Strike action" label="strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067529" start="7706" end="7716" title="Wiretapping" label="wiretapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="7991" end="8008" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="8420" end="8427" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573466" start="8818" end="8830" title="Constitution of Greece" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="8919" end="8939" title="Private university" label="private universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="8966" end="8976" title="Nonprofit organization" label="non-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="9720" end="9736" title="Tertiary education" label="Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q513213" start="9794" end="9816" title="Higher education in Greece" label="Greek higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="9937" end="9947" title="Professor" label="professors"/>
<link wikidata="Q48282" start="9952" end="9960" title="Student" label="students"/>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="10123" end="10133" title="Protest" label="protesters"/>
<link wikidata="Q131395" start="10493" end="10501" title="dialogue" label="dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q49371" start="10507" end="10518" title="legislation" label="legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204824" start="10573" end="10594" title="2007 Greek legislative election" label="2007 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123572" start="10629" end="10639" title="Diminished responsibility" label="diminished"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382648" start="10640" end="10648" title="majority" label="majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q225475" start="10664" end="10687" title="2007 Greek forest fires" label="2007 Greek forest fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="10717" end="10728" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q173096" start="10742" end="10748" title="Euboea" label="Euboea"/>
<link wikidata="Q900406" start="10782" end="10788" title="reform" label="reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="10793" end="10806" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q863595" start="10933" end="10954" title="2009 Greek legislative election" label="2009 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q225475" start="11201" end="11218" title="2007 Greek forest fires" label="wildfires of 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q10818" start="11678" end="11705" title="7 July 2005 London bombings" label="7 July 2005 London bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="11866" end="11872" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="12046" end="12051" title="Panhellenic Socialist Movement" label="PASOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q12885652" start="12088" end="12109" title="Minister for Public Order (Greece)" label="public order minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q382096" start="12110" end="12130" title="Georgios Voulgarakis" label="Georgios Voulgarakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q152372" start="12610" end="12620" title="2008 civil unrest in Greece" label="2008 riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="12983" end="13004" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q16331915" start="13429" end="13446" title="Cabinet of Greece" label="Cabinet of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q901173" start="13514" end="13531" title="Charlie Rose Show" label="Charlie Rose Show"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424202" wikidata="Q108537107" url="?curid=424202" title="Rotational invariance">
<text>In mathematics, a function defined on an inner product space is said to have rotational invariance if its value does not change when arbitrary rotations are applied to its argument.

==Mathematics==

===Functions===

For example, the function 

:formula_1

is invariant under rotations of the plane around the origin, because for a rotated set of coordinates through any angle &quot;θ&quot;

:formula_2
:formula_3

the function, after some cancellation of terms, takes exactly the same form 

:formula_4

The rotation of coordinates can be expressed using matrix form using the rotation matrix,

:formula_5

or symbolically &#x27; = Rx. Symbolically, the rotation invariance of a real-valued function of two real variables is

:formula_6

In words, the function of the rotated coordinates takes exactly the same form as it did with the initial coordinates, the only difference is the rotated coordinates replace the initial ones. For a real-valued function of three or more real variables, this expression extends easily using appropriate rotation matrices. 

The concept also extends to a vector-valued function f of one or more variables;

:formula_7

In all the above cases, the arguments (here called &quot;coordinates&quot; for concreteness) are rotated, not the function itself.

===Operators===

For a function

:formula_8

which maps elements from a subset &quot;X&quot; of the real line formula_9 to itself, rotational invariance may also mean that the function commutes with rotations of elements in &quot;X&quot;. This also applies for an operator that acts on such functions. An example is the two-dimensional Laplace operator 

:formula_10

which acts on a function &quot;f&quot; to obtain another function ∇2&quot;f&quot;. This operator is invariant under rotations.

If &quot;g&quot; is the function &quot;g&quot;(&quot;p&quot;) = &quot;f&quot;(&quot;R&quot;(&quot;p&quot;)), where &quot;R&quot; is any rotation, then (∇2&quot;g&quot;)(&quot;p&quot;) = (∇2&quot;f&quot; )(&quot;R&quot;(&quot;p&quot;)); that is, rotating a function merely rotates its Laplacian. 

==Physics==

In physics, if a system behaves the same regardless of how it is oriented in space, then its Lagrangian is rotationally invariant. According to Noether&#x27;s theorem, if the action (the integral over time of its Lagrangian) of a physical system is invariant under rotation, then angular momentum is conserved.

=== Application to quantum mechanics ===

In quantum mechanics, rotational invariance is the property that after a rotation the new system still obeys Schrödinger&#x27;s equation. That is

:formula_11 

for any rotation &quot;R&quot;. Since the rotation does not depend explicitly on time, it commutes with the energy operator. Thus for rotational invariance we must have [&quot;R&quot;, &quot;H&quot;] = 0.

For infinitesimal rotations (in the &quot;xy&quot;-plane for this example; it may be done likewise for any plane) by an angle &quot;dθ&quot; the (infinitesimal) rotation operator is

:formula_12

then

:formula_13

thus

:formula_14

in other words angular momentum is conserved.

==See also==
* Axial symmetry
* Invariant measure
* Isotropy
* Maxwell&#x27;s theorem
* Rotational symmetry

==References==
*Stenger, Victor J. (2000). &quot;Timeless Reality&quot;. Prometheus Books. Especially chpt. 12. Nontechnical.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="18" end="26" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q214159" start="41" end="60" title="inner product space" label="inner product space"/>
<link wikidata="Q108537107" start="77" end="98" title="Rotational invariance" label="rotational invariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q107617" start="143" end="151" title="rotation" label="rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="371" end="376" title="angle" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="556" end="562" title="matrix (mathematics)" label="matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256564" start="578" end="593" title="rotation matrix" label="rotation matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284797" start="936" end="988" title="function of several real variables" label="real-valued function of three or more real variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375954" start="1090" end="1112" title="vector-valued function" label="vector-valued function"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="1309" end="1317" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="1358" end="1364" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q35689" start="1386" end="1395" title="real line" label="real line"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="1471" end="1478" title="commutative operation" label="commute"/>
<link wikidata="Q131030" start="1550" end="1558" title="Operator (mathematics)" label="operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q203484" start="1622" end="1638" title="Laplace operator" label="Laplace operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="2095" end="2102" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q324669" start="2185" end="2195" title="Lagrangian mechanics" label="Lagrangian"/>
<link wikidata="Q578555" start="2236" end="2258" title="Noether&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Noether&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q846785" start="2267" end="2273" title="Action (physics)" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="2372" end="2401" title="Conservation of angular momentum" label="angular momentum is conserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="2449" end="2466" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q107617" start="2519" end="2527" title="rotation" label="rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="2555" end="2582" title="Schrödinger&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Schrödinger&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q118905735" start="2817" end="2839" title="infinitesimal rotation" label="infinitesimal rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="3062" end="3078" title="angular momentum" label="angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886264" start="3109" end="3123" title="Axial symmetry" label="Axial symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200518" start="3126" end="3143" title="Invariant measure" label="Invariant measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q273163" start="3146" end="3154" title="Isotropy" label="Isotropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796056" start="3157" end="3179" title="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q593950" start="3182" end="3201" title="Rotational symmetry" label="Rotational symmetry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424208" wikidata="Q651063" url="?curid=424208" title="Gravastar">
<text>In astrophysics, the gravastar (a blend word of &quot;gravitational vacuum star&quot;) is an object hypothesized in a 2001 paper by Pawel O. Mazur and Emil Mottola as an alternative to the black hole theory. It has the usual black hole metric outside of the horizon, but de Sitter metric inside. On the horizon there is a thin shell of matter. This solution to the Einstein equations is stable and has no singularities. Further theoretical considerations of gravastars include the notion of a nestar (a second gravastar &quot;nested&quot; within the first one).

== Structure ==
In the original formulation by Mazur and Mottola, a gravastar is composed of three regions, differentiated by the relationship between pressure and energy density . The central region consists of false vacuum or &quot;dark energy&quot;, and in this region . Surrounding it is a thin shell of perfect fluid where . On the exterior is true vacuum, where .

The dark-energy-like behavior of the inner region prevents collapse to a singularity, and the presence of the thin shell prevents the formation of an event horizon, avoiding the infinite blue shift. The inner region has thermodynamically no entropy and may be thought of as a gravitational Bose–Einstein condensate. Severe red-shifting of photons as they climb out of the gravity well would make the fluid shell also seem very cold, almost absolute zero.

In addition to the original thin-shell formulation, gravastars with continuous pressure have been proposed. These objects must contain anisotropic stress.

Externally, a gravastar appears similar to a black hole: it is visible by the high-energy radiation it emits while consuming matter, and by the Hawking radiation it creates. Astronomers search the sky for X-rays emitted by infalling matter to detect black holes. A gravastar would produce an identical signature. It is also possible, if the thin shell is transparent to radiation, that gravastars may be distinguished from ordinary black holes by different gravitational lensing properties, as null geodesics may pass through.

Mazur and Mottola suggest that the violent creation of a gravastar might be an explanation for the origin of our universe and many other universes because all the matter from a collapsing star would implode &quot;through&quot; the central hole and explode into a new dimension and expand forever, which would be consistent with the current theories regarding the Big Bang. This &quot;new dimension&quot; exerts an outward pressure on the Bose-Einstein condensate layer and prevents it from collapsing further.

Gravastars also could provide a mechanism for describing how dark energy accelerates the expansion of the universe. One possible hypothesis uses Hawking radiation as a means to exchange energy between the &quot;parent&quot; universe and the &quot;child&quot; universe, and so cause the rate of expansion to accelerate, but this area is under much speculation.

Gravastar formation may provide an alternative explanation for sudden and intense gamma-ray bursts throughout space.

LIGO&#x27;s observations of gravitational waves from colliding objects have been found either to not be consistent with the gravastar concept, or to be indistinguishable from ordinary black holes.

==Comparison with black holes==
By taking quantum physics into account, the gravastar hypothesis attempts to resolve contradictions caused by conventional black hole theories.

===Event horizons===
In a gravastar, the event horizon is not present. The layer of positive-pressure fluid would lie just outside the &quot;event horizon&quot;, being prevented from complete collapse by the inner false vacuum. Due to the absence of an event horizon, the time coordinate of the exterior vacuum geometry is everywhere valid.

===Dynamic stability of gravastars===
In 2007, theoretical work indicated that under certain conditions, gravastars as well as other alternative black hole models are not stable when they rotate. Theoretical work has also shown that certain rotating gravastars are stable assuming certain angular velocities, shell thicknesses, and compactnesses. It is also possible that some gravastars which are mathematically unstable may be physically stable over cosmological timescales. Theoretical support for the feasibility of gravastars does not exclude the existence of black holes as shown in other theoretical studies. 
==See also==
* Acoustic metric
* Acoustic Hawking radiation from sonic black holes
* Black star (semiclassical gravity)
* Dark-energy star

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* The original paper by Mazur and Mottola
* 
==External links==
* Papers about gravastars on gr-qc
* by Kurzgesagt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="3" end="15" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q651063" start="21" end="30" title="Gravastar" label="gravastar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="34" end="44" title="portmanteau" label="blend word"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="68" end="74" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="132" end="146" title="Pawel O. Mazur" label="Pawel O. Mazur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="151" end="163" title="Emil Mottola" label="Emil Mottola"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="189" end="199" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045231" start="236" end="242" title="Metric tensor (general relativity)" label="metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903346" start="258" end="265" title="Horizon (general relativity)" label="horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179448" start="271" end="287" title="de Sitter metric" label="de Sitter metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394061" start="349" end="357" title="Solutions of the Einstein field equations" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q273711" start="365" end="383" title="Einstein field equations" label="Einstein equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q201721" start="405" end="418" title="Gravitational singularity" label="singularities"/>
<link wikidata="Q651063" start="493" end="499" title="Gravastar" label="nestar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538708" start="775" end="787" title="false vacuum" label="false vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q613845" start="871" end="884" title="perfect fluid" label="perfect fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q181741" start="1084" end="1097" title="event horizon" label="event horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="1175" end="1182" title="entropy (thermodynamics)" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46202" start="1224" end="1248" title="Bose–Einstein condensate" label="Bose–Einstein condensate"/>
<link wikidata="Q81182" start="1374" end="1387" title="absolute zero" label="absolute zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q466686" start="1525" end="1536" title="anisotropic" label="anisotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q497396" start="1690" end="1707" title="Hawking radiation" label="Hawking radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="1751" end="1756" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q185243" start="2003" end="2024" title="gravitational lensing" label="gravitational lensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="2187" end="2195" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="2437" end="2445" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343" start="2646" end="2657" title="dark energy" label="dark energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="2674" end="2699" title="expansion of the universe" label="expansion of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q22247" start="3028" end="3043" title="gamma-ray burst" label="gamma-ray burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="3417" end="3427" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674696" start="4413" end="4428" title="Acoustic metric" label="Acoustic metric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4431" end="4457" title="Hawking radiation#Experimental" label="Acoustic Hawking radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254125" start="4463" end="4479" title="sonic black hole" label="sonic black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q9298968" start="4483" end="4517" title="Black star (semiclassical gravity)" label="Black star (semiclassical gravity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002787" start="4520" end="4536" title="Dark-energy star" label="Dark-energy star"/>
<link wikidata="Q23893763" start="4680" end="4690" title="Kurzgesagt" label="Kurzgesagt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424214" wikidata="Q207023" url="?curid=424214" title="Ligures">
<text>The Ligures or Ligurians were an ancient people after whom Liguria, a region of present-day north-western Italy, is named. Because of the strong Celtic influences on their language and culture, they were also known in antiquity as Celto-Ligurians.
In pre-Roman times, the Ligurians occupied the present-day Italian region of Liguria, Piedmont, northern Tuscany, western Lombardy, western Emilia-Romagna, and northern Sardinia, reaching also Elba and Sicily. They inhabited also the French region of Provence-Alpes-Côte d&#x27;Azur and Corsica; however, it is generally believed that around 2000 BC the Ligurians occupied a much larger area, extending as far as what is today Catalonia (in the north-eastern corner of the Iberian Peninsula).

The origins of the ancient Ligurians are unclear, and an autochthonous origin is increasingly probable. What little is known today about the ancient Ligurian language is based on placenames and inscriptions on steles representing warriors. The lack of evidence does not allow a certain linguistic classification; it may be Pre-Indo-European, or an Indo-European language.

== Name ==
The Ligures are referred to as &quot;Ligyes&quot; (Λιγυες) by the Greeks and &quot;Ligures&quot; (earlier &quot;Liguses&quot;) by the Romans. According to Plutarch, the Ligurians called themselves &quot;Ambrones&quot;, which could indicate a relationship with the Ambrones of northern Europe.

== Geographical area of ancient Liguria ==

The geography of Strabo, from book 2, chapter 5, section 28 :
This zone corresponds to the current region of Liguria in Italy as well as to the former county of Nice which could be compared today to the Alpes Maritimes.

The writer, naturalist and Roman philosopher Pliny the Elder writes in his book &quot;The Natural History&quot; book III chapter 7 on the Ligurians and Liguria:
 
Just like Strabo, Pliny the Elder situates Liguria between the rivers Varus and Magra. He also quotes the Ligurian peoples living on the other side of the banks of the Var and the Alps. He writes in his book &quot;The Natural History&quot; book III chapter 6 :


Transalpine Ligures are said to have inhabited the South Eastern portion of modern France, between the Alps and the Rhone river, from where they constantly battled against the Greek colony of Massalia.


==History==
=== Copper and Bronze ages ===
Copper begins to be mined from the middle of the 4th millennium BC in Liguria with the Libiola and Monte Loreto mines dated to 3700 BC. These are the oldest copper mines in the western Mediterranean basin. It was during this period of the Copper Age in Italy that we find throughout Liguria a large number of anthropomorphic stelae in addition to rock engravings.

The Polada Culture (a location near Brescia, Lombardy, Italy) was a cultural horizon extended in the Po valley from eastern Lombardy and Veneto to Emilia and Romagna, formed in the first half of 2nd millennium BC perhaps for the arrival of new people from the transalpine regions of Switzerland and Southern Germany. Its influences are also found in the cultures of the Early Bronze Age of Liguria, Romagna, Corsica, Sardinia (Bonnanaro culture) and Rhone Valley. There are some commonalities with the previous Bell Beaker Culture including the usage of the bow and a certain mastery in metallurgy. Apart from that, the Polada culture does not correspond to the Beaker culture nor to the previous Remedello culture.

The Bronze tools and weapons show similarities with those of the Unetice Culture and other groups in north of Alps. According to Bernard Sergent, the origin of the Ligurian linguistic family (in his opinion distantly related to the Celtic and Italic ones) would have to be found in the Polada culture and Rhone culture, southern branches of the Unetice culture.
It is said that the ligurians inhabited the Po valley around the 2,000 B.C., they not only appear in the legends of the Po valley, but would have left traces (linguistic and craft) found in the archaeological also in the area near the northern Adriatic coast. The Ligurians are credited with forming the first villages in the Po Valley of the facies of the pile dwellings and of the dammed settlements, a society that followed the Polada culture, and is well suited in middle and late Bronze Age.

The ancient name of the Po river (Padus in Latin) derived from the Ligurian name of the river: &quot;Bod-encus&quot; or &quot;Bod-incus.&quot; This word appears in the placename Bodincomagus, a Ligurian town on the right bank of the Po downstream near today&#x27;s Turin.

According to a legend, Brescia and Barra (Bergamo) were founded by Cydno, forefather of the Ligurians. This myth seems to have a grain of truth, because recent archaeological excavations have unearthed remains of a settlement dating back to 1200 BC that scholars presume to have been built and inhabited by Ligures. Others scholars attribute the founding of Bergamo and Brescia to the Etruscans.

=== Canegrate and Golasecca cultures ===

The Canegrate culture (13th century BC) may represent the first migratory wave of the proto-Celtic population from the northwest part of the Alps that, through the Alpine passes, penetrated and settled in the western Po valley between Lake Maggiore and Lake Como (Scamozzina culture). They brought a new funerary practice—cremation—which supplanted inhumation. It has also been proposed that a more ancient proto-Celtic presence can be traced back to the beginning of the Middle Bronze Age (16th-15th century BC), when north-western Italy appears closely linked regarding the production of bronze artifacts, including ornaments, to the western groups of the Tumulus culture (Central Europe, 1600 BC - 1200 BC). The bearers of the Canegrate culture maintained its homogeneity for only a century, after which it melded with the Ligurian populations and with this union gave rise to a new phase called the Golasecca culture, which is nowadays identified with the Lepontii and other Celto-Ligurian tribes.

Within the Golasecca culture territory roughly corresponds with the territories occupied by those tribal groups whose names are reported by Latin and Greek historians and geographers:
* Insubri: in the area south of Lake Maggiore, in Varese and part of Novara with Golasecca, Sesto Calende, Castelletto sopra Ticino; from the fifth century BC this area remains suddenly depopulated, while the first settlement of Mediolanum (Milan) rises.
* Leponti: in the Canton of Ticino, with Bellinzona and Sopra Ceneri; in the Ossola.
* Orobi: in the area of Como and Bergamo.
* Laevi and Marici: in Lomellina (Pavia/Ticinum).

=== Founding of Genoa ===

The Genoa area has been inhabited since the fifth or fourth millennium BC. According to excavations carried out in the city between 1898 and 1910, the Ligurian population that lived in Genoa maintained trade relations with the Etruscans and the Greeks, since several objects from these populations were found. In the 5th century BC the first town, or oppidum, was founded at the top of the hill today called Castello (Castle), which is now inside the medieval old town.

Thucydides (5th century BC) speaks of the Ligures having expelled the Sicanians, an Iberian tribe, from the banks of the river Sicanus, in Iberia.

=== First contacts with Romans ===
Ligurian sepulchres of the Italian Riviera and of Provence, holding cremations, exhibit Etruscan and Celtic influences.

In the third century BC, the Romans were in direct contact with the Ligurians. However, Roman expansionism was directed towards the rich territories of Gaul and the Iberian Peninsula (then under Carthaginian control), and the territory of the Ligurians was on the road (they controlled the Ligurian coasts and the south-western Alps).

Despite Roman efforts, only a few Ligurian tribes made alliance agreements with the Romans, notably the Genuates. The rest soon proved hostile. The hostilities were opened in 238 BC by a coalition of Ligurians and Boii Gauls, but the two peoples soon found themselves in disagreement and the military campaign came to a halt with the dissolution of the alliance. Meanwhile, a Roman fleet commanded by Quintus Fabius Maximus routed Ligurian ships on the coast (234-233 BC), allowing the Romans to control the coastal route to and from Gaul and to counter the Carthaginian expansion in Iberia, given that the Pisa-Luni-Genoa sea route was now safe.

In 222 BC the Insubres, during a war with Romans occupied the oppidum of Clastidium, that at that time, it was an important locality of the Anamari (or Marici), a Ligurian tribe that, probably for fear of the nearby warlike Insubres, had already accepted the alliance with Rome the year before.

For the first time, the Roman army marched beyond the Po, expanding into Gallia Transpadana. In 222 BC, the battle of Clastidium was fought and allowed Rome to take the capital of the Insubres, Mediolanum (modern-day Milan). To consolidate its dominion, Rome created the colonies of Placentia in the territory of the Boii and Cremona in that of the Insubres.

=== Second Punic War ===
With the outbreak of the second Punic war (218 BC) the Ligurian tribes had different attitudes. Some, like the tribes of the west Riviera and the Apuani, allied with the Carthaginians, providing soldiers to Hannibal&#x27;s troops when he arrived in Northern Italy, hoping that the Carthaginian general would free them from the neighbouring Romans. Others, like the Taurini, took sides in support of the Romans.

The pro-Carthaginian Ligurians took part in the Battle of the Trebia, which the Carthaginians won. Other Ligurians enlisted in the army of Hasdrubal Barca, when he arrived in Cisalpine Gaul (207 BC), in an attempt to rejoin the troops of his brother Hannibal. In the port of Savo (modern-day Savona), then capital of the Ligures Sabazi, triremes of the Carthaginian fleet of Mago Barca, brother of Hannibal, which were intended to cut the Roman trade routes in the Tyrrhenian Sea, found shelter.

In the early stages of the war, the pro-Roman Ligurians suffered. The Taurini were on the path of Hannibal&#x27;s march into Italy, and in 218 BC, they were attacked by him, as he had allied with their long-standing enemies, the Insubres. The Taurini chief town of Taurasia (modern-day Turin) was captured by Hannibal&#x27;s forces after a three-day siege.

In 205 BC, Genua (modern-day Genoa) was attacked and razed to the ground by Mago.

Near the end of the Second Punic War, Mago was among the Ingauni, trying to block the Roman advance. At the Battle of Insubria, he suffered a defeat, and later, died of wounds sustained in the battle. Genua was rebuilt in the same year.

Ligurian troops were present at the Battle of Zama in 202 BC, which marked the final end of Carthage as a great power.

=== Roman conquest of Ligurians ===

In 200 BC, the Ligures and Boii sacked and destroyed the Roman colony of Placentia, effectively controlling the most important ford of the Po Valley.

During the same period, the Romans were at war with the Apuani. Serious Roman efforts began in 182 BC, when both consular armies and a proconsular army were sent against the Ligurians. The wars continued into the 150s BC, when victorious generals celebrated two triumphs over the Ligurians. Here too, the Romans drove many natives off their land and settled colonies in their stead (&quot;e.g.&quot;, Luna and Luca in the 170s BC). During the same period, the Romans were at war with the Ligurian tribes of the northern Apennines.

By the end of the Second Punic War, however, hostilities were not over yet. Ligurian tribes and Carthaginian holdouts operating from the mountain territories continued to fight with guerrilla tactics. Thus, the Romans were forced into continuous military operations in northern Italy. In 201 BC, the Ingauni signed a peace treaty with Rome.

It was only in 197 BC that the Romans, under the leadership of Minucius Rufus, succeeded in regaining control of the Placentia area by subduing the Celelates, Cerdicates, Ilvati and the Boii Gauls and occupying the oppidum of Clastidium.

Genua was rebuilt by the proconsul Spurius Lucretius in the same year. Having defeated Carthage, Rome sought to expand northwards, and used Genua as a support base for raids, between 191 and 154 BC, against the Ligurian tribes of the hinterland, allied for decades with Carthage.

A second phase of the conflict followed (197-155 BC), characterized by the fact that the Apuani Ligurians entrenched themselves on the Apennines, from where they periodically descended to plunder the surrounding territories. The Romans, for their part, organized continuous expeditions to the mountains, hoping to surround and defeat the Ligurians (taking care not to be destroyed by ambushes). In the course of these wars, the Romans celebrated fifteen triumphs and suffered at least one serious defeat.

Historically, the beginning of the campaign dates back to 193 BC on the initiative of the Ligurian conciliabula (federations), who organized a major raid going as far as the right bank of the river Arno. Roman campaigns followed (191, 188 and 187 BC); these were victorious, but not decisive.

In the campaign of 186 BC, the Romans were beaten by the Ligurians in the Magra valley. In this battle, which took place in a narrow and precipitous place, the Romans lost about 4000 soldiers, three eagle insignia of the second legion and eleven banners of the Latin allies. In addition, the consul Quintus Martius was also killed in the battle. It is thought that the place of the battle and the death of the consul gave rise to the place-name of Marciaso, or that of the Canal of March on Mount Caprione in the town of Lerici (near the ruins of the city of Luni), which was later founded by the Romans. This mountain had a strategic importance because it controlled the valley of Magra and the sea.

In 185 BC, the Ingauni and the Intimilii also rebelled and managed to resist the Roman legions for the next five years, before capitulating in 180 BC. The Apuani, and those of hinterland side still resisted.

However, the Romans wanted to permanently pacify Liguria to facilitate further conquests in Gaul. To that end, they prepared a large army of almost 36,000 soldiers, under the command of proconsuls Publius Cornelius Cethegus and Marcus Baebius Tamphilus, with the aim of putting an end to Ligurian independence.

In 180 BC, the Romans inflicted a serious defeat on the Apuani Ligures, and deported 40,000 of them to the regions of Samnium. This deportation was followed by another one of 7,000 Ligurians in the following year. These were one of the few cases in which the Romans deported defeated populations in such a high number. In 177 BC other groups of Apuani Ligures surrendered to the Roman forces, and were eventually assimilated into Roman culture during the 2nd century BC, while the military campaign continued further north.

The Frinatiates surrendered in 175 BC, followed by the Statielli (172 BC) and the Velleiates (158 BC). The last Apuani resistance was subdued in 155 BC by consul Marcus Claudius Marcellus.

The subjugation of the coastal Ligures and the annexation of the Alpes Maritimae took place in 14 BC, closely following the occupation of the central Alps in 15 BC.

The last Ligurian tribes (e.g. Vocontii and Salluvii) still autonomous, who occupied Provence, were subdued in 124 BC.

=== Under Roman rule ===
Cisalpine Gaul was the part of modern Italy inhabited by Celts during the 4th and 3rd centuries BC. Conquered by the Roman Republic in the 220s BC, it was a Roman province from c. 81 BC until 42 BC, when it was merged into Roman Italy as indicated in Caesar&#x27;s will (&quot;Acta Caesaris&quot;). In 49 BC all inhabitants of northern Italy received Roman citizenship.

Around 7 BC, Augustus divided Italy into eleven &quot;regiones&quot;, as reported by Pliny the Elder in his &quot;Naturalis Historia.&quot; One of these was &quot;Regio IX: Liguria&quot;. Genoa became the centre of this region and the Ligurian populations moved towards the definitive Romanization.

The official historical name did not have the Liguria apposition, due to the contemporary academic use of naming the Augustan regions according to the populations they understood. Regio IX included only the Ligurian territory. This territory extended from the Maritime and Cottian Alps and the Var river (to the west) to the Trebbia and the Magra bordering Regio VIII Aemilia and Regio VII Etruria (to the east), and the Po to the north.

Pliny describes the region thus: &quot;patet ora Liguriae inter amnes Varum et Macram XXXI Milia passuum. Haec regio ex descriptione Augusti nona est&quot;. 

People with Ligurian names were living south of Placentia, in Italy, as late as 102 AD.

In 126 AD the Liguria region was the birthplace of Pertinax, Roman soldier and politician who became Roman Emperor.

== Theories on the origin of the Ligurians ==

In the 19th century, the origins of the Ligures drew renewed attention from scholars. Amédée Thierry, a French historian and journalist, linked them to the Iberians. The historian of the Bourgogne and specialist in its Gallic culture, Dominique-François-Louis Roget, Baron de Belloguet, would later claim a Gallic origin of the Ligurians. During the Iron Age the spoken language, the main divinities and the workmanship of the artifacts unearthed in the area of Liguria (such as the numerous torcs found) were similar to those of Celtic culture in both style and type.

Karl Müllenhoff, professor of Germanic antiquities at the Universities of Kiel and Berlin, studying the sources of the &quot;Ora maritima&quot; by Avienius (a Latin poet who lived in the 4th century AD, but who used as a source for his own work a Phoenician Periplum of the 6th century BC), held that the name &#x27;Ligurians&#x27; generically referred to various peoples who lived in western Europe, including the Celts, but thought the &quot;real Ligurians&quot; were a Pre-Indo-European population. Italian geologist and paleontologist Arturo Issel considered Ligurians to be direct descendants of the Cro-Magnon people that lived throughout Gaul from the Mesolithic period.

Those in favor of an Indo-European origin included Henri d&#x27;Arbois de Jubainville, a 19th-century French historian, who argued in &quot;Les Premiers habitants de l&#x27;Europe&quot; (1877) that the Ligurians were the earliest Indo-European speakers of western Europe. Jubainville&#x27;s &quot;Celto-Ligurian hypothesis&quot;, as it later became known, was significantly expanded in the second edition of his initial study. It inspired a body of contemporary philological research, as well as some archaeological work. The Celto-Ligurian hypothesis became associated with the Funnelbeaker culture and &quot;expanded to cover much of Central Europe&quot;.

Julius Pokorny adapted the Celto-Ligurian hypothesis into one linking the Ligures to the Illyrians, citing an array of similar evidence from Eastern Europe. Under this theory the &quot;Ligures-Illyrians&quot; became associated with the prehistoric Urnfield peoples.

The 1935 work of Frederick Orton even suggests that the Ligurians may have possibly been of Pashtun Afghan origin.

Today some accounts suggest that the Ligures represented the northern branch of an ethno-linguistic layer older than and very different from the proto-Italic peoples. It was believed that a &quot;Ligurian-Sicanian&quot; culture occupied a wide area of southern Europe, stretching from Liguria to Sicily and Iberia. However, while any such area would be broadly similar to that of the paleo-European &quot;Tyrrhenian culture&quot; hypothesized by later modern scholars, there are no known links between the Tyrrenians and Ligurians.

There are others such as Dominique Garcia, who question whether the Ligures can be considered a distinct ethnic group or culture from the surrounding cultures.

== Culture ==
=== Society ===

The Ligurians never formed a centralized state, they were in fact divided into independent tribes, in turn organized in small villages or castles. Rare were the oppidas, to which corresponded the federal capitals of the individual tribes or important commercial emporiums.

Within the tribes, an egalitarian and communal spirit prevailed. If there was also a noble class, this was tempered by &quot;tribal rallies&quot; in which all the classes participated; there does not seem to have been any pre-organized magistracy. There were no dynastic leaders either: the Ligurian &quot;king&quot; was elected as leader of a tribe or a federation of tribes; only in late period did a real dynastic aristocratic class begin to emerge. Originally there was no slavery: prisoners of war were massacred or sacrificed.

Diodorus Siculus, in the first century B.C., writes that women take part in the work of toil alongside men.

=== Religion ===
Among the most important testimonies, the sacred mountain sites (Mont Bègo, Monte Beigua) and the development of megalithicism (statues-stelae of Lunigiana) are worth mentioning.

The spectacular Mont Bégo in Vallée des merveilles is the most representative site of the numerous sacred sites covered with rock carvings, and in particular with cupels, gullies and ritual basins. The latter would indicate that a fundamental part of the rites of the ancient Ligurians, provided for the use of water (or milk, blood?). The site of Mont Bégo has an extension and spectacularity comparable to the sites of Val Camonica. Another important sacred centre is Mount Beigua, but the reality is that many promontories in North-west Italy and the Alps present these types of sacred centres.

In general, it is believed that the Ligurian religion was rather primitive, addressed to supernatural tutelary gods, representing the great forces of nature, and from which you could get help and protection through their divination.

Another important deity was Cycnus of Liguria, who was a king of Liguria, a beloved and kin of Phaethon, who lamented his death and was subsequently turned into a swan and then a constellation.

=== Dress ===
Diodorus Siculus reports the use of a tunic tightened at the waist by a leather belt and closed by a clasp generally bronze; the legs were bare. Other garments used were cloaks &quot;sagum&quot;, and during the winter animal skins to shelter from the cold.

Lucan in his &quot;Pharsalia&quot; (c. 61 AD) described Ligurian tribes as being long-haired, and their hair a shade of auburn (a reddish-brown):

== Warfare ==

Diodorus Siculus describes the Ligurians as very fearsome enemies.

=== Tactics, unit types and equipment ===
The armament varied according to the class and the comfort of the owner, in general however the great mass of the Ligurian warriors was substantially light infantry, armed in a poor way. The main weapon was the spear, with cusps that could exceed a cubit (about 45 cm, or one and half foot ), followed by the sword, of Gallic shape (sometimes cheap because made with soft metals), very rarely the warriors were equipped with bows and arrows.

The protection was entrusted to an oblong shield of wood, always of Celtic typology (but to difference of this last one without metallic boss) and a simple helmet, of Montefortino type.

The horned helmets, recovered in the Apuani tribe area, were probably used only for ceremonial purpose and they were worn by warchief, to underline their virility and military skills. The use of armor is not known. Even if it is possible that the richer warriors used armor in organic material like the Gauls or the Greek linothorax.

==== Cavalry ====
Strabo and Diodorus Siculus say they fought mostly on foot, because of the nature of their territory, but their phrasing implies that cavalry was not entirely unknown, and two recently discovered Ligurian graves have included harness fittings. Strabo says that the Salyes, a tribe located north of Massalia, had a substantial cavalry force, but they were one of the several Celto-Ligurian tribes, and the cavalry probably reflected a Celtic element.
The Ligures seem to have been ready to engage as mercenary troops in the service of others. Ligurian auxiliaries are mentioned in the army of the Carthaginian general Hamilcar I in 480 BC. Greek leaders in Sicily continued to recruit Ligurian mercenary forces as late as the time of Agathocles.

The Ingauni, a tribe of sailors located around Albingaunum (nowadays Albenga) were famous to engage trade and piracy, hostiles to Rome, they were subdued by consul Lucius Emilius Paullus Macedonicus in 181 BC.

=== Under Roman service ===
According to Plutarch, Ligurian auxiliaries fought for the Romans in the Battle of Pydna, the decisive battle of Third Macedonian War.

Sallustius and Plutarch say that during the Jugurthine War (from 112 to 105 BC) and the Cimbrian War (from 104 to 101 BC) the Ligurians served as auxiliary troops in the Roman army. In the course of this last conflict they played an important role in the Battle of Aquae Sextae.

== Economy ==
The Ligurian economy was based on primitive agriculture, sheep farming, hunting and the exploitation of forests. Diodorus Siculus writes about the Ligurians:

Since their country is mountainous and full of trees, some of them use all day to cut wood, using strong and heavy dark; others, who want to cultivate the land, must deal with breaking stones, because it is so dry soil that you can not pick tools remove a sod, that with it do not rise stones. However, even if they have to fight with so many misfortunes, by means of stubborn work they go beyond nature [...] they often give themselves to hunting, and finding quantities of savage, with it they make up for the lack of bladders; and so it comes, that flowing through their snow-covered mountains, and getting used to practicing then more difficult places of the thickets, they harden their bodies, and strengthen their muscles admirably. Some of them, due to the famine of food, drink water, and live of meat of domestic and wild animals.

Thanks to the contact with the bronze &quot;metal seekers&quot;, the Ligurians also dedicated themselves to mining.

The commercial activity is important. Already in ancient times the Ligurians were known in the Mediterranean for the trade of the precious Baltic amber. With the development of the Celtic populations, the Ligurians found themselves controlling a crucial access to the sea, becoming (sometimes in spite of themselves) custodians of an important way of communication.

Although they were not renowned navigators, they came to have a small maritime fleet, and their attitude to navigation is described as follows:

They sail for reason of shops on the sea of Sardinia and Libya, spontaneously exposing themselves to extreme dangers; they use smaller hulls than vulgar boats for this; nor are they practical of the comfort of other ships; and what is surprising is that they are not afraid to sustain the serious risks of storms.

==Tribes==
The Ligures lived divided into numerous tribes, among them were: the Genuati, who lived in what is now the area of the city of Genoa; the Tigulli, who lived in what is now the area of Trigoso; the Ingauni, who lived in what is now the area of the city of Albenga; the Intimilii who lived in what is now the area of Ventimiglia, the Apuani who lived in what is now the areas of the valleys of Magra and Serchio.

== See also ==

* Ligurian (ancient language)
* Ancient peoples of italy
* Liguria
* Genoa

==References==
==Bibliography==
* ARSLAN E. A. 2004b, LVI.14 Garlasco, in &quot;I Liguri. Un antico popolo europeo tra Alpi e Mediterraneo&quot;, Catalogo della Mostra (Genova, 23.10.2004-23.1.2005), Milano-Ginevra, pp. 429–431.
* ARSLAN E. A. 2004 c.s., &quot;Liguri e Galli in Lomellina&quot;, in &quot;I Liguri. Un antico popolo europeo tra Alpi e Mediterraneo&quot;, Saggi Mostra (Genova, 23.10.2004–23.1.2005).
* Raffaele De Marinis, Giuseppina Spadea (a cura di), &quot;Ancora sui Liguri. Un antico popolo europeo tra Alpi e Mediterraneo&quot;, De Ferrari editore, Genova 2007 (scheda sul volume).
* John Patterson, &quot;Sanniti, Liguri e Romani&quot;, Comune di Circello;Benevento
* Giuseppina Spadea (a cura di), &quot;I Liguri. Un antico popolo europeo tra Alpi e Mediterraneo&quot; (catalogo mostra, Genova 2004–2005), Skira editore, Genova 2004

==Further reading==

* Berthelot, André. &quot;LES LIGURES.&quot; Revue Archéologique 2 (1933): 245–303. www.jstor.org/stable/41750896.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207023" start="4" end="11" title="Ligures" label="Ligures"/>
<link wikidata="Q207023" start="15" end="24" title="Ligures" label="Ligurians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="59" end="66" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="92" end="111" title="Northern Italy" label="north-western Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="145" end="151" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207023" start="231" end="246" title="Ligures" label="Celto-Ligurians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="307" end="321" title="Italian region" label="Italian region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="325" end="332" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="334" end="342" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="353" end="360" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="370" end="378" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263" start="388" end="402" title="Emilia-Romagna" label="Emilia-Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="417" end="425" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45328" start="441" end="445" title="Elba" label="Elba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="450" end="456" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q36784" start="482" end="495" title="Regions of France" label="French region"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104" start="499" end="530" title="Provence-Alpes-Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur" label="Provence-Alpes-Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="535" end="542" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q183376" start="590" end="597" title="20th century BC" label="2000 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="675" end="684" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="721" end="738" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36104" start="883" end="908" title="Ligurian (ancient language)" label="ancient Ligurian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="952" end="958" title="steles" label="steles"/>
<link wikidata="Q536187" start="1065" end="1082" title="Pre-Indo-European languages" label="Pre-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="1090" end="1112" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651392" start="1260" end="1266" title="Roman people" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="1281" end="1289" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q459098" start="1390" end="1398" title="Ambrones" label="Ambrones"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="1481" end="1487" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="1573" end="1580" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1584" end="1589" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q706553" start="1615" end="1629" title="county of Nice" label="county of Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139" start="1667" end="1682" title="Alpes Maritimes" label="Alpes Maritimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="1730" end="1745" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q933979" start="1918" end="1923" title="Var (river)" label="Varus"/>
<link wikidata="Q692549" start="1928" end="1933" title="Magra" label="Magra"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="2227" end="2238" title="Rhone river" label="Rhone river"/>
<link wikidata="Q115439" start="2407" end="2424" title="4th millennium BC" label="4th millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="2428" end="2435" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q227587" start="2485" end="2493" title="37th century BC" label="3700 BC."/>
<link wikidata="Q2347305" start="2723" end="2741" title="Polada culture" label="The Polada Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221" start="2759" end="2766" title="Brescia" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="2768" end="2776" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202207" start="2824" end="2833" title="Po Valley" label="Po valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="2860" end="2866" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263" start="2870" end="2888" title="Emilia-Romagna" label="Emilia and Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q26257" start="2918" end="2935" title="2nd millennium BC" label="2nd millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="3006" end="3017" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="3031" end="3038" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="3113" end="3120" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q244482" start="3122" end="3129" title="Romagna" label="Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="3131" end="3138" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="3140" end="3148" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q747396" start="3150" end="3167" title="Bonnanaro culture" label="Bonnanaro culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q470867" start="3234" end="3253" title="Bell Beaker Culture" label="Bell Beaker Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q19827042" start="3281" end="3284" title="Bow and arrow" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699326" start="3420" end="3437" title="Remedello culture" label="Remedello culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="3444" end="3450" title="Bronze" label="Bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q773818" start="3505" end="3520" title="Unetice Culture" label="Unetice Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="3550" end="3554" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746386" start="3569" end="3584" title="Bernard Sergent" label="Bernard Sergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q36104" start="3604" end="3612" title="Ligurian (ancient language)" label="Ligurian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3745" end="3758" title="Prehistory of France#The Bronze Age" label="Rhone culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q773818" start="3785" end="3800" title="Unetice culture" label="Unetice culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17630270" start="4145" end="4203" title="facies of the pile dwellings and of the dammed settlements" label="facies of the pile dwellings and of the dammed settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347305" start="4233" end="4247" title="Polada culture" label="Polada culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="4287" end="4297" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q36104" start="4367" end="4375" title="Ligurian language (ancient)" label="Ligurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9493" start="4478" end="4490" title="Bodincomagus" label="Bodincomagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q628" start="4615" end="4622" title="Bergamo" label="Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="4958" end="4967" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699312" start="5016" end="5033" title="Canegrate culture" label="Canegrate culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829186" start="5176" end="5189" title="Alpine passes" label="Alpine passes"/>
<link wikidata="Q643" start="5229" end="5231" title="Po River" label="Po"/>
<link wikidata="Q14379" start="5247" end="5260" title="Lake Maggiore" label="Lake Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15523" start="5265" end="5274" title="Lake Como" label="Lake Como"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699310" start="5276" end="5294" title="Scamozzina culture" label="Scamozzina culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q201676" start="5316" end="5324" title="funerary" label="funerary"/>
<link wikidata="Q207315" start="5334" end="5343" title="cremation" label="cremation"/>
<link wikidata="Q331055" start="5361" end="5371" title="inhumation" label="inhumation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="5491" end="5501" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q603383" start="5670" end="5685" title="Tumulus culture" label="Tumulus culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="5687" end="5701" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q690947" start="5915" end="5932" title="Golasecca culture" label="Golasecca culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q662182" start="5972" end="5980" title="Lepontii" label="Lepontii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097266" start="6201" end="6208" title="Insubres" label="Insubri"/>
<link wikidata="Q662182" start="6456" end="6463" title="Lepontii" label="Leponti"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724" start="6472" end="6488" title="Canton of Ticino" label="Canton of Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132179" start="6541" end="6546" title="Orobii" label="Orobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073667" start="6583" end="6588" title="Laevi" label="Laevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291416" start="6593" end="6599" title="Marici (Ligures)" label="Marici"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="6886" end="6895" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q192601" start="7010" end="7017" title="oppidum" label="oppidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="7130" end="7140" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q952123" start="7200" end="7209" title="Sicanians" label="Sicanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q190992" start="7214" end="7221" title="Iberians" label="Iberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14311" start="7257" end="7264" title="Júcar" label="Sicanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="7586" end="7590" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577600" start="7629" end="7649" title="Carthaginian Iberia" label="Carthaginian control"/>
<link wikidata="Q157676" start="7984" end="7988" title="Boii" label="Boii"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="8354" end="8360" title="Iberia" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13375" start="8377" end="8381" title="Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q270220" start="8382" end="8386" title="Luni, Italy" label="Luni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="8387" end="8392" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097266" start="8432" end="8440" title="Insubres" label="Insubres"/>
<link wikidata="Q192601" start="8480" end="8487" title="oppidum" label="oppidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291416" start="8570" end="8576" title="Marici (Ligures)" label="Marici"/>
<link wikidata="Q675000" start="8822" end="8842" title="battle of Clastidium" label="battle of Clastidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q729978" start="8908" end="8918" title="Mediolanum" label="Mediolanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="8931" end="8936" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231" start="9040" end="9047" title="Cremona" label="Cremona"/>
<link wikidata="Q11124206" start="9224" end="9236" title="Italian Riviera" label="west Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q622306" start="9245" end="9251" title="Apuani" label="Apuani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362001" start="9464" end="9471" title="Taurini" label="Taurini"/>
<link wikidata="Q271873" start="9559" end="9579" title="Battle of the Trebia" label="Battle of the Trebia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311702" start="9650" end="9665" title="Hasdrubal Barca" label="Hasdrubal Barca"/>
<link wikidata="Q13320" start="9803" end="9809" title="Savona" label="Savona"/>
<link wikidata="Q208420" start="9848" end="9856" title="triremes" label="triremes"/>
<link wikidata="Q335604" start="9886" end="9896" title="Mago Barca" label="Mago Barca"/>
<link wikidata="Q36456" start="10106" end="10114" title="Hannibal" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097266" start="10237" end="10245" title="Insubres" label="Insubres"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="10294" end="10299" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="10395" end="10400" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21138391" start="10506" end="10513" title="Ingauni" label="Ingauni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979703" start="10557" end="10575" title="Battle of Insubria" label="Battle of Insubria"/>
<link wikidata="Q200056" start="10723" end="10737" title="Battle of Zama" label="Battle of Zama"/>
<link wikidata="Q157676" start="10871" end="10875" title="Boii" label="Boii"/>
<link wikidata="Q13329" start="10917" end="10926" title="Piacenza" label="Placentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096581" start="12040" end="12046" title="Ilvati" label="Ilvati"/>
<link wikidata="Q192601" start="12084" end="12091" title="oppidum" label="oppidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q705766" start="12143" end="12160" title="Spurius Lucretius Tricipitinus" label="Spurius Lucretius"/>
<link wikidata="Q270220" start="13748" end="13752" title="Luni, Italy" label="Luni"/>
<link wikidata="Q105393821" start="13922" end="13931" title="Intimilii" label="Intimilii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="14286" end="14295" title="proconsul" label="proconsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q919223" start="14297" end="14323" title="Publius Cornelius Cethegus (consul 181 BC)" label="Publius Cornelius Cethegus"/>
<link wikidata="Q947663" start="14328" end="14352" title="Marcus Baebius Tamphilus" label="Marcus Baebius Tamphilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q463459" start="14530" end="14537" title="Samnium" label="Samnium"/>
<link wikidata="Q379693" start="14678" end="14686" title="Deportation" label="deported"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968551" start="14992" end="15001" title="Statielli" label="Statielli"/>
<link wikidata="Q521485" start="15099" end="15124" title="Marcus Claudius Marcellus (consul 166 BC)" label="Marcus Claudius Marcellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554804" start="15324" end="15332" title="Vocontii" label="Vocontii"/>
<link wikidata="Q748095" start="15337" end="15345" title="Salluvii" label="Salluvii"/>
<link wikidata="Q199728" start="15438" end="15452" title="Cisalpine Gaul" label="Cisalpine Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="15495" end="15500" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="15555" end="15569" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="15595" end="15609" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q913582" start="15661" end="15672" title="Italy (Roman Empire)" label="Roman Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="15822" end="15830" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="15894" end="15909" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="15923" end="15941" title="Pliny&amp;#x27;s Natural History" label="Naturalis Historia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13329" start="16755" end="16764" title="Placentia, Italy" label="Placentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436" start="16847" end="16855" title="Pertinax" label="Pertinax"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="16897" end="16910" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q697833" start="17046" end="17060" title="Amédée Thierry" label="Amédée Thierry"/>
<link wikidata="Q190992" start="17116" end="17124" title="Iberians" label="Iberians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="17147" end="17156" title="Bourgogne" label="Bourgogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q273854" start="17267" end="17273" title="Gauls" label="Gallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397447" start="17452" end="17456" title="torc" label="torc"/>
<link wikidata="Q67091" start="17530" end="17545" title="Karl Müllenhoff" label="Karl Müllenhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q366793" start="17677" end="17685" title="Avienius" label="Avienius"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="17689" end="17694" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="17777" end="17786" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168731" start="17788" end="17796" title="Periplum" label="Periplum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275904" start="18002" end="18019" title="Neolithic Europe" label="Pre-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450486" start="18069" end="18081" title="Arturo Issel" label="Arturo Issel"/>
<link wikidata="Q179234" start="18135" end="18145" title="Cro-Magnon" label="Cro-Magnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="18189" end="18199" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="18230" end="18243" title="Indo-European" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q978749" start="18260" end="18294" title="Henri d&amp;#x27;Arbois de Jubainville" label="Henri d&amp;#x27;Arbois de Jubainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="18671" end="18683" title="philology" label="philological"/>
<link wikidata="Q875115" start="18788" end="18808" title="Funnelbeaker culture" label="Funnelbeaker culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q215638" start="18868" end="18882" title="Julius Pokorny" label="Julius Pokorny"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="18957" end="18966" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q223998" start="19116" end="19124" title="Urnfield culture" label="Urnfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="19227" end="19234" title="Pashtun" label="Pashtun"/>
<link wikidata="Q383029" start="19235" end="19241" title="Afghan (ethnonym)" label="Afghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102720" start="19396" end="19408" title="Proto-Italic language" label="proto-Italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q952123" start="19456" end="19462" title="Sicani" label="Sicani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355160" start="19656" end="19674" title="Tyrrhenians" label="Tyrrhenian culture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19809" end="19825" title="Dominique Garcia" label="Dominique Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192601" start="20137" end="20144" title="Oppidum" label="oppidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097" start="20556" end="20560" title="king" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="20736" end="20752" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="20771" end="20781" title="Human sacrifice" label="sacrificed"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="20784" end="20800" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q745803" start="20975" end="20984" title="Mont Bégo" label="Mont Bègo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299731" start="20986" end="20998" title="Monte Beigua" label="Monte Beigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="21023" end="21031" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q657832" start="21056" end="21065" title="Lunigiana" label="Lunigiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q745803" start="21106" end="21115" title="Mont Bégo" label="Mont Bégo"/>
<link wikidata="Q736943" start="21119" end="21140" title="Vallée des merveilles" label="Vallée des merveilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q745803" start="21438" end="21447" title="Mont Bégo" label="Mont Bégo"/>
<link wikidata="Q734317" start="21511" end="21523" title="Val Camonica" label="Val Camonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299731" start="21560" end="21572" title="Monte Beigua" label="Mount Beigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725942" start="21619" end="21635" title="Northwest Italy" label="North-west Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="21644" end="21648" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094710" start="21951" end="21968" title="Cycnus of Liguria" label="Cycnus of Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="21988" end="21995" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q203480" start="22018" end="22026" title="Phaethon" label="Phaethon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564928" start="22086" end="22090" title="swan" label="swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="22102" end="22115" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="22132" end="22148" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201714" start="22170" end="22175" title="tunic" label="tunic"/>
<link wikidata="Q304143" start="22315" end="22320" title="sagum" label="sagum"/>
<link wikidata="Q678375" start="22409" end="22418" title="Pharsalia" label="Pharsalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="22552" end="22568" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598759" start="22812" end="22826" title="light infantry" label="light infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502030" start="22911" end="22916" title="cubit" label="cubit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965849" start="22981" end="22993" title="Iron Age sword" label="Gallic shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q19827042" start="23087" end="23102" title="Bow and arrow" label="bows and arrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q131559" start="23147" end="23153" title="shield" label="shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757364" start="23272" end="23284" title="Montefortino helmet" label="Montefortino"/>
<link wikidata="Q11886611" start="23487" end="23492" title="Armour" label="armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11886611" start="23560" end="23585" title="Leather armor" label="armor in organic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609567" start="23614" end="23624" title="linothorax" label="linothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q599845" start="24262" end="24272" title="Hamilcar I of Carthage" label="Hamilcar I"/>
<link wikidata="Q312326" start="24378" end="24388" title="Agathocles of Syracuse" label="Agathocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q21138391" start="24395" end="24402" title="Ingauni" label="Ingauni"/>
<link wikidata="Q241298" start="24460" end="24467" title="Albenga" label="Albenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="24521" end="24525" title="Roman Republic" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="24548" end="24554" title="Roman consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q298168" start="24555" end="24589" title="Lucius Aemilius Paullus Macedonicus" label="Lucius Emilius Paullus Macedonicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q504739" start="24703" end="24718" title="Battle of Pydna" label="Battle of Pydna"/>
<link wikidata="Q76118" start="24743" end="24763" title="Third Macedonian War" label="Third Macedonian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170" start="24766" end="24773" title="Sallust" label="Sallust"/>
<link wikidata="Q827612" start="24810" end="24824" title="Jugurthine War" label="Jugurthine War"/>
<link wikidata="Q903199" start="24854" end="24866" title="Cimbrian War" label="Cimbrian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q56280462" start="27199" end="27206" title="Trigoso" label="Trigoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q21138391" start="27212" end="27219" title="Ingauni" label="Ingauni"/>
<link wikidata="Q241298" start="27270" end="27277" title="Albenga" label="Albenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q105393821" start="27283" end="27292" title="Intimilii" label="Intimilii"/>
<link wikidata="Q191759" start="27330" end="27341" title="Ventimiglia" label="Ventimiglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q622306" start="27347" end="27353" title="Apuani" label="Apuani"/>
<link wikidata="Q692549" start="27407" end="27412" title="Magra" label="Magra"/>
<link wikidata="Q247494" start="27417" end="27424" title="Serchio" label="Serchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q36104" start="27445" end="27472" title="Ligurian (ancient language)" label="Ligurian (ancient language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108810" start="27475" end="27499" title="Ancient peoples of italy" label="Ancient peoples of italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="27502" end="27509" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="27512" end="27517" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27937" end="27956" title="Raffaele De Marinis" label="Raffaele De Marinis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28210" end="28227" title="Giuseppina Spadea" label="Giuseppina Spadea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424216" wikidata="Q255791" url="?curid=424216" title="671 BC">
<text>The year 671 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. In the Roman Empire, it was known as year 83 &quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&quot;. The denomination 671 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.

==Events==

=== By place ===

==== Middle East ====

* King Esarhaddon of Assyria defeats the Kushite-Egyptian army of Pharaoh Taharqa and captures Memphis, along with a number of the royal family. He sets up a new Assyrian administration in Lower Egypt and withdraws.

==Births==

==Deaths==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q255791" start="9" end="15" title="671 BC" label="671 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="34" end="59" title="Roman calendar" label="pre-Julian Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="68" end="80" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q255791" start="98" end="131" title="671 BC" label="year 83 &amp;quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="233" end="244" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="245" end="257" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q193912" start="375" end="385" title="Esarhaddon" label="Esarhaddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q737648" start="409" end="425" title="Twenty-fifth Dynasty of Egypt" label="Kushite-Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="434" end="441" title="Pharaoh" label="Pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q315714" start="442" end="449" title="Taharqa" label="Taharqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715" start="463" end="470" title="Memphis, Egypt" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="530" end="537" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q463871" start="557" end="568" title="Lower Egypt" label="Lower Egypt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424217" wikidata="Q332963" url="?curid=424217" title="William Sloane Coffin">
<text>William Sloane Coffin Jr. (June 1, 1924 – April 12, 2006) was an American Christian clergyman and long-time peace activist. He was ordained in the Presbyterian Church, and later received ministerial standing in the United Church of Christ. In his younger days he was an athlete, a talented pianist, a CIA officer, and later chaplain of Yale University, where the influence of H. Richard Niebuhr&#x27;s social philosophy led him to become a leader in the civil rights movement and peace movements of the 1960s and 1970s. He also was a member of the secret society Skull and Bones. He went on to serve as senior minister at Riverside Church in New York City and President of SANE/Freeze, the nation&#x27;s largest peace and social justice group, and prominently opposed United States military interventions in conflicts, from the Vietnam War to the Iraq War. He was also an ardent supporter of gay rights.

== Biography ==

===Childhood===
William Sloane Coffin Jr. was born into the wealthy elite of New York City. His paternal great-grandfather William Sloane was a Scottish immigrant and co-owner of the very successful W. &amp; J. Sloane Company. His uncle was Henry Sloane Coffin, president of Union Theological Seminary and one of the most famous ministers in the United States. His father, William Sloane Coffin, Sr. was an executive in the family business and president of the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Famed record producer and civil rights activist John Hammond was a cousin, and singer and musician John P. Hammond his nephew.

His mother, Catherine Butterfield, had grown up in the Midwest, and as a young woman spent time in France during World War I providing relief to soldiers, and met her future husband there, where he was also engaged in charitable activities. Their three children grew up fluent in French by being taught by their nanny, and attended private schools in New York.

William Sr.&#x27;s father, Edmund Coffin, was a prominent lawyer, real estate developer, and reformer who owned a property investment and management firm that renovated and rented low-income housing in New York. Upon Edmund&#x27;s death in 1928, it went to his sons William and Henry, with William managing the firm. When the Great Depression hit in 1929, William allowed tenants to stay whether or not they could pay the rent, quickly draining his own funds, and at a time when the family&#x27;s substantial W. &amp; J. Sloane stock was not paying dividends.

William Sloane Coffin, Sr. died at home on his oldest son Edmund&#x27;s eleventh birthday in 1933 from a heart attack he suffered returning from work. After this, his wife Catherine decided to move the family to Carmel, California, to make life more affordable, but was able to do this only with financial support from her brother-in-law Henry. After years spent in the most exclusive private schools in Manhattan, the three Coffin children were educated in Carmel&#x27;s public schools, where William had his first sense that there was injustice—sometimes very great—in the world.

A talented musician, he became devoted to the piano and planned a career as a concert pianist. At the urging of his uncle Henry (who was still contributing to the family&#x27;s finances), his mother enrolled him in Deerfield Academy in 1938.

The following year (when Edmund left for Yale University), William moved with his mother to Paris at the age of 15 to receive personal instruction in the piano and was taught by some of the best music teachers of the 20th century, including Nadia Boulanger. The Coffins moved to Geneva, Switzerland, when World War II came to France in 1940, and then back to the United States, where he enrolled in Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts.

===Early adulthood===
Having graduated from high school in 1942, William enrolled at Yale College and studied in the School of Music. While continuing his pursuit of the piano, he was also excited by the prospect of fighting to stop fascism and became very focused on joining the war effort. He applied to work as a spy with the Office of Strategic Services in 1943, but was turned down for not having sufficiently &quot;Gallic features&quot; to be effective. He then left school, enlisted in the Army, and was quickly tapped to become an officer. After training, he was assigned to work as liaison to the French and Russian armies in connection with the Army&#x27;s military intelligence unit, and where he heard first-hand stories of life in Stalin&#x27;s USSR. Records indicate he was part of the Ritchie Boys and trained extensively at Camp Ritchie, in Maryland.

After the war, Coffin returned to Yale, where he became president of the Yale Glee Club. Coffin had been a friend of George H. W. Bush since his youth, as they both attended Phillips Academy (1942). In Coffin&#x27;s senior year, Bush brought Coffin into the exclusive Skull and Bones secret society at the university.

Upon graduating in 1949, Coffin entered the Union Theological Seminary, where he remained for a year, until the outbreak of the Korean War reignited his interest in fighting against communism. He joined the CIA as a case officer in 1950 (his brother-in-law Franklin Lindsay had been head of the Office of Policy Coordination, the political warfare arm of the CIA) spending three years in West Germany recruiting anti-Soviet Russian refugees and training them how to undermine Stalin&#x27;s regime. Coffin grew increasingly disillusioned with the role of the CIA and the United States due to events including the CIA&#x27;s involvement in overthrowing Prime Minister Mohammed Mossadegh of Iran in 1953, followed by the CIA&#x27;s orchestration of the coup that removed President Jacobo Árbenz in Guatemala in 1954.

===Ministry and political activism===

After leaving the CIA, Coffin enrolled at Yale Divinity School and earned his Bachelor of Divinity degree in 1956, the same year he was ordained a Presbyterian minister. This same year he married Eva Rubinstein, the daughter of pianist Arthur Rubinstein, and became chaplain at Williams College. Soon, he accepted the position as Chaplain of Yale University, where he remained from 1958 until 1975. Gifted with a rich bass-baritone voice, he was an active member of the Yale Russian Chorus during the late 1950s and 1960s.

With his CIA background, he was dismayed when he learned in 1964 of the history of French and American involvement in South Vietnam. He felt the United States should have honored the French agreement to hold a national referendum in Vietnam about unification. He was in early opposition to the Vietnam War and became famous for his anti-war activities and his civil rights activism. Along with others, he was a founder in the early 1960s of the Clergy and Laity Concerned About Vietnam, organized to resist President Lyndon Johnson&#x27;s escalation of the war.

Coffin had a prominent role in the Freedom Rides challenging segregation and the oppression of black people. As chaplain at Yale in the early 1960s, Coffin organized busloads of Freedom Riders to challenge segregation laws in the South. Through his efforts, hundreds of students at Yale University and elsewhere were recruited into civil rights and anti-war activity. He was jailed many times, but his first conviction was overturned by the Supreme Court.

In 1962, he joined SANE: The Committee for a SANE Nuclear Policy, an organization he would later lead.

Approached by Sargent Shriver in 1961 to run the first training programs for the Peace Corps, Coffin took up the task and took a temporary leave from Yale, working to develop a rigorous training program modeled on Outward Bound and supervising the building of a training camp in Puerto Rico. He used his pulpit as a platform for like-minded crusaders, hosting the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., South African Archbishop Desmond Tutu, and Nelson Mandela, among others. Fellow Yale graduate Garry Trudeau has immortalized Coffin (combined with Coffin&#x27;s protege Rev. Scotty McLennan) as &quot;the Rev. Scot Sloan&quot; in the comic strip &quot;Doonesbury&quot;. During the Vietnam War years, Coffin and his friend Howard Zinn often spoke from the same anti-war platform. An inspiring speaker, Coffin was known for optimism and humor: &quot;Remember, young people, even if you win the rat race, you&#x27;re still a rat.&quot;

By 1967, Coffin concentrated increasingly on preaching civil disobedience and supported the young men who turned in their draft cards. He was, however, uncomfortable with draft-card burning, worried that it looked &quot;unnecessarily hostile&quot;. Coffin was one of several persons who signed an open letter entitled &quot;A Call to Resist Illegitimate Authority&quot;, which was printed in several newspapers in October 1967. In that same month, he also raised the possibility of declaring Battell Chapel at Yale a sanctuary for resisters, or possibly as the site of a large demonstration of civil disobedience. School administration barred the use of the church as a sanctuary. Coffin later wrote, &quot;I accused them of behaving more like &#x27;true Blues than true Christians&#x27;. They squirmed but weren&#x27;t about to change their minds... I realized I was licked.&quot;

And so on January 5, 1968, Coffin, Benjamin Spock (the pediatrician and baby book author who was also a Phillips Academy alumnus), Marcus Raskin, and Mitchell Goodman (all signers of &quot;A Call to Resist Illegitimate Authority&quot; and members of the anti-war collective RESIST) were indicted by a Federal grand jury for &quot;conspiracy to counsel, aid and abet draft resistance&quot;. All but Raskin were convicted that June, but in 1970 an appeals court overturned the verdict. Coffin remained chaplain of Yale until December 1975.

In 1977, he became senior minister at Riverside Church—an interdenominational congregation affiliated with both the United Church of Christ and American Baptist Churches—and one of the most prominent congregations in New York City. Coffin was a controversial, yet inspirational leader at Riverside, with sermon titles like &quot;Abortion&quot;, &quot;AIDS&quot;, &quot;Homosexuality&quot;, and &quot;Iran&quot;. His other sermons included &quot;It&#x27;s a Sin to Build a Nuclear Weapon&quot;, and during the Iran hostage crisis, &quot;And Pray for the Iranians, Too&quot;. Coffin openly and vocally supported gay rights when many liberals still were uncomfortable with homosexuality. Some of the congregation&#x27;s socially conservative members openly disagreed with his position on sexuality.

=== Nuclear disarmament ===
Coffin started a strong nuclear disarmament program at Riverside, and hired Cora Weiss (a secular Jew he had worked with during the Vietnam War and had traveled with to North Vietnam in 1972 to accompany three released U.S. prisoners of war), an action which was uncomfortable for some parishioners. Broadening his reach to an international audience, he met with numerous world leaders and traveled abroad. His visits included going to Iran to perform Christmas services for hostages being held in the U.S. embassy during the Iran hostage crisis in 1979 and to Nicaragua to protest U.S. military intervention there.

In 1987, he resigned from Riverside Church to pursue disarmament activism full-time, saying then that there was no issue more important for a man of faith. He became president of SANE/FREEZE, the largest peace and justice organization in the United States. He retired with the title president emeritus in the early 1990s, and then taught and lectured across the United States and overseas. Coffin also wrote several books. He cautioned that we are all living in &quot;the shadow of Doomsday&quot;, and urged that people turn away from isolationism and become more globally aware. Shortly before his death, Coffin founded Faithful Security, a coalition for people of faith committed to working for a world free of nuclear weapons.

===Personal life===
Coffin was married three times. His marriages to Eva Rubinstein and Harriet Gibney ended in divorce. His third wife, Virginia Randolph Wilson (&quot;Randy&quot;), survived him. Rubinstein, his first wife and the mother of his children, was a daughter of pianist Arthur Rubinstein. The loss of their son Alexander, at age 24, in a car accident in 1983 inspired one of Coffin&#x27;s most requested sermons. They also shared two other children, community developer Amy Coffin and folk musician David Coffin.

Coffin was given only six months to live in early 2004 due to a weakened heart. He and his wife lived in the small town of Strafford, Vermont, a few houses away from his brother Ned, until his death nearly two years later at age 81.

==Military awards==
*American Campaign Medal
*European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign Medal
*World War II Victory Medal
*Army of Occupation Medal with &quot;Germany&quot; clasp

==Books==

===By Coffin===
* &quot;Letters to a Young Doubter&quot;, Westminster John Knox Press, July 2005, 
* &quot;Credo&quot;, Westminster John Knox Press, December 2003, 
* &quot;The Heart Is a Little to the Left: Essays on Public Morality&quot;, Dartmouth College, 1st edition, October 1999, 
* &quot;The Courage to Love&quot;, sermons, Harper &amp; Row, 1982, 
* &quot;Once to Every Man: A Memoir&quot;, autobiography, Athenaeum Press, 1977, 

===About Coffin===
* &quot;William Sloane Coffin, Jr.: A Holy Impatience&quot;, by Warren Goldstein, Yale University Press, March 2004, 
* &quot;The Trial of Dr. Spock, William Sloane Coffin, Michael Ferber, Mitchell Goodman, and Marcus Raskin&quot;, by Jessica Mitford, New York, Knopf, 1969 

== In popular culture ==
The &quot;Doonesbury&quot; character Reverend Scot Sloan is named (in part) for William Sloane Coffin. Some of the character&#x27;s early personality also reflects Coffin&#x27;s &quot;Christian revolutionary&quot; approach.

==See also==
* List of peace activists

==References==
==Sources==
* &quot;Once to Every Man: A Memoir&quot; (1977)
* &quot;William Sloane Coffin, Jr.: A Holy Impatience&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Passion for the Possible: A Message to U.S. Churches&quot;

==External links==

* Interview from 1982 with William Sloane Coffin on Vietnam and the Anti-War movement WGBH Educational Foundation
* A Politically Engaged Spirituality Video and transcript of Coffin&#x27;s April 2005 speech at Yale Divinity School
* Interview with William Sloane Coffin from Religion &amp; Ethics Newsweekly, August 2004
* William Sloane Coffin: A Lover&#x27;s Quarrel With America Video interview from Old Dog Documentaries
* William Sloane Coffin - Not to Bring Peace, But a Sword Sermon and interview.
* Profile of Coffin from &quot;Yale Alumni Magazine&quot;, March 2004
* . Manuscripts and Archives, Yale University Library.
* Selected writings (PDF)
* Peace Action (formerly SANE/Freeze, the merger of SANE and the Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign)
* Faithful Security
* www.williamsloanecoffin.org This is the complete digital collection of William Sloane Coffin&#x27;s sermons preached from the pulpit of New York City&#x27;s Riverside Church 1977–1987.
* Speech &quot;Who Is the Enemy?&quot; delivered April 8, 1983, at a symposium in Kansas City.

===Memorials===
*Obituary from the &quot;New York Times&quot;
*Obituary from the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;
*Obituary from &quot;The Guardian&quot;
*Obituary from the Associated Press
*Remembrance from the United Church of Christ &quot;(article and video)&quot;
*Remembrance from &quot;The Nation&quot;
*Remembrance by William F. Buckley Jr. in the &quot;Yale Daily News&quot;
*The Legacy of William Sloane Coffin by the Rev. Scotty McLennan
*Tribute of Yale Class of 1968 to its &quot;Permanent Chaplain &quot;
*Obituary on Commondreams.org
*Photo gallery of Coffin from &quot;The Washington Post&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q332963" start="0" end="25" title="William Sloane Coffin" label="William Sloane Coffin Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q859557" start="74" end="83" title="Liberal Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="147" end="159" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q426316" start="215" end="238" title="United Church of Christ" label="United Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="301" end="304" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q208762" start="324" end="332" title="chaplain" label="chaplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="336" end="351" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076201" start="376" end="394" title="H. Richard Niebuhr" label="H. Richard Niebuhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="454" end="475" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q708312" start="480" end="495" title="peace movements" label="peace movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q195604" start="563" end="578" title="Skull and Bones" label="Skull and Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156586" start="622" end="638" title="Riverside Church" label="Riverside Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="642" end="655" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157308" start="673" end="684" title="Peace Action" label="SANE/Freeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q708312" start="712" end="736" title="peace movement" label="peace and social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="828" end="839" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="847" end="855" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="892" end="902" title="gay rights" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="999" end="1012" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="1066" end="1074" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945272" start="1121" end="1139" title="W. &amp;amp; J. Sloane" label="W. &amp;amp; J. Sloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728400" start="1163" end="1182" title="Henry Sloane Coffin" label="Henry Sloane Coffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196251" start="1197" end="1223" title="Union Theological Seminary in the City of New York" label="Union Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q21405712" start="1295" end="1321" title="William Sloane Coffin, Sr." label="William Sloane Coffin, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="1383" end="1409" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q549141" start="1459" end="1471" title="John Hammond (record producer)" label="John Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368185" start="1510" end="1525" title="John P. Hammond" label="John P. Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q936969" start="1851" end="1856" title="nanny" label="nanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="1959" end="1965" title="lawyer" label="lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q695829" start="1967" end="1988" title="real estate developer" label="real estate developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2227" end="2243" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q21405712" start="2462" end="2488" title="William Sloane Coffin, Sr." label="William Sloane Coffin, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="2567" end="2579" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q625458" start="2674" end="2692" title="Carmel, California" label="Carmel, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="2866" end="2875" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="3131" end="3138" title="piano" label="pianist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250893" start="3260" end="3277" title="Deerfield Academy" label="Deerfield Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="3329" end="3344" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="3380" end="3385" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="3442" end="3447" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q140619" start="3529" end="3544" title="Nadia Boulanger" label="Nadia Boulanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="3567" end="3586" title="Geneva, Switzerland" label="Geneva, Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3593" end="3605" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432645" start="3687" end="3703" title="Phillips Academy" label="Phillips Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q370619" start="3707" end="3729" title="Andover, Massachusetts" label="Andover, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599077" start="3817" end="3829" title="Yale College" label="Yale College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784420" start="3849" end="3864" title="Yale School of Music" label="School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="3965" end="3972" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="4048" end="4051" title="spy" label="spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="4061" end="4089" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="4229" end="4233" title="United States Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="4399" end="4420" title="military intelligence" label="military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q828429" start="4532" end="4544" title="Ritchie Boys" label="Ritchie Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047383" start="4673" end="4687" title="Yale Glee Club" label="Yale Glee Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="4717" end="4734" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q195604" start="4868" end="4883" title="Skull and Bones" label="Skull and Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196251" start="4963" end="4989" title="Union Theological Seminary (New York)" label="Union Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="5047" end="5057" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487969" start="5176" end="5192" title="Franklin Lindsay" label="Franklin Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="5307" end="5319" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q123037" start="5585" end="5603" title="Mohammed Mossadegh" label="Mohammed Mossadegh"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="5607" end="5611" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="5669" end="5673" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q216943" start="5697" end="5710" title="Jacobo Árbenz" label="Jacobo Árbenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="5714" end="5723" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q10723329" start="5815" end="5835" title="Yale Divinity School" label="Yale Divinity School"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="5920" end="5932" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="5933" end="5941" title="minister of religion" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589118" start="5969" end="5983" title="Eva Rubinstein" label="Eva Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q183182" start="6009" end="6026" title="Arthur Rubinstein" label="Arthur Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q49166" start="6051" end="6067" title="Williams College" label="Williams College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047419" start="6243" end="6262" title="Yale Russian Chorus" label="Yale Russian Chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="6415" end="6428" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="6591" end="6602" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="6814" end="6828" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q538790" start="6895" end="6908" title="Freedom Riders" label="Freedom Rides"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="7142" end="7157" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157308" start="7336" end="7381" title="Peace Action" label="SANE: The Committee for a SANE Nuclear Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q317248" start="7435" end="7450" title="Sargent Shriver" label="Sargent Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q458620" start="7502" end="7513" title="Peace Corps" label="Peace Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411901" start="7635" end="7648" title="Outward Bound" label="Outward Bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="7700" end="7711" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="7790" end="7812" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q43033" start="7839" end="7851" title="Desmond Tutu" label="Desmond Tutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="7857" end="7871" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340213" start="7908" end="7921" title="Garry Trudeau" label="Garry Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438233" start="7988" end="8003" title="Scotty McLennan" label="Scotty McLennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569224" start="8023" end="8033" title="Scot Sloan" label="Scot Sloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q429433" start="8065" end="8075" title="Doonesbury" label="Doonesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q119546" start="8135" end="8146" title="Howard Zinn" label="Howard Zinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304755" start="8518" end="8536" title="draft-card burning" label="draft-card burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q310694" start="9265" end="9279" title="Benjamin Spock" label="Benjamin Spock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758404" start="9361" end="9374" title="Marcus Raskin" label="Marcus Raskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013852" start="9380" end="9396" title="Mitchell Goodman" label="Mitchell Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17508378" start="9504" end="9510" title="RESIST (non-profit)" label="RESIST"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156586" start="9807" end="9823" title="Riverside Church" label="Riverside Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q426316" start="9885" end="9908" title="United Church of Christ" label="United Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q463455" start="9913" end="9938" title="American Baptist Churches USA" label="American Baptist Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="10098" end="10106" title="Abortion" label="Abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="10120" end="10124" title="HIV/AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="10241" end="10255" title="Nuclear Weapon" label="Nuclear Weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q589673" start="10278" end="10297" title="Iran hostage crisis" label="Iran hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="10379" end="10389" title="gay rights" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200085" start="10618" end="10637" title="nuclear disarmament" label="nuclear disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="10818" end="10834" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="11030" end="11034" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q589673" start="11120" end="11139" title="Iran hostage crisis" label="Iran hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="11155" end="11164" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157308" start="11390" end="11401" title="Peace Action" label="SANE/FREEZE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11832" end="11849" title="Faithful Security" label="Faithful Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589118" start="12011" end="12025" title="Eva Rubinstein" label="Eva Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q183182" start="12224" end="12241" title="Arthur Rubinstein" label="Arthur Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232455" start="12453" end="12465" title="David Coffin" label="David Coffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305933" start="12591" end="12609" title="Strafford, Vermont" label="Strafford, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338107" start="12723" end="12746" title="American Campaign Medal" label="American Campaign Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376304" start="12748" end="12794" title="European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign Medal" label="European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079534" start="12796" end="12822" title="World War II Victory Medal" label="World War II Victory Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794320" start="12824" end="12848" title="Army of Occupation Medal" label="Army of Occupation Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q457856" start="13586" end="13601" title="Jessica Mitford" label="Jessica Mitford"/>
<link wikidata="Q429433" start="13662" end="13672" title="Doonesbury" label="Doonesbury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13689" end="13708" title="List of Doonesbury characters#Rev Scot Sloan" label="Reverend Scot Sloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921049" start="13892" end="13915" title="List of peace activists" label="List of peace activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="14799" end="14802" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157308" start="14856" end="14860" title="Peace Action" label="SANE"/>
<link wikidata="Q55625615" start="14869" end="14900" title="Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign" label="Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="15246" end="15260" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="15292" end="15309" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="15337" end="15349" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="15375" end="15391" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q426316" start="15414" end="15437" title="United Church of Christ" label="United Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="15494" end="15504" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q378098" start="15527" end="15549" title="William F. Buckley Jr." label="William F. Buckley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2599070" start="15563" end="15578" title="Yale Daily News" label="Yale Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438233" start="15634" end="15649" title="Scotty McLennan" label="Scotty McLennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="15786" end="15805" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424218" wikidata="Q524004" url="?curid=424218" title="Production function">
<text>In economics, a production function gives the technological relation between quantities of physical inputs and quantities of output of goods. The production function is one of the key concepts of mainstream neoclassical theories, used to define marginal product and to distinguish allocative efficiency, a key focus of economics. One important purpose of the production function is to address allocative efficiency in the use of factor inputs in production and the resulting distribution of income to those factors, while abstracting away from the technological problems of achieving technical efficiency, as an engineer or professional manager might understand it.

For modelling the case of many outputs and many inputs, researchers often use the so-called Shephard&#x27;s distance functions or, alternatively, directional distance functions, which are generalizations of the simple production function in economics.

In macroeconomics, aggregate production functions are estimated to create a framework in which to distinguish how much of economic growth to attribute to changes in factor allocation (e.g. the accumulation of physical capital) and how much to attribute to advancing technology. Some non-mainstream economists, however, reject the very concept of an aggregate production function.

==The theory of production functions==
In general, economic output is &quot;not&quot; a (mathematical) function of input, because any given set of inputs can be used to produce a range of outputs. To satisfy the mathematical definition of a function, a production function is customarily assumed to specify the &quot;maximum&quot; output obtainable from a given set of inputs. The production function, therefore, describes a boundary or frontier representing the limit of output obtainable from each feasible combination of input. Alternatively, a production function can be defined as the specification of the minimum input requirements needed to produce designated quantities of output. Assuming that maximum output is obtained from given inputs allows economists to abstract away from technological and managerial problems associated with realizing such a technical maximum, and to focus exclusively on the problem of allocative efficiency, associated with the &quot;economic&quot; choice of how much of a factor input to use, or the degree to which one factor may be substituted for another. In the production function itself, the relationship of output to inputs is non-monetary; that is, a production function relates physical inputs to physical outputs, and prices and costs are not reflected in the function.

In the decision frame of a firm making economic choices regarding production—how much of each factor input to use to produce how much output—and facing market prices for output and inputs, the production function represents the possibilities afforded by an exogenous technology. Under certain assumptions, the production function can be used to derive a marginal product for each factor. The profit-maximizing firm in perfect competition (taking output and input prices as given) will choose to add input right up to the point where the marginal cost of additional input matches the marginal product in additional output. This implies an ideal division of the income generated from output into an income due to each input factor of production, equal to the marginal product of each input.

The inputs to the production function are commonly termed factors of production and may represent primary factors, which are stocks. Classically, the primary factors of production were land, labour and capital. Primary factors do not become part of the output product, nor are the primary factors, themselves, transformed in the production process. The production function, as a theoretical construct, may be abstracting away from the secondary factors and intermediate products consumed in a production process. The production function is not a full model of the production process: it deliberately abstracts from inherent aspects of physical production processes that some would argue are essential, including error, entropy or waste, and the consumption of energy or the co-production of pollution. Moreover, production functions do not ordinarily model the business processes, either, ignoring the role of strategic and operational business management. (For a primer on the fundamental elements of microeconomic production theory, see production theory basics).

The production function is central to the marginalist focus of neoclassical economics, its definition of efficiency as allocative efficiency, its analysis of how market prices can govern the achievement of allocative efficiency in a decentralized economy, and an analysis of the distribution of income, which attributes factor income to the marginal product of factor input.

===Specifying the production function===

A production function can be expressed in a functional foim as the right side of
:formula_1
where formula_2 is the quantity of output and
formula_3 are the quantities of factor inputs (such as capital, labour, land or raw materials). For formula_4 it must be formula_5 since we cannot produce anything without inputs.

If formula_2 is a scalar, then this form does not encompass joint production, which is a production process that has multiple co-products. On the other hand, if formula_7 maps from formula_8 to formula_9 then it is a joint production function expressing the determination of formula_10 different types of output based on the joint usage of the specified quantities of the formula_11 inputs.

One formulation is as a linear function:
:formula_12
where formula_13 are parameters that are determined empirically. Linear functions imply that inputs are perfect substitutes in production.
Another is as a Cobb–Douglas production function:
:formula_14
where formula_15 is the so-called total factor productivity.
The Leontief production function applies to situations in which inputs must be used in fixed proportions; starting from those proportions, if usage of one input is increased without another being increased, the output will not change. This production function is given by

:formula_16

Other forms include the constant elasticity of substitution production function (CES), which is a generalized form of the Cobb–Douglas function, and the quadratic production function. The best form of the equation to use and the values of the parameters (formula_17) vary from company to company and industry to industry. In the short run, production function at least one of the formula_18&#x27;s (inputs) is fixed. In the long run, all factor inputs are variable at the discretion of management.

Moysan and Senouci (2016) provide an analytical formula for all 2-input, neoclassical production functions.

===Production function as a graph===
Any of these equations can be plotted on a graph. A typical (quadratic) production function is shown in the following diagram under the assumption of a single variable input (or fixed ratios of inputs so they can be treated as a single variable). All points above the production function are unobtainable with current technology, all points below are technically feasible, and all points on the function show the maximum quantity of output obtainable at the specified level of usage of the input. From point A to point C, the firm is experiencing positive but decreasing marginal returns to the variable input. As additional units of the input are employed, output increases but at a decreasing rate. Point B is the point beyond which there are diminishing average returns, as shown by the declining slope of the average physical product curve (APP) beyond point Y. Point B is just tangent to the steepest ray from the origin hence the average physical product is at a maximum. Beyond point B, mathematical necessity requires that the marginal curve must be below the average curve (See production theory basics for further explanation and Sickles and Zelenyuk (2019) for more extensive discussions of various production functions, their generalizations and estimations).

===Stages of production===

To simplify the interpretation of a production function, it is common to divide its range into 3 stages. In Stage 1 (from the origin to point B) the variable input is being used with increasing output per unit, the latter reaching a maximum at point B (since the average physical product is at its maximum at that point). Because the output per unit of the variable input is improving throughout stage 1, a price-taking firm will always operate beyond this stage.

In Stage 2, output increases at a decreasing rate, and the average and marginal physical product both decline. However, the average product of fixed inputs (not shown) is still rising, because output is rising while fixed input usage is constant. In this stage, the employment of additional variable inputs increases the output per unit of fixed input but decreases the output per unit of the variable input. The optimum input/output combination for the price-taking firm will be in stage 2, although a firm facing a downward-sloped demand curve might find it most profitable to operate in Stage 2.
In Stage 3, too much variable input is being used relative to the available fixed inputs: variable inputs are over-utilized in the sense that their presence on the margin obstructs the production process rather than enhancing it. The output per unit of both the fixed and the variable input declines throughout this stage. At the boundary between stage 2 and stage 3, the highest possible output is being obtained from the fixed input.

===Shifting a production function===
By definition, in the long run the firm can change its scale of operations by adjusting the level of inputs that are fixed in the short run, thereby shifting the production function upward as plotted against the variable input. If fixed inputs are lumpy, adjustments to the scale of operations may be more significant than what is required to merely balance production capacity with demand. For example, you may only need to increase production by million units per year to keep up with demand, but the production equipment upgrades that are available may involve increasing productive capacity by 2 million units per year.

If a firm is operating at a profit-maximizing level in stage one, it might, in the long run, choose to reduce its scale of operations (by selling capital equipment). By reducing the amount of fixed capital inputs, the production function will shift down. The beginning of stage 2 shifts from B1 to B2. The (unchanged) profit-maximizing output level will now be in stage 2.

===Homogeneous and homothetic production functions===
There are two special classes of production functions that are often analyzed. The production function formula_19 is said to be homogeneous of degree formula_20, if given any positive constant formula_10, formula_22. If formula_23, the function exhibits increasing returns to scale, and it exhibits decreasing returns to scale if formula_24. If it is homogeneous of degree formula_25, it exhibits constant returns to scale. The presence of increasing returns means that a one percent increase in the usage levels of all inputs would result in a greater than one percent increase in output; the presence of decreasing returns means that it would result in a less than one percent increase in output. Constant returns to scale is the in-between case. In the Cobb–Douglas production function referred to above, returns to scale are increasing if formula_26, decreasing if formula_27, and constant if formula_28.

If a production function is homogeneous of degree one, it is sometimes called &quot;linearly homogeneous&quot;. A linearly homogeneous production function with inputs capital and labour has the properties that the marginal and average physical products of both capital and labour can be expressed as functions of the capital-labour ratio alone. Moreover, in this case, if each input is paid at a rate equal to its marginal product, the firm&#x27;s revenues will be exactly exhausted and there will be no excess economic profit.

Homothetic functions are functions whose marginal technical rate of substitution (the slope of the isoquant, a curve drawn through the set of points in say labour-capital space at which the same quantity of output is produced for varying combinations of the inputs) is homogeneous of degree zero. Due to this, along rays coming from the origin, the slopes of the isoquants will be the same. Homothetic functions are of the form formula_29 where formula_30 is a monotonically increasing function (the derivative of formula_30 is positive (formula_32)), and the function formula_33 is a homogeneous function of any degree.

===Aggregate production functions===

In macroeconomics, aggregate production functions for whole nations are sometimes constructed. In theory, they are the summation of all the production functions of individual producers; however there are methodological problems associated with aggregate production functions, and economists have debated extensively whether the concept is valid.

===Criticisms of the production function theory===

There are two major criticisms of the standard form of the production function.

====On the concept of capital====
During the 1950s, &#x27;60s, and &#x27;70s there was a lively debate about the theoretical soundness of production functions (see the Capital controversy). Although the criticism was directed primarily at aggregate production functions, microeconomic production functions were also put under scrutiny. The debate began in 1953 when Joan Robinson criticized the way the factor input capital was measured and how the notion of factor proportions had distracted economists. She wrote:

&quot;The production function has been a powerful instrument of miseducation. The student of economic theory is taught to write formula_34 where formula_35 is a quantity of labor, formula_36 a quantity of capital and formula_2 a rate of output of commodities. [They] are instructed to assume all workers alike, and to measure formula_35 in man-hours of labor; [they] are told something about the index-number problem in choosing a unit of output; and then [they] are hurried on to the next question, in the hope that [they] will forget to ask in what units K is measured. Before [they] ever do ask, [they] have become a professor, and so sloppy habits of thought are handed on from one generation to the next&quot;.

According to the argument, it is impossible to conceive of capital in such a way that its quantity is independent of the rates of interest and wages. The problem is that this independence is a precondition of constructing an isoquant. Further, the slope of the isoquant helps determine relative factor prices, but the curve cannot be constructed (and its slope measured) unless the prices are known beforehand.

====On the empirical relevance====
As a result of the criticism on their weak theoretical grounds, it has been claimed that empirical results firmly support the use of neoclassical &quot;well behaved&quot; aggregate production functions. Nevertheless, Anwar Shaikh has demonstrated that they also have no empirical relevance, as long as the alleged good fit comes from an accounting identity, not from any underlying laws of production/distribution.

====Natural resources====

Natural resources are usually absent in production functions. When Robert Solow and Joseph Stiglitz attempted to develop a more realistic production function by including natural resources, they did it in a manner economist Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen criticized as a &quot;conjuring trick&quot;: Solow and Stiglitz had failed to take into account the laws of thermodynamics, since their variant allowed man-made capital to be a complete substitute for natural resources. Neither Solow nor Stiglitz reacted to Georgescu-Roegen&#x27;s criticism, despite an invitation to do so in the September 1997 issue of the journal &quot;Ecological Economics&quot;.

Georgescu-Roegen can be understood as criticizing Solow and Stiglitz&#x27;s approach to mathematically modelling factors of production. We will use the example of energy to illustrate the strengths and weaknesses of the two approaches in question.

===== Independent factors of production =====
Robert Solow and Joseph Stiglitz describe an approach to modelling energy as a factor of production which assumes the following:

* Labor, capital, energy input, and technical change (omitted below for brevity) are the only relevant factors of production,
* The factors of production are independent of one another such that the production function takes the general form formula_39,
* Labor, capital, and energy input only depend on time such that formula_40.

This approach yields an energy-dependent production function given as formula_41. However, as discussed in more-recent work, this approach does not accurately model the mechanism by which energy affects production processes. Consider the following cases which support the revision of the assumptions made by this model:

* If workers at any stage of the production process rely on electricity to perform their jobs, a power outage would significantly reduce their maximum output, and a long-enough power outage would reduce their maximum output to zero. Therefore formula_35 should be modeled as depending directly on time-dependent energy input formula_43.

* If there were a power outage, machines would not be able to run, and therefore their maximum output would be reduced to zero. Therefore formula_36 should be modeled as depending directly on time-dependent energy input formula_43.

This model has also been shown to predict a 28% decrease in output for a 99% decrease in energy, which further supports the revision of this model&#x27;s assumptions. Note that, while inappropriate for energy, an &quot;independent&quot; modelling approach may be appropriate for modelling other natural resources such as land.

===== Inter-dependent factors of production =====
The &quot;independent&quot; energy-dependent production function can be revised by considering energy-dependent labor and capital input functions formula_46, formula_47. This approach yields an energy-dependent production function given generally as formula_48. Details related to the derivation of a specific functional form of this production function as well as empirical support for this form of the production function are discussed in more-recently published work. Note that similar arguments could be used to develop more-realistic production functions which consider other depletable natural resources beyond energy:

* If a geographical region runs out of the natural resources required to produce a given machine or maintain existing machines and is unable to import more or recycle, the machines in that region will eventually fall into disrepair and the machines&#x27; maximum output would be reduced to near-zero. This should be modeled as significantly affecting the total output. Therefore, therefore formula_36 should be modeled as depending directly on time-dependent natural resource input formula_50.

===The practice of production functions===
The theory of the production function depicts the relation between physical outputs of a production process and physical inputs, i.e. factors of production. The practical application of production functions is obtained by valuing the physical outputs and inputs by their prices. The economic value of physical outputs minus the economic value of physical inputs is the income generated by the production process. By keeping the prices fixed between two periods under review we get the income change generated by a change of the production function. This is the principle how the production function is made a practical concept, i.e. measureable and understandable in practical situations.

==See also==

* Assembly line
* Computer-aided manufacturing
* Distribution (economics)
* Division of labour
* Economic region of production
* Industrial Revolution
* Mass production
* Production
* Production theory basics
* Production possibility frontier
* Productive forces
* Productive and unproductive labour
* Productivity
* Productivity improving technologies (historical)
* Productivity model
* Second Industrial Revolution
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* Sickles, R., &amp; Zelenyuk, V. (2019). Measurement of Productivity and Efficiency: Theory and Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. https://assets.cambridge.org/97811070/36161/frontmatter/9781107036161_frontmatter.pdf
==Further reading==
* 
* Guerrien B. and O. Gun (2015) &quot;Putting an end to the aggregate function of production... forever?&quot;, &quot;Real World Economic Review&quot; N°73
* 
* 
* 
* 
*Sickles, R., &amp; Zelenyuk, V. (2019). Measurement of Productivity and Efficiency: Theory and Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. https://assets.cambridge.org/97811070/36161/frontmatter/9781107036161_frontmatter.pdf

==External links==
*A further description of production functions
*Anatomy of Cobb–Douglas Type Production Functions in 3D
*Anatomy of CES Type Production Functions in 3D</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="3" end="12" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q524004" start="16" end="35" title="Production function" label="production function"/>
<link wikidata="Q73273" start="196" end="206" title="mainstream economics" label="mainstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q60571" start="207" end="219" title="neoclassical economics" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q634028" start="245" end="261" title="marginal product" label="marginal product"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175604" start="281" end="302" title="allocative efficiency" label="allocative efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q39680" start="923" end="937" title="macroeconomics" label="macroeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="974" end="983" title="regression analysis" label="estimated"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="1042" end="1057" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q990550" start="1129" end="1145" title="physical capital" label="physical capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="1186" end="1196" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582475" start="1203" end="1228" title="heterodox economics" label="non-mainstream economists"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="1542" end="1550" title="Function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175604" start="2222" end="2243" title="allocative efficiency" label="allocative efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q634028" start="2973" end="2989" title="marginal product" label="marginal product"/>
<link wikidata="Q210947" start="3467" end="3488" title="factors of production" label="factors of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q815823" start="4270" end="4288" title="Business model" label="business processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q739302" start="4448" end="4472" title="production theory basics" label="production theory basics"/>
<link wikidata="Q847163" start="5813" end="5825" title="Cobb–Douglas" label="Cobb–Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936153" start="5893" end="5918" title="total factor productivity" label="total factor productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819524" start="5924" end="5952" title="Leontief production function" label="Leontief production function"/>
<link wikidata="Q520134" start="6230" end="6265" title="Constant Elasticity of Substitution" label="constant elasticity of substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q739302" start="7938" end="7962" title="production theory basics" label="production theory basics"/>
<link wikidata="Q634028" start="8688" end="8713" title="marginal physical product" label="marginal physical product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132952" start="10871" end="10882" title="Homogeneous function" label="homogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="10997" end="11007" title="Economy of scale" label="increasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q282942" start="11008" end="11024" title="returns to scale" label="returns to scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517710" start="11042" end="11052" title="Diseconomy of scale" label="decreasing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11183" end="11201" title="Returns to scale#Economies of scale" label="increasing returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q935114" start="12281" end="12289" title="isoquant" label="isoquant"/>
<link wikidata="Q39680" start="12845" end="12859" title="macroeconomics" label="macroeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424453" start="13490" end="13509" title="Capital controversy" label="Capital controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q234793" start="13688" end="13701" title="Joan Robinson" label="Joan Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="13738" end="13745" title="Capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q170924" start="14686" end="14694" title="interest" label="interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821213" start="14699" end="14704" title="wages" label="wages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778061" start="15220" end="15232" title="Anwar Shaikh (economist)" label="Anwar Shaikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="15446" end="15462" title="Natural resource" label="Natural resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q157268" start="15513" end="15525" title="Robert Solow" label="Robert Solow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18430" start="15530" end="15545" title="Joseph Stiglitz" label="Joseph Stiglitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351160" start="15670" end="15695" title="Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen" label="Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q849392" start="15796" end="15818" title="laws of thermodynamics" label="laws of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037914" start="16069" end="16089" title="Ecological Economics (journal)" label="Ecological Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q157268" start="16393" end="16405" title="Robert Solow" label="Robert Solow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18430" start="16410" end="16425" title="Joseph Stiglitz" label="Joseph Stiglitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q455037" start="19995" end="20008" title="Assembly line" label="Assembly line"/>
<link wikidata="Q660192" start="20011" end="20039" title="Computer-aided manufacturing" label="Computer-aided manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q989018" start="20042" end="20066" title="Distribution (economics)" label="Distribution (economics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q207449" start="20069" end="20087" title="Division of labour" label="Division of labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333539" start="20090" end="20119" title="Economic region of production" label="Economic region of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="20122" end="20143" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="20146" end="20161" title="Mass production" label="Mass production"/>
<link wikidata="Q739302" start="20164" end="20174" title="Production (economics)" label="Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q739302" start="20177" end="20201" title="Production theory basics" label="Production theory basics"/>
<link wikidata="Q376791" start="20204" end="20235" title="Production possibility frontier" label="Production possibility frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433881" start="20238" end="20255" title="Productive forces" label="Productive forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247853" start="20258" end="20292" title="Productive and unproductive labour" label="Productive and unproductive labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111958" start="20295" end="20307" title="Productivity" label="Productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628737" start="20310" end="20358" title="Productivity improving technologies (historical)" label="Productivity improving technologies (historical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357466" start="20361" end="20379" title="Productivity model" label="Productivity model"/>
<link wikidata="Q217200" start="20382" end="20410" title="Second Industrial Revolution" label="Second Industrial Revolution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424219" wikidata="Q240096" url="?curid=424219" title="645 BC">
<text>The year 645 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. In the Roman Empire, it was known as year 109 &quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&quot;. The denomination 645 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.

==Events==
* The Spring and Autumn Annals, a Chinese book of records, mentions that on December 24 of this year there were five meteors in the sky. It was the first Chinese observation of meteors.

==Births==

==Deaths==
* Guan Zhong, prime minister of Qi
* Archilochos, Greek poet

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q240096" start="9" end="15" title="645 BC" label="645 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="34" end="59" title="Roman calendar" label="pre-Julian Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="68" end="80" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q240096" start="98" end="138" title="645 BC" label="year 109 &amp;quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="234" end="245" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="246" end="258" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q747720" start="333" end="357" title="Spring and Autumn Annals" label="Spring and Autumn Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q457972" start="539" end="549" title="Guan Zhong" label="Guan Zhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q837855" start="569" end="571" title="Qi (state)" label="Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201323" start="574" end="585" title="Archilochos" label="Archilochos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424220" wikidata="Q1059384" url="?curid=424220" title="644 BC">
<text>The year 644 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. In the Roman Empire, it was known as year 110 &quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&quot;. The denomination 644 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.

==Events==
=== Asia Minor ===
* Cimmerian forces from Anatolia conquer Sardis and reach the peak of their power. King Gyges of Lydia has spent most of his 28-year reign fighting his southern and western neighbors in an effort to gain suzerainty over all of Western Asia Minor. He has helped the rebellion of Psamtik I, but he receives no support from his erstwhile Assyrian ally Ashurbanipal. Gyges falls in a battle against the Cimmerians under king Tugdamme (approximate date). 
* Ardys succeeds his father Gyges as the second Mermnad king of Lydia. During his reign he finds payment of tribute to Assyria preferable to rule by the Cimmerians, who will be routed a few decades later.

==Births==
==Deaths==
* Gyges, king of Lydia (approximate date)
* Bao Shuya, prominent official under Duke Huan of Qi

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1059384" start="9" end="15" title="644 BC" label="644 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="34" end="59" title="Roman calendar" label="pre-Julian Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="68" end="80" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059384" start="98" end="132" title="644 BC" label="year 110 &amp;quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="234" end="245" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="246" end="258" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="370" end="378" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q232615" start="387" end="393" title="Sardis" label="Sardis"/>
<link wikidata="Q312537" start="434" end="448" title="Gyges of Lydia" label="Gyges of Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="550" end="560" title="suzerainty" label="suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="581" end="591" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192730" start="745" end="755" title="Cimmerians" label="Cimmerians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264124" start="767" end="775" title="Tugdamme" label="Tugdamme"/>
<link wikidata="Q640203" start="799" end="804" title="Ardys of Lydia" label="Ardys"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="861" end="866" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q748289" start="905" end="912" title="tribute" label="tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="916" end="923" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q312537" start="1027" end="1032" title="Gyges of Lydia" label="Gyges"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="1042" end="1047" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q807048" start="1069" end="1078" title="Bao Shuya" label="Bao Shuya"/>
<link wikidata="Q470108" start="1105" end="1120" title="Duke Huan of Qi" label="Duke Huan of Qi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424223" wikidata="Q6952612" url="?curid=424223" title="NATS">
<text>Nats or NATS may refer to:

== Politics==
* National Party (South Africa) and its supporters
* New Zealand National Party and its supporters
* Scottish National Party and its supporters

== Sports ==
* Syracuse Nationals, an NBA team currently known as the Philadelphia 76ers
* Washington Nationals, the current baseball team in Washington, DC
** Washington Nationals (disambiguation), any of a number of historical baseball teams
* Nats Park
* Nats Xtra
* Raleigh Nats
* Vancouver Nats, an ice hockey team from British Columbia, Canada

== Transport ==
* NATS Holdings, the United Kingdom&#x27;s main Air Navigation Service Provider
* North Atlantic Tracks
* Naval Air Transport Service, a branch of the United States Navy from 1941 to 1948

== Other uses ==
* Nat (unit), a unit of information
* Nat (spirit), in Burmese religion
* Nat caste, a social group of India
* NATS Messaging, an open source messaging (message oriented middleware) system
* National Association of Teachers of Singing, a professional organization for singing teachers
* Next-Generation Administration and Tracking System, an affiliate program backend
* Nihon Automobile High Technical School (Japanese Wikipedia)
* Nissan Anti-Theft System
* North Avenue Trade School

==See also==
* Nat (disambiguation)
* Young Nationals (disambiguation)
* Gnat</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6952612" start="0" end="4" title="NATS" label="Nats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952612" start="8" end="12" title="NATS" label="NATS"/>
<link wikidata="Q740718" start="44" end="73" title="National Party (South Africa)" label="National Party (South Africa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="95" end="121" title="New Zealand National Party" label="New Zealand National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="143" end="166" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870198" start="202" end="220" title="Syracuse Nationals" label="Syracuse Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q825838" start="278" end="298" title="Washington Nationals" label="Washington Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972076" start="347" end="384" title="Washington Nationals (disambiguation)" label="Washington Nationals (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q517545" start="433" end="442" title="Nats Park" label="Nats Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211730" start="445" end="454" title="Nats Xtra" label="Nats Xtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086353" start="457" end="469" title="Raleigh Nats" label="Raleigh Nats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510011" start="472" end="486" title="Vancouver Nats" label="Vancouver Nats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307163" start="556" end="569" title="NATS Holdings" label="NATS Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q948612" start="636" end="657" title="North Atlantic Tracks" label="North Atlantic Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155202" start="660" end="687" title="Naval Air Transport Service" label="Naval Air Transport Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q376660" start="762" end="772" title="Nat (unit)" label="Nat (unit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483364" start="798" end="810" title="Nat (spirit)" label="Nat (spirit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q142530" start="834" end="843" title="Nat caste" label="Nat caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q25327044" start="871" end="885" title="NATS Messaging" label="NATS Messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970786" start="951" end="994" title="National Association of Teachers of Singing" label="National Association of Teachers of Singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823922" start="1047" end="1097" title="Too Much Media" label="Next-Generation Administration and Tracking System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1130" end="1168" title="Nihon Automobile High Technical School" label="Nihon Automobile High Technical School"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1170" end="1188" title=":ja:日本自動車大学校" label="Japanese Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853416" start="1199" end="1216" title="Anti-theft system" label="Anti-Theft System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547841" start="1219" end="1244" title="North Avenue Trade School" label="North Avenue Trade School"/>
<link wikidata="Q227625" start="1261" end="1281" title="Nat (disambiguation)" label="Nat (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16915394" start="1284" end="1316" title="Young Nationals (disambiguation)" label="Young Nationals (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998701" start="1319" end="1323" title="Gnat" label="Gnat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424225" wikidata="Q223153" url="?curid=424225" title="New Democracy (Greece)">
<text>New Democracy ( , ND/ΝΔ) is a liberal-conservative political party in Greece. In contemporary Greek politics, New Democracy has been the main centre-right to right wing political party and one of the two major parties along with its historic rival, the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK). New Democracy and PASOK were created in the wake of the toppling of the military junta in 1974, ruling Greece in succession for the next four decades. Following the electoral decline of PASOK, New Democracy remained one of the two major parties in Greece, the other being the Coalition of the Radical Left (SYRIZA). The party was founded in 1974 by Konstantinos Karamanlis and in the same year it formed the first cabinet of the Third Hellenic Republic. New Democracy is a member of the European People&#x27;s Party, the largest European political party since 1999, the Centrist Democrat International, and the International Democracy Union.

The support of New Democracy comes from a wide electorate base ranging from centrists to conservatives and from nationalists to post-modernists. From a geographical perspective, its main support base is in the rural areas of Greece as well as the city centers of Athens and Thessaloniki. Its support is generally weaker in areas like Arta, Achaia and Crete, with the exception of some parts in Chania and Rethymno. Traditionally, New Democracy receives the greatest percentages in Laconia, Messenia, Kastoria and Serres. Having spent four and a half years in opposition to SYRIZA&#x27;s government, New Democracy regained its majority in the Hellenic Parliament and returned to government under Kyriakos Mitsotakis after the 2019 Greek legislative election. The party secured an absolute majority in Parliament in the June 2023 Greek legislative election.

The party has garnered acclaim for its strides in economic development since 2019, notably emphasizing digitization and post-crisis recovery economics, after delivering economic growth. New Democracy has received accolades for its commitment to liberal reforms and a robust emphasis on pro-Europeanism, successfully securing funds from the European Union to fuel domestic development initiatives. Furthermore, commendation has been extended to the party for effectively reducing both overall unemployment and youth unemployment in the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic.

New Democracy has also faced criticism for its role in the fiscal crisis that engulfed Greece in the late 2000s to the 2010s, as well as its financial management during the 2000s. Numerous academic scholars have highlighted the party&#x27;s penchant for lacking transparency concerning financial data and resource utilization, which has raised concerns about their accountability as a political entity within the country. Moreover, New Democracy has come under fire for its substantial debt to Greek banks, amounting to 435 million euros as of 2023.

== History ==


=== Foundation ===

New Democracy was founded on 4 October 1974 by Konstantinos Karamanlis, in the beginning of the metapolitefsi era following the fall of the Greek junta. Karamanlis, who had already served as Prime Minister of Greece from 1955 to 1963, was sworn in as the first Prime Minister of the Third Hellenic Republic in a national unity government on 24 July 1974, until the first free elections of the new era. He intended New Democracy to be a more modern and progressive political party than the right-wing parties that ruled Greece before the 1967 Greek coup d&#x27;état, including his own National Radical Union (ERE). The party&#x27;s ideology was defined as &quot;radical liberalism&quot;, a term defined as &quot;the prevalence of free market rules with the decisive intervention of the state in favour of social justice.&quot; The party was formed out of a National Radical Union core and dissident members of the pre-Junta Centre Union. It included members of both former Monarchist and Venizelist backgrounds.

=== First government (1974–1981) ===
In the 1974 legislative election, New Democracy obtained a massive parliamentary majority of 220 seats with a record 54.37% of the vote, a result attributed to the personal appeal of Karamanlis to the electorate. Karamanlis was elected as prime minister and soon decided to hold a referendum on 8 December 1974 for the issue of the form of government; with a large majority of 69.17%, monarchy was eventually abolished in favour of a republic. The next major issue for the New Democracy cabinet was the creation of the Constitution of Greece, which entered into force in 1975 and established Greece as a parliamentary republic. On 12 June 1975, Greece applied to join the European Communities, of which it was already an associate member since 1961, while it had already been readmitted to the Council of Europe on 28 November 1974.

In the 1977 election, New Democracy won again a large parliamentary majority of 171 seats, albeit with a reduced percentage of popular vote (41.84%). Under Karamanlis, Greece redefined its relations with NATO and tried to resolve the Cyprus problem following the Turkish invasion of the island. In 1979, the first conference of the party was held in Chalkidiki, where its ideological principles defined under the term &quot;radical liberalism&quot; were unanimously approved, as well as its statute and the operating regulations of its organizations. It was the first conference of any Greek political party whose delegates were elected by the members.

Karamanlis&#x27; vision concerning the accession of Greece into the European Communities, despite the resolute opposition of the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK) and the Communist Party of Greece (KKE), led to the signing of the Treaty of Accession on 28 May 1979 in Athens; following the ratification of the act by the Hellenic Parliament on 28 June 1979, Greece became the tenth member state of the European Communities on 1 January 1981. Karamanlis was criticised by opposing parties for not holding a referendum, even though Greece&#x27;s accession into the European Communities had been in the forefront of New Democracy&#x27;s political platform, under which the party had been elected to power. Meanwhile, Karamanlis relinquished the premiership in 1980 and was elected as President of Greece by the parliament, serving until 1985. Georgios Rallis was elected as the new leader of New Democracy and succeeded Karamanlis in premiership.

=== Opposition and Mitsotakis&#x27; rise to power (1981–1989) ===
Under the leadership of Georgios Rallis, New Democracy was defeated in the 1981 legislative elections by Andreas Papandreou&#x27;s PASOK which ran on a left-wing progressive platform, and was placed in opposition for a first time with 35.87% share of the vote and 115 seats. On the same day, on 18 October 1981, New Democracy was also defeated in the first Greek election to the European Parliament. In the following December, the party&#x27;s parliamentary group elected Evangelos Averoff, former Minister for National Defence, as president of New Democracy, but he resigned in 1984 due to health problems. On 1 September 1984, Konstantinos Mitsotakis succeeded him in the party&#x27;s presidency and he managed to increase its percentage in the 1985 elections to 40.85%, although it was defeated again and remained in opposition.

=== Second government (1989–1993) ===

Mitsotakis led New Democracy to a clear win in the June 1989 legislative elections registering 44.28% of the vote but, due to the modification of the electoral law by the outbound PASOK government, New Democracy obtained only 145 seats which were not enough to form a government on its own. The aftermath was the formation of a coalition government under Tzannis Tzannetakis, consisted of New Democracy and Coalition of the Left and Progress (&quot;Synaspismos&quot;), with the latter also including at the time the Communist Party of Greece. In the subsequent elections of November 1989, New Democracy took one more comfortable win, increasing its share to 46.19% of the vote and 148 seats but, under the same electoral law, they were still short of forming a government and this led to a national unity government along with PASOK and Synaspismos, under Xenophon Zolotas.

Eventually, in the 1990 election Mitsotakis&#x27; New Democracy defeated once again Papandreou&#x27;s PASOK with a lead of 8.28%, but this time the 46.89% of votes awarded them with 150 seats, which allowed Mitsotakis to form a majority in the parliament with the support of Democratic Renewal&#x27;s (DIANA) sole member of parliament and one more seat given by the Supreme Special Court, after a mistake in seat calculation was detected. After three consecutive wide wins with high vote percentages, Mitsotakis became the 178th Prime Minister of Greece and the 7th Prime Minister of the 3rd Hellenic Republic though with a slim parliamentary majority of 152 seats due to the electoral law in force at the time.

In a turbulent international political environment following the 1989 Fall of Communism in Europe, Mitsotakis&#x27; government focused on cutting government spending, the privatization of state enterprises, the reformation of the public administration and the restoration of the original electoral system, with the addition of an election threshold of 3%. In foreign policy, the priorities were the restoration of confidence among Greece&#x27;s economic and political partners, NATO and the United States. Mitsotakis also supported a new dialogue with Turkey on the Cyprus dispute and a compromise over the Macedonia naming dispute; the latter triggered an irritation among the MPs of New Democracy, which led Antonis Samaras to leave it and form a new political party in June 1993, Political Spring; one more withdrawal later from its parliamentary group resulted in New Democracy&#x27;s loss of the majority in the parliament and the call of early elections.

=== Opposition (1993–2004) ===
In the 1993 elections, New Democracy suffered an easy defeat with 39.30% of the vote, something that led to Mitsotakis&#x27; resignation and the election of Miltiadis Evert in the party&#x27;s leadership. In the early 1996 legislative election, New Democracy was defeated again by Costas Simitis&#x27; PASOK registering 38.12%, but Evert obtained a re-election as the party&#x27;s leader in the same year. However, in the spring of 1997 a new conference took place, in order to elect a new president among others. Kostas Karamanlis, nephew of the party&#x27;s founder, was elected the sixth president of New Democracy.

Under Karamanlis, New Democracy experienced an evident increase in popularity, but in the 2000 elections they lost by only 1.06% of the popular vote, the smallest margin in modern Greek history, registering 42.74% and obtaining 125 seats in the parliament. By 2003, New Democracy was consistently leading Simitis&#x27; PASOK in opinion polls; in January 2004 Simitis resigned and announced elections for 7 March, while George Papandreou succeeded him in PASOK&#x27;s leadership.

=== Third government (2004–2009) ===
Despite speculation that Papandreou would succeed in restoring the party&#x27;s fortunes, in the 2004 election Karamanlis managed to take a clear win with 45.36% of the vote and 165 seats, and New Democracy returned to power after eleven years in opposition, scoring an all-time record of 3,359,682 votes in the history of Greek elections. The regions that consistently support New Democracy include the Peloponnese, Central Macedonia and West Macedonia. On the other hand, the party is weak in Crete, the Aegean Islands, Attica and West Greece.
On 16 September 2007, Kostas Karamanlis won re-election with a diminished majority in Parliament, and stated: &quot;Thank you for your trust. You have spoken loud and clear and chosen the course the country will take in the next few years.&quot; George Papandreou, PASOK, accepted defeat (New Democracy party with 41.87%, and opposition party PASOK had 38.1%).

=== 2009 defeat ===
On 2 September 2009 Karamanlis announced his intention to call an election, although one was not required until September 2011. The parliament was dissolved on 9 September, and the 2009 legislative election was held on 4 October. New Democracy&#x27;s share of the parliamentary vote dropped to 33.47% (down by 8.37%) and they won only 91 of 300 seats, dropping by 61 since the last election. The rival PASOK soared to 43.92% (up 5.82%), and took 160 seats (up 58). The 33.5% tally marked a historic low for the party since its founding in 1974. Karamanlis conceded defeat and stated that he would resign as a leader of New Democracy, and would not stand as a candidate at the next party election. Two former Ministers for Foreign Affairs, Dora Bakoyannis and Antonis Samaras, as well as Thessaloniki Prefect Panagiotis Psomiadis were announced as candidates, with Samaras being the favorite to win.

On 29 November 2009, Antonis Samaras was elected the new leader of New Democracy by the party base at the 2009 leadership election. Following early results showing Samaras in the lead, his main rival Dora Bakoyannis conceded defeat and congratulated Samaras for his election; later she left New Democracy to found her own party, Democratic Alliance. Samaras himself had also left New Democracy in 1992 because of his hard stance on the Macedonia naming dispute and found his own party, Political Spring; he returned to New Democracy in 2004.

=== 2011 government debt crisis ===
New Democracy was in opposition during the first phase (2009–11) of the Greek government debt crisis which included the First bailout package agreed in May 2010. The party did not support the first EU/IMF rescue package of May 2010 and the three related austerity packages of March 2010, May 2010 and June 2011. Further measures were agreed by prime minister George Papandreou with the EU and private banks and insurers on 27 October 2011. The aim was to complete negotiations by the end of the year and put in place a full Second bailout package to supplement the one agreed in May 2010. Samaras initially blasted the deal. In reality New Democracy had dismissed cross-party agreement even before the deal was agreed.

A few days later, Papandreou announced a surprise referendum. During the frantic negotiations that followed, Samaras offered to support the austerity package he had initially condemned if Papandreou resigned and an interim government be appointed to lead the country to elections early in the new year.

The referendum was never held, and Papandreou resigned in early November 2011. New Democracy supported the new national unity government headed by Lucas Papademos; however the party&#x27;s support for austerity appeared lukewarm at first.

Within a few days, party officials spoke of &quot;renegotiating&quot; existing agreements with the EU and IMF. EU partners requested that Samaras sign a letter committing him to the terms of the rescue package, in what was seen as an effort to keep the nationalist elements of his party happy. Samaras argued that his word should be enough and that the demand for a written commitment was &quot;humiliating&quot;. Both Papademos and the EU insisted on a written commitment. New Democracy repeated its call for new elections. Samaras was said to be infuriating European leaders by only partly backing the international reform programme. A meeting of Eurozone&#x27;s Finance Ministers was postponed in February 2012, when it became apparent that not all the main political parties were willing to pledge to honour the conditions demanded in return for the rescue package; a day later Samaras reversed course and wrote to the European Commission and IMF, promising to implement the austerity measures if his party were to win a general election in April. German finance minister Wolfgang Schäuble suggested postponing the election and setting up a small technocratic cabinet like Italy&#x27;s to run Greece for the next two years.

=== Fourth government with PASOK (2012–2015) ===
In May 2012 general election, the New Democracy regained the largest party but could not obtain a majority. Anti-austerity leftist SYRIZA, led by Alexis Tsipras became the second largest party and refused to negotiate with New Democracy and PASOK. After the general election the New Democracy could not form a coalition government.

New Democracy during its rule introduced a strict immigration policy, and proposed strengthening this policy as part of its political agenda.

=== In opposition (2015–2019) ===
In its electoral campaign for the January 2015 legislative election, Samaras promised to continue with his plan to exit the bailout and return to growth by further privatizations, a corporate tax rate reduced to 15 percent and a recapitalization of Greece&#x27;s banks. The party received a total of €747,214 of state funding, the largest share of all political parties in Greece. In the election, ND was defeated by SYRIZA. On 5 July 2015 Samaras stepped down from party leadership.

New Democracy was once again defeated by SYRIZA in the September 2015 legislative election, but maintained its number of seats in the Hellenic Parliament. On 10 January 2016 Kyriakos Mitsotakis was elected as new party leader.

On 4 October 2018, the party adopted a new logo.

=== Fifth government (2019–present) ===
In the 2019 legislative election, New Democracy won 158 seats in the 300-seat Hellenic Parliament, a majority of the seats, enabling it to form a government on its own under Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, Mitsotakis&#x27; efforts to deal with the prolonged lockdown in Greece received widespread praise from Greek and International press, analysts, and academics, for the well-structured approach and continuous reliance on scientific expertise of the Greek pandemic task force, headed by Sotiris Tsiodras. In 2021, the country managed to keep the new cases of COVID-19 to low levels by enforcing back to back strict lockdowns in Athens and Thessaloniki, and enabling different emergency protocols for rural areas. At the same time the government focused on tackling the pandemic before the launch of the 2021 summer tourist season in an attempt to boost the country&#x27;s economy.

During Mitsotakis&#x27;s term as prime minister, he has received praise for his pro-European and technocratic governance, his handling of the COVID-19 pandemic in Greece, and is credited with the modernization and digitalization of the country&#x27;s public administration, as well as for his overall management of the Greek economy, with Greece being named the Top Economic Performer for 2022 and 2023 by &quot;The Economist&quot;. This was in particular due to Greece in 2022 being able to repay ahead of schedule the 2.7 billion euros ($2.87 billion) of loans owed to Eurozone countries under the first bailout it received during the decade-long debt crisis, along with being on the verge of reaching an investment-grade rating. Mitsotakis has also received criticism, as during his term Greece experienced heightened corruption, and a deterioration of freedom of the press. His term was marred by the Novartis corruption scandal, the 2022 wiretapping scandal, and the Tempi Train crash. Additionally, he has received both praise and criticism for his handling of migration, including support and aid from the European Union, but criticism from journalists and activists for pushbacks, which his government has denied.

In the May 2023 elections, the only election to use the purely proportional system introduced by SYRIZA in 2016, Mitsotakis led the party to achieve a plurality of the seats in parliament. Soon after the results were announced, Mitsotakis called snap elections for the following month, with this election returning to the majority bonus system.

== Ideology ==
New Democracy political position has been placed as centrist, centre-right, with some far-right elements. The main ideologies of the party have been described as liberal-conservative, or conservative-liberal, and Christian democratic, with a pro-European stance.

== Democratic Renewal Initiative – New Democracy Student Movement ==
The Democratic Renewal Initiative – New Democracy Student Movement (Greek: ), abbreviated as &quot;Δ.Α.Π.–Ν.Δ.Φ.Κ.&quot;, is the student wing of New Democracy. It was founded in 1976, after the merger of the Democratic Renewal Initiative and the New Democracy Student Movement.

As of June 2024, the Democratic Renewal Initiative - New Democracy Student Movement has secured the first place in yearly university elections 37 times nationwide. Its first electoral victory is reported to have taken place in 1987, while its highest percentage (47%) was achieved in 1990.

== Electoral history ==
=== Hellenic Parliament ===
Popular vote in Greek legislative elections


=== European Parliament elections ===


== Party leaders ==
== Symbols ==
The traditional symbol of the party has been the freedom torch, incorporated in its logo, albeit in a stylized form in the logo adopted in 2018.

=== Logos ===
== References ==
== External links ==
* ND list of MPs_Vouliwatch.gr</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="0" end="13" title="New Democracy (Greece)" label="New Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="18" end="20" title="New Democracy (Greece)" label="ND"/>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="21" end="23" title="New Democracy (Greece)" label="ΝΔ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043096" start="30" end="50" title="Liberal conservatism" label="liberal-conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q659914" start="51" end="76" title="List of political parties in Greece" label="political party in Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056647" start="94" end="108" title="Politics of Greece" label="Greek politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="142" end="154" title="Centre-right politics" label="centre-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738353" start="204" end="217" title="Major party" label="major parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="253" end="283" title="PASOK" label="Panhellenic Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="349" end="387" title="Greek junta#Cypriot coup d&amp;#x27;état, Turkish invasion and fall of the junta" label="toppling of the military junta in 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="541" end="547" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q222897" start="569" end="598" title="Syriza" label="Coalition of the Radical Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q156806" start="642" end="665" title="Konstantinos Karamanlis" label="Konstantinos Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="722" end="745" title="History of the Hellenic Republic#Third Hellenic Republic" label="Third Hellenic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208242" start="780" end="808" title="European People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="European People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q24649" start="822" end="846" title="European political party" label="European political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q128064" start="863" end="894" title="Centrist Democrat International" label="Centrist Democrat International"/>
<link wikidata="Q862603" start="904" end="933" title="International Democracy Union" label="International Democracy Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="1199" end="1205" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="1210" end="1222" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q208573" start="1270" end="1274" title="Arta, Greece" label="Arta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495811" start="1276" end="1282" title="Achaea" label="Achaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="1287" end="1292" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q182299" start="1330" end="1336" title="Chania" label="Chania"/>
<link wikidata="Q200908" start="1341" end="1349" title="Rethymno" label="Rethymno"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723836" start="1417" end="1424" title="Laconia" label="Laconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723843" start="1426" end="1434" title="Messenia" label="Messenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206954" start="1436" end="1444" title="Kastoria" label="Kastoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q206957" start="1449" end="1455" title="Serres" label="Serres"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="1578" end="1597" title="Hellenic Parliament" label="Hellenic Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q552751" start="1631" end="1650" title="Kyriakos Mitsotakis" label="Kyriakos Mitsotakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25053460" start="1661" end="1692" title="2019 Greek legislative election" label="2019 Greek legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q118616507" start="1754" end="1790" title="June 2023 Greek legislative election" label="June 2023 Greek legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="2285" end="2297" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261734" start="2302" end="2320" title="youth unemployment" label="youth unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="2345" end="2362" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q956475" start="2424" end="2437" title="Greek government-debt crisis" label="fiscal crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q720829" start="2627" end="2639" title="Open government" label="transparency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196867" start="2851" end="2855" title="debt" label="debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q156806" start="2999" end="3022" title="Konstantinos Karamanlis" label="Konstantinos Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204796" start="3048" end="3061" title="metapolitefsi" label="metapolitefsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q504081" start="3092" end="3103" title="Greek junta" label="Greek junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377230" start="3143" end="3167" title="Prime Minister of Greece" label="Prime Minister of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3235" end="3258" title="History of the Hellenic Republic#Third Hellenic Republic (1974-)" label="Third Hellenic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q327922" start="3264" end="3289" title="national unity government" label="national unity government"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="3441" end="3451" title="Right-wing politics" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="3471" end="3477" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3489" end="3516" title="Greek junta#Coup d&amp;#x27;état of 21 April" label="1967 Greek coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371314" start="3536" end="3558" title="National Radical Union" label="National Radical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q913401" start="3613" end="3631" title="Classical radicalism" label="radical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="3681" end="3692" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="3756" end="3770" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371314" start="3808" end="3830" title="National Radical Union" label="National Radical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343608" start="3875" end="3887" title="Centre Union" label="Centre Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510840" start="4008" end="4033" title="1974 Greek legislative election" label="1974 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602054" start="4282" end="4292" title="1974 Greek republic referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840097" start="4386" end="4394" title="Monarchy of Greece" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="4435" end="4443" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573466" start="4520" end="4542" title="Constitution of Greece" label="Constitution of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="4605" end="4627" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="4673" end="4693" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="4795" end="4812" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337928" start="4842" end="4855" title="1977 Greek legislative election" label="1977 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="5039" end="5043" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q245831" start="5069" end="5083" title="Cyprus problem" label="Cyprus problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050999" start="5098" end="5114" title="Turkish invasion of Cyprus" label="Turkish invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q204728" start="5185" end="5195" title="Chalkidiki" label="Chalkidiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q659914" start="5421" end="5442" title="List of political parties in Greece" label="Greek political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="5618" end="5648" title="PASOK" label="Panhellenic Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q192406" start="5665" end="5690" title="Communist Party of Greece" label="Communist Party of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991236" start="5724" end="5743" title="Treaty of Accession 1979" label="Treaty of Accession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="5762" end="5768" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="5815" end="5834" title="Hellenic Parliament" label="Hellenic Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="5876" end="5916" title="Member state of the European Union" label="member state of the European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409203" start="6275" end="6294" title="President of Greece" label="President of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q252657" start="6334" end="6349" title="Georgios Rallis" label="Georgios Rallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337898" start="6580" end="6606" title="1981 Greek legislative election" label="1981 legislative elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q219256" start="6610" end="6628" title="Andreas Papandreou" label="Andreas Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576812" start="6856" end="6903" title="1981 European Parliament election in Greece" label="first Greek election to the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q562162" start="6977" end="6994" title="Evangelos Averoff" label="Evangelos Averoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865935" start="7003" end="7032" title="Minister for National Defence (Greece)" label="Minister for National Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q312013" start="7134" end="7157" title="Konstantinos Mitsotakis" label="Konstantinos Mitsotakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338854" start="7252" end="7266" title="1985 Greek legislative election" label="1985 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566034" start="7428" end="7459" title="June 1989 Greek legislative election" label="June 1989 legislative elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="7705" end="7725" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q316235" start="7732" end="7751" title="Tzannis Tzannetakis" label="Tzannis Tzannetakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q219573" start="7784" end="7818" title="Coalition of Left, of Movements and Ecology" label="Coalition of the Left and Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565862" start="7938" end="7964" title="November 1989 Greek legislative election" label="elections of November 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q318009" start="8233" end="8249" title="Xenophon Zolotas" label="Xenophon Zolotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532458" start="8271" end="8284" title="1990 Greek legislative election" label="1990 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555896" start="8527" end="8545" title="Democratic Renewal" label="Democratic Renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="8566" end="8586" title="member of parliament" label="member of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344028" start="8618" end="8639" title="Supreme Special Court (Greece)" label="Supreme Special Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="9030" end="9052" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="1989 Fall of Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="9056" end="9062" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q217032" start="9295" end="9313" title="election threshold" label="election threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="9456" end="9469" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="9517" end="9523" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="9531" end="9537" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139479" start="9572" end="9596" title="Macedonia naming dispute" label="Macedonia naming dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q57806" start="9675" end="9690" title="Antonis Samaras" label="Antonis Samaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064301" start="9748" end="9764" title="Political Spring" label="Political Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052966" start="9965" end="9979" title="1993 Greek legislative election" label="1993 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935856" start="10115" end="10130" title="Miltiadis Evert" label="Miltiadis Evert"/>
<link wikidata="Q737031" start="10176" end="10201" title="1996 Greek legislative election" label="1996 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q155390" start="10239" end="10253" title="Costas Simitis" label="Costas Simitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188978" start="10472" end="10489" title="Kostas Karamanlis" label="Kostas Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934584" start="10668" end="10682" title="2000 Greek legislative election" label="2000 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q151917" start="10997" end="11014" title="George Papandreou" label="George Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518129" start="11192" end="11205" title="2004 Greek legislative election" label="2004 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991470" start="11418" end="11433" title="Elections in Greece" label="Greek elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="11499" end="11510" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152" start="11512" end="11529" title="Central Macedonia" label="Central Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165408" start="11534" end="11548" title="West Macedonia" label="West Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="11590" end="11595" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q878481" start="11601" end="11615" title="Aegean Islands" label="Aegean Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="11617" end="11623" title="Attica" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q170291" start="11628" end="11639" title="West Greece" label="West Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q188978" start="11663" end="11680" title="Kostas Karamanlis" label="Kostas Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="11727" end="11737" title="Parliament of Greece" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q151917" start="11887" end="11904" title="George Papandreou (junior)" label="George Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q863595" start="12204" end="12229" title="2009 Greek legislative election" label="2009 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q863595" start="12400" end="12413" title="2009 Greek legislative election" label="last election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125291" start="12731" end="12760" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Greece)" label="Ministers for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q464862" start="12762" end="12777" title="Dora Bakoyannis" label="Dora Bakoyannis"/>
<link wikidata="Q57806" start="12782" end="12797" title="Antonis Samaras" label="Antonis Samaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q210176" start="12810" end="12830" title="Thessaloniki prefecture" label="Thessaloniki Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12831" end="12851" title="Panagiotis Psomiadis" label="Panagiotis Psomiadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006873" start="13029" end="13053" title="2009 New Democracy leadership election" label="2009 leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226117" start="13252" end="13271" title="Democratic Alliance (Greece)" label="Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139479" start="13359" end="13383" title="Macedonia naming dispute" label="Macedonia naming dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064301" start="13409" end="13425" title="Political Spring" label="Political Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q956475" start="13574" end="13602" title="Greek government debt crisis" label="Greek government debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12875844" start="13622" end="13643" title="First bailout package (Greece)" label="First bailout package"/>
<link wikidata="Q18746559" start="13778" end="13788" title="First austerity package (Greece)" label="March 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q18746559" start="13790" end="13798" title="Second austerity package (Greece)" label="May 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q18746559" start="13803" end="13812" title="Third austerity package (Greece)" label="June 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q151917" start="13861" end="13878" title="George Papandreou" label="George Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q18788513" start="14026" end="14048" title="Second bailout package (Greece)" label="Second bailout package"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814530" start="14263" end="14282" title="2011 Greek proposed economy referendum" label="surprise referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q327922" start="14637" end="14662" title="national unity government" label="national unity government"/>
<link wikidata="Q164281" start="14673" end="14688" title="Lucas Papademos" label="Lucas Papademos"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="15415" end="15423" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q429958" start="15791" end="15807" title="May 2012 Greek legislative election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019" start="15842" end="15859" title="Wolfgang Schäuble" label="Wolfgang Schäuble"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="15943" end="15948" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q429958" start="16047" end="16072" title="May 2012 Greek legislative election" label="May 2012 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q222897" start="16175" end="16181" title="SYRIZA" label="SYRIZA"/>
<link wikidata="Q312015" start="16190" end="16204" title="Alexis Tsipras" label="Alexis Tsipras"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091742" start="16588" end="16621" title="January 2015 Greek legislative election" label="January 2015 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q222897" start="16971" end="16977" title="SYRIZA" label="SYRIZA"/>
<link wikidata="Q552751" start="17213" end="17232" title="Kyriakos Mitsotakis" label="Kyriakos Mitsotakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187753" start="17237" end="17244" title="2015–16 New Democracy leadership election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q25053460" start="17364" end="17389" title="2019 Greek legislative election" label="2019 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="17435" end="17454" title="Hellenic Parliament" label="Hellenic Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q65184515" start="17503" end="17524" title="First Cabinet of Kyriakos Mitsotakis" label="government on its own"/>
<link wikidata="Q552751" start="17546" end="17565" title="Kyriakos Mitsotakis" label="Kyriakos Mitsotakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="17579" end="17596" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37830054" start="17882" end="17898" title="Sotiris Tsiodras" label="Sotiris Tsiodras"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781399" start="18357" end="18369" title="pro-European" label="pro-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q190044" start="18374" end="18386" title="technocratic" label="technocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q87068864" start="18419" end="18446" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Greece" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="18689" end="18702" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="18848" end="18856" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q956475" start="18914" end="18937" title="Greek government-debt crisis" label="decade-long debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="19133" end="19153" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q507154" start="19182" end="19209" title="Novartis corruption scandal" label="Novartis corruption scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q113933481" start="19215" end="19239" title="Greek wiretapping scandal of 2022" label="2022 wiretapping scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q116946502" start="19249" end="19266" title="Tempi train crash" label="Tempi Train crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="19390" end="19404" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q108934126" start="19455" end="19464" title="Pushbacks in Greece" label="pushbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q84081612" start="19507" end="19525" title="May 2023 Greek legislative election" label="May 2023 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="19556" end="19582" title="Proportional representation" label="purely proportional system"/>
<link wikidata="Q118616507" start="19746" end="19760" title="June 2023 Greek legislative election" label="snap elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089495" start="19822" end="19843" title="majority bonus system" label="majority bonus system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="19913" end="19921" title="Centrism" label="centrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="19923" end="19935" title="Centre-right politics" label="centre-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="19947" end="19956" title="Far-right politics" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043096" start="20023" end="20043" title="liberal conservatism" label="liberal-conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q617609" start="20048" end="20068" title="conservative liberalism" label="conservative-liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="20074" end="20094" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781399" start="20103" end="20115" title="Pro-Europeanism" label="pro-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="20262" end="20267" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q27963052" start="20323" end="20335" title="student wing" label="student wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q452440" start="20388" end="20394" title="Merger (politics)" label="merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="20606" end="20614" title="election" label="election"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424227" wikidata="Q7157308" url="?curid=424227" title="Peace Action">
<text>Peace Action is a peace organization whose focus is on preventing the deployment of nuclear weapons in space, thwarting weapons sales to countries with human rights violations, and promoting a new United States foreign policy based on common security and peaceful resolution to international conflicts.

Peace Action believes that every person has the right to live without the threat of nuclear weapons, that war is not a suitable response to conflict, and that the United States has the resources to both protect and provide for its citizens. Peace Action has over 100,000 members who belong to over 70 autonomous affiliate and chapter organizations.

The name &quot;Peace Action&quot; was adopted in 1993 by SANE / FREEZE, which had been formed in 1987 by the merger of the Committee for a SANE Nuclear Policy and the Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign (also known as &quot;The Freeze&quot;).

== Campaigns ==
In 2003, Peace Action launched the Campaign for a New Foreign Policy, an initiative to build grassroots support and congressional pressure for a U.S. foreign policy based on human rights and democracy, nuclear disarmament and international cooperation.

Peace Action opposes the U.S. occupation of Iraq as well as any potential future action within that state to impose permanent military bases, any attempt to control Iraqi oil through U.S. government or corporate institutions, or any action on the part of the U.S. government to further influence the domestic policy of elected Iraqi officials. They lobby their activist network to demand a complete withdrawal from Iraq as soon as possible.

To prevent future wars, Peace Action lobbies its grassroots network to demand peaceful diplomacy with Iran. In December 2006 Peace Action began a petition to prevent war with Iran; to date there are over 44,000 names.

On the nuclear front, Peace Action took part in a coalition lobby effort with organizations like the Arms Control Association and the Council for a Livable World to zero out funding for the Reliable Replacement Warhead and Complex 2030. Efforts of the coalition helped stir the Senate Arms Services Committee to zero out the Administration’s $15 million RRW request for Navy research and development.

Peace Action participated in organizing People’s Climate March in September 2014. Peace Action believes war and militarism are interconnected with the climate crisis. The organization states that wars and militarism are the biggest obstacles to funding initiatives to address global warming. Both wars and climate crisis require a political solution which can become a reality only if the climate justice movement links to ending wars and militarism and the peace movement connects to justice: climate, economic and racial justice. Peace Action, as a national endorser, jumped into the organizing from the beginning, launching the Peoples Climate March Peace and Justice Hub. The Hub brought together peace and faith groups to organize a No War, No Warming contingent and rally. George Martin, Peace Action Education Fund board member; Cole Harrison, executive director of Massachusetts Peace Action (MAPA); Jim Anderson, Peace Action of New York State (PANYS) Chair; and Natia Bueno, PANYS Student Outreach Coordinator, led the way.

== Grassroots work ==

Peace Action has 100 chapters nationwide with a network of over 100,000 paying members. They send bi-weekly Action Alerts to almost 100,000 people worldwide, keeping them up to date on legislation regarding the Iraq war, nuclear disarmament, and preventing future wars with countries the former Bush administration deemed &quot;rogue nations,&quot; like Iran. They also run a forum blog concerning issues of peace, nuclear abolition, and justice.

Their motto is &quot;Peace Demands Action&quot; and work on issues like Iraq, missile bases in Europe, or cutting the funding of new nuclear warheads . Peace Action’s goal is to organize the nation around issues of peace and justice through protests, congressional action, and lobby days. They recently organized a petition to let our leaders know that any war with Iran, particularly one that involves nuclear weapons, should not be an option.

Peace Action initiated the Student Peace Action Network (SPAN) in 1995 to bring the voices of young activists into the forefront of the peace movement. Youth actively engaged in peace issues lacked a systematic tool to unite and organize with other young people. SPAN addresses this problem by providing advocacy tools, a nationwide network of like-minded youth, information about the issues, and support for affiliate chapters. Through coordinated direct actions, demonstrations, teach-ins, letter-writing campaigns, dissemination of materials, and other tactics, SPAN activists all over the country challenge unjust policies and work for non-violent, constructive alternatives.

== History ==
Peace Action was founded as &#x27;SANE&#x27; in 1957 by Lenore Marshall and Norman Cousins and others in response to the nuclear arms race and the Eisenhower administration&#x27;s policies on the production and testing of nuclear weapons. William Sloane Coffin, former chaplain of Yale University and political activist, retired from Riverside Church to become President of SANE/FREEZE in 1987. The name &quot;SANE&quot; came from the concepts put forth by Erich Fromm in his book &quot;The Sane Society&quot;. The group&#x27;s aim was to alert Americans of the threat of nuclear weapons. A full-page advertisement placed in &quot;The New York Times&quot; in November 1957 provoked a nationwide response, and by 1958 the membership of the organization had grown to 25,000. SANE was formally incorporated in July of that year.

Various influential people and celebrities began to get involved with the organization and show support for their cause. In 1959, Steve Allen hosted a meeting that founded the Hollywood SANE. Members included Marlon Brando, Henry Fonda, Marilyn Monroe, Arthur Miller, Harry Belafonte, and Ossie Davis. In 1960, a SANE rally held at Madison Square Garden attracted 20,000 to hear Eleanor Roosevelt, Norman Cousins, Norman Thomas, A. Philip Randolph, Walter Reuther, and Harry Belafonte call for an end to the arms race. International sponsors of SANE (including Martin Buber, Pablo Casals, Bertrand Russell and Albert Schweitzer) petitioned President John F. Kennedy to maintain a moratorium on testing in the atmosphere. Graphic Artists for SANE was also organized, with members that included Jules Feiffer, Ben Shahn, and Edward Sorel.

The group launched campaigns and rallies to drum up support for its cause and to put pressure on political figures. In 1961, SANE hosted an eight-day, 109-mile march from McGuire Air Force Base to the United Nations Plaza that was attended by more than 25,000 people. They organized a rally of over 10,000 people on &quot;Cuba Sunday&quot; to express concern and outrage over the Cuban Missile Crisis. Dr. Spock became a national sponsor and appeared in an ad stating &quot;Dr. Spock is worried.&quot; The ad was printed in 700 papers worldwide.

=== Early political influence ===
As a way of seeing their goals achieved, SANE began working through its political lobbying programs. The organization began by pushing for the election of congressional candidates whose positions reflected those of the organization. In 1966, SANE formed the &quot;Voter&#x27;s Peace Pledge Campaign&quot; to urge Congressional candidates to work for peace in Vietnam. They became one of the first national organizations to advocate removal of President Lyndon B. Johnson from office. They went on to endorse Eugene McCarthy as the Democratic presidential candidate in 1968.

SANE&#x27;s Norman Cousins acted as an unofficial liaison between President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev on the Partial Test Ban Treaty negotiations. The organization helped secure the passage of the War Powers Resolution. As the Vietnam War began to escalate, SANE organized a rally at Madison Square Garden that attracted 18,000 people opposing the war, as well as a march on Washington in November 1965 drawing 35,000. Three days after the march, Vice-president Hubert Humphrey met with SANE leaders Dr. Spock, Sanford Gottlieb, and Homer Jack &quot;to openly, responsibly, and frankly discuss their proposals&quot; to end the war. Many more SANE marches on Washington would occur throughout the war.

SANE would go on to criticize the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty and SALT agreements for ignoring offensive strategic weapons. Following Richard Nixon&#x27;s re-election, SANE advocated Congressional cut-off of funds for the Vietnam war. After the end of the Vietnam War, SANE lobbied to have Congress end the bombing of Cambodia, and helped lead a successful effort to pass the War Powers Act. SANE would also take on the military budget, and produced the &quot;America Has a Tapeworm&quot; ad. Despite the end of the war, SANE continued actions throughout the 1970s that promoted its purpose.

=== Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign ===

During the 1980s, SANE continued to monitor the political and military actions of the U.S. government and beyond. In 1981, The Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign began with the purpose of pressuring the government to stop the nuclear arms build-up. The campaign was initiated by Randall Forsberg&#x27;s call to &quot;freeze and reverse the nuclear arms race&quot;. Many SANE leaders participated in the creation of &#x27;the Freeze&#x27;, as it was sometimes called, which was a grassroots-based confederation of groups spanning the country. Freeze leaders included Randall Forsberg, Helen Caldicott, Pam Solo, and Randy Kehler. Elected officials such as Rep. Patricia Schroeder and Sen. Ted Kennedy helped to lead the movement in Congress. The Freeze&#x27;s grassroots network pushed for nuclear reductions through ballot initiatives in towns and cities across the nation.

Specifically, the Freeze&#x27;s goal was to get the U.S. and the Soviet Union to simultaneously adopt a mutual freeze on the testing, production, and deployment of nuclear weapons and of missiles, as well as new aircraft designed primarily to deliver nuclear weapons. Much emphasis was put on the MX and Pershing II missiles. Randall Forsberg was the organizer who initiated this idea of the &quot;mutual, verifiable&quot; Freeze.

During 1982, the SANE political action committee was formed for the political election year. Aside from working to get selected candidates elected, it became a driving force behind many proposed nuclear freeze referendums. In a victory for both the Freeze campaign and SANE, Ronald Reagan proposed START I, part of a two-phase treaty between the U.S. and the USSR that would reduce overall warhead counts on any missile type.

In roughly the 1983–84 period, when the Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign was planning expansively around mass-movement fund raising, lobbying, and Political Action Committees (PACs), SANE was merged into that entity, though local SANE chapters would continue to hold meetings for some time to come. Specific congressional races were targeted, and some of the pro-Freeze candidates credited the movement, and the grass-roots funds it raised, with their success in getting elected, or re-elected, to Congress. From 1984 on, the movement had three actual legal entities, the &#x27;Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign&#x27;, with both public education and lobbying arms (501.C-3 and 501.C-4 corporations), and the Freeze Voter PAC (501.C-5).

During the 1980s, SANE/FREEZE expanded its work to oppose U.S. military intervention in El Salvador and to end U.S. military aid to the Contras in Nicaragua. The organization promoted its agenda in different ways. An ad was placed in Variety magazine signed by over 250 celebrities including Jack Lemmon, Burt Lancaster, James Earl Jones, Sally Field, Shirley MacLaine, and Ed Asner supporting its causes. A weekly radio program by SANE/FREEZE, &quot;Consider the Alternatives&quot;, reaches 140 radio stations. Their door canvassing campaign reached 250,000 households.

=== The Gulf War and the War on Terror ===
Following Iraq&#x27;s invasion of Kuwait, SANE/FREEZE opposed the U.S. military buildup in the Persian Gulf. Throughout the Gulf War, the organization coordinated anti-war marches in Washington, DC, helping to mobilize 500,000 protesters. Soon after, in 1993, SANE/FREEZE renamed itself Peace Action.

Of great concern to Peace Action in 1995 was the conference for review of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. The signatories to the treaty decided by consensus to extend the treaty indefinitely and without conditions. The year also marked the 50th anniversary of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.

The next year Peace Action launched Peace Voter &#x27;96, the organization&#x27;s largest nationally coordinated campaign since the mid-1980s. Over one million Peace Voter Guides were distributed for the November elections. Also that year, Peace Action joined human-rights groups to stop major weapons sales to Indonesia and Turkey. In 1997, Indonesia withdrew its request for U.S. fighter jets due to &quot;unwarranted criticism&quot; of their human-rights record.

In 1999, Peace Action opposed the NATO bombing of Kosovo, which it described as &quot;cruise missile humanitarianism&quot;, and founded the National Coalition for Peace and Justice, a body uniting most of the major peace groups in the country. Also that year, Peace Action commemorated the bombing of Nagasaki by staging a demonstration at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico. The demonstration was led by actor Martin Sheen.

Following the September 11, 2001 attacks, Peace Action responded to the war on terrorism and the bombing of Afghanistan with a call for justice, not war. The group went on to participate in two national coalitions: Win Without War and United for Peace and Justice.

== See also ==
* Committee for Non-Violent Action
* Department of Peace
* List of anti-war organizations
* List of peace activists
* Nuclear weapons

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Milton S. Katz, &quot;Ban the Bomb: A History of SANE, 1957–1985&quot; (New York: Greenwood Press, 1986). 
* Pam Solo, &quot;From Protest to Policy: Beyond the Freeze to Common Security&quot; (Ballinger, 1988). 
* Glen Harold Stassen and Lawrence S. Wittner, eds., &quot;Peace Action: Past, Present and Future&quot; (Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers, 2007). 

== External links ==
* Official site
* Peace Action Blog
* People&#x27;s Climate Change Peace and Justice hub
* Student Peace Action</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7157308" start="0" end="12" title="Peace Action" label="Peace Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="84" end="99" title="nuclear weapons" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="152" end="164" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081444" start="1329" end="1338" title="Iraqi oil" label="Iraqi oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793846" start="1926" end="1950" title="Arms Control Association" label="Arms Control Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387579" start="2267" end="2289" title="People&amp;#x27;s Climate March (2014)" label="People’s Climate March"/>
<link wikidata="Q60933643" start="2378" end="2392" title="climate crisis" label="climate crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291678" start="2616" end="2631" title="climate justice" label="climate justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q76611" start="4819" end="4830" title="non-violent" label="non-violent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523097" start="4930" end="4945" title="Lenore Marshall" label="Lenore Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364026" start="4950" end="4964" title="Norman Cousins" label="Norman Cousins"/>
<link wikidata="Q550452" start="4995" end="5012" title="nuclear arms race" label="nuclear arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="5021" end="5031" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="5096" end="5110" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q332963" start="5113" end="5134" title="William Sloane Coffin" label="William Sloane Coffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57085" start="5331" end="5342" title="Erich Fromm" label="Erich Fromm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5505" end="5523" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q553276" start="5831" end="5842" title="Steve Allen" label="Steve Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="5910" end="5923" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q19155" start="5925" end="5936" title="Henry Fonda" label="Henry Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="5938" end="5952" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Marilyn Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="5954" end="5967" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q214959" start="5969" end="5984" title="Harry Belafonte" label="Harry Belafonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q515632" start="5990" end="6001" title="Ossie Davis" label="Ossie Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="6033" end="6054" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q83396" start="6080" end="6097" title="Eleanor Roosevelt" label="Eleanor Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364026" start="6099" end="6113" title="Norman Cousins" label="Norman Cousins"/>
<link wikidata="Q162820" start="6115" end="6128" title="Norman Thomas" label="Norman Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q720153" start="6130" end="6148" title="A. Philip Randolph" label="A. Philip Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055932" start="6150" end="6164" title="Walter Reuther" label="Walter Reuther"/>
<link wikidata="Q214959" start="6170" end="6185" title="Harry Belafonte" label="Harry Belafonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q84423" start="6262" end="6274" title="Martin Buber" label="Martin Buber"/>
<link wikidata="Q208537" start="6276" end="6288" title="Pablo Casals" label="Pablo Casals"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="6290" end="6306" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q49325" start="6311" end="6328" title="Albert Schweitzer" label="Albert Schweitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="6351" end="6366" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q975547" start="6494" end="6507" title="Jules Feiffer" label="Jules Feiffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q695239" start="6509" end="6518" title="Ben Shahn" label="Ben Shahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720041" start="6524" end="6536" title="Edward Sorel" label="Edward Sorel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860392" start="6710" end="6732" title="McGuire Air Force Base" label="McGuire Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="6740" end="6754" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="6919" end="6939" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="7573" end="7590" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q380550" start="7628" end="7643" title="Eugene McCarthy" label="Eugene McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="7651" end="7661" title="United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="7798" end="7815" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q278960" start="7823" end="7846" title="Partial Test Ban Treaty" label="Partial Test Ban Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419202" start="7911" end="7932" title="War Powers Resolution" label="War Powers Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="7941" end="7952" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="8176" end="8191" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q287422" start="8450" end="8479" title="Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty" label="Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q623994" start="8484" end="8488" title="Strategic Arms Limitation Talks" label="SALT"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="8552" end="8565" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="8736" end="8744" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419202" start="8794" end="8808" title="War Powers Resolution" label="War Powers Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q533306" start="9328" end="9344" title="Randall Forsberg" label="Randall Forsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q533306" start="9615" end="9631" title="Randall Forsberg" label="Randall Forsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q431092" start="9633" end="9648" title="Helen Caldicott" label="Helen Caldicott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128998" start="9650" end="9658" title="Pam Solo" label="Pam Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292275" start="9664" end="9676" title="Randy Kehler" label="Randy Kehler"/>
<link wikidata="Q433656" start="9709" end="9727" title="Patricia Schroeder" label="Patricia Schroeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="9737" end="9748" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10221" end="10223" title="LGM-118A Peacekeeper#Development and deployment" label="MX"/>
<link wikidata="Q20203109" start="10228" end="10239" title="Pershing II" label="Pershing II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101438" start="10378" end="10404" title="political action committee" label="political action committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="10631" end="10644" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q931492" start="10654" end="10661" title="START I" label="START I"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="10715" end="10719" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="11605" end="11616" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="11653" end="11660" title="Contra (guerrillas)" label="Contras"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="11664" end="11673" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="11751" end="11767" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q94123" start="11809" end="11820" title="Jack Lemmon" label="Jack Lemmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160528" start="11822" end="11836" title="Burt Lancaster" label="Burt Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q203960" start="11838" end="11854" title="James Earl Jones" label="James Earl Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q187033" start="11856" end="11867" title="Sally Field" label="Sally Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q95026" start="11869" end="11885" title="Shirley MacLaine" label="Shirley MacLaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q154421" start="11891" end="11899" title="Ed Asner" label="Ed Asner"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="12154" end="12172" title="invasion of Kuwait" label="invasion of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="12227" end="12239" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="12256" end="12264" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q186444" start="12512" end="12544" title="Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty" label="Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="12704" end="12744" title="atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="13248" end="13270" title="Kosovo War" label="NATO bombing of Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="13515" end="13523" title="Nagasaki, Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="13554" end="13584" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="Los Alamos National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q184572" start="13635" end="13647" title="Martin Sheen" label="Martin Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="13664" end="13690" title="September 11, 2001 attacks" label="September 11, 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="13758" end="13769" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893669" start="13885" end="13913" title="United for Peace and Justice" label="United for Peace and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152945" start="13933" end="13965" title="Committee for Non-Violent Action" label="Committee for Non-Violent Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260435" start="13968" end="13987" title="Department of Peace" label="Department of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606026" start="13990" end="14020" title="List of anti-war organizations" label="List of anti-war organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921049" start="14023" end="14046" title="List of peace activists" label="List of peace activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="14049" end="14064" title="Nuclear weapons" label="Nuclear weapons"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424230" wikidata="Q2919335" url="?curid=424230" title="Constitution Gardens">
<text>Constitution Gardens is a park area in Washington, D.C., United States, located within the boundaries of the National Mall. The park is bounded on the west by the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, on the east by 17th St NW, on the north by Constitution Avenue, and on the south by the Reflecting Pool. 

Constitution Gardens has a small pond, which contains the Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence on an island open to pedestrians.

==History==

The land that became Constitution Gardens was originally submerged beneath the Potomac River and was dredged at the beginning of the 20th century by the Army Corps of Engineers. The U.S. Navy built the Main Navy and Munitions Buildings as temporary offices on the land during World War I. The buildings were demolished in 1970 due in part to lobbying by President Richard Nixon, who had served in the offices as a navy officer. President Nixon subsequently ordered that a park be established on the land, and in 1976, Constitution Gardens was finally dedicated as a &quot;living legacy American Revolution Bicentennial tribute.&quot; It has been a separate park unit in the National Park Service since 1982, administered under the National Capitol Parks-Central (NACC).

In July 1982, the Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence was dedicated on the small island in the lake. On November 13 of the same year, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Wall was also dedicated within Constitution Gardens.

On September 17, 1986, President Ronald Reagan formally proclaimed the park a &quot;living legacy tribute&quot; to the United States Constitution, in honor of the bicentennial of the U.S. Constitution one year later.

From March 17 to March 19, 2003, Constitution Gardens was the site of a bizarre standoff between federal police and a disgruntled tobacco farmer, Dwight Watson. Watson drove his tractor into the center of the pond and claimed to have explosives, prompting the evacuation of the area and holding the FBI and U.S. Park Police at bay for 48 hours before he surrendered. During the standoff, Watson dug up part of the island and damaged a retaining wall (for which he received a conviction for destroying federal property) but apparently did not harm any of the monuments. No explosives were found.

As home to famous monuments, Constitution Gardens continues to have millions of visitors every year. It is also the site of an annual naturalization ceremony for new U.S. citizens hosted by the National Park Service.

==Design==
In a series of plans and designs, architecture firm Skidmore, Owings, and Merrill (SOM) and Modern landscape architect Dan Kiley completed Constitution Gardens in 1976 as a picturesque restful park with a small lake, which would contrast with the &quot;formalism of the Grand Axis.&quot; Meandering paths would traverse meadows shaded by tree canopy. Construction budgets were reduced from $14million to $6.7million. 

In 1984, the Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence was completed and placed on an island in Constitution Gardens Lake. It was designed by EDAW, with Joe Brown, FASLA, as the principal landscape architect. The low-key design features a granite semi-circle with gold signatures of the Founding Fathers, organized by the original thirteen states.

==Renovation==

A 2011–12 national design competition was sponsored by the Trust for the National Mall to select a design team for the redesign of three sites: Constitution Gardens, the Sylvan Theater, and Union Square. After an intense and highly publicized competition, the Trust for the National Mall has announced the three winning teams selected to redesign the neglected sites of &quot;America&#x27;s front yard&quot;. As reported by &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, Rogers Marvel Architects and PWP Landscape Architecture will redesign Constitution Gardens east of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. PWP Landscape Architecture will transform the lake into a critical piece of water infrastructure that reduces the damaging impacts of stormwater while creating a source of water for reuse in irrigation and toilets.

As of May 2024, efforts are underway to kick-start the revitalization effort aimed at restoring the role of Constitution Gardens as a prominent urban oasis and biodiversity hotspot. Led by PWP Landscape Architecture and Rogers Partners Architects, the approved three-phase plan seeks to reintroduce a natural ecological landscape. Phase two, recently approved by the Commission of Fine Arts and National Capital Planning Commission, focuses on redesigning a 6.75-acre lake and creating 2.5 acres of meadows and woodlands. This transformation aims to replace the current concrete-lined lake with a thriving, sustainable habitat, integrating modern ecological principles with the historic design concepts envisioned by Dan Kiley and SOM in the McMillan Plan. 

==See also==
* Founding Fathers of the United States
* Architecture of Washington, D.C.

== Gallery ==
==References==

==External links==

* &quot;Constitution Gardens&quot;, National Park Service
* &quot;Trust for the National Mall: Constitution Gardens&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2919335" start="0" end="20" title="Constitution Gardens" label="Constitution Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q465811" start="109" end="122" title="National Mall" label="National Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q713628" start="163" end="188" title="Vietnam Veterans Memorial" label="Vietnam Veterans Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406648" start="233" end="252" title="Constitution Avenue" label="Constitution Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q585532" start="278" end="293" title="Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool" label="Reflecting Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895034" start="355" end="416" title="Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence" label="Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="544" end="557" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="618" end="641" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="647" end="656" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736021" start="667" end="700" title="Main Navy and Munitions Buildings" label="Main Navy and Munitions Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="741" end="752" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="829" end="842" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="1051" end="1070" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889582" start="1071" end="1083" title="United States Bicentennial" label="Bicentennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="1139" end="1160" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895034" start="1254" end="1315" title="Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence" label="Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q713628" start="1400" end="1425" title="Vietnam Veterans Memorial" label="Vietnam Veterans Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="1513" end="1526" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="1599" end="1625" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318258" start="1844" end="1857" title="Dwight Watson (farmer)" label="Dwight Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="1997" end="2000" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005254" start="2005" end="2021" title="United States Park Police" label="U.S. Park Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076291" start="2133" end="2147" title="retaining wall" label="retaining wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="2428" end="2442" title="naturalization" label="naturalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="2488" end="2509" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q459464" start="2575" end="2604" title="Skidmore, Owings, and Merrill" label="Skidmore, Owings, and Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q355946" start="2642" end="2651" title="Dan Kiley" label="Dan Kiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895034" start="2955" end="3016" title="Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence" label="Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197527" start="3104" end="3108" title="EDAW" label="EDAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="3249" end="3265" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q357056" start="3813" end="3839" title="Peter Walker (landscape architect)" label="PWP Landscape Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q357056" start="4319" end="4345" title="PWP Landscape Architecture" label="PWP Landscape Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986557" start="4497" end="4520" title="Commission of Fine Arts" label="Commission of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971257" start="4525" end="4561" title="National Capital Planning Commission" label="National Capital Planning Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802368" start="4872" end="4885" title="McMillan Plan" label="McMillan Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="4904" end="4941" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Fathers of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q110128203" start="4944" end="4976" title="Architecture of Washington, D.C." label="Architecture of Washington, D.C."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424232" wikidata="Q3927888" url="?curid=424232" title="Augmented fifth">
<text>In Western classical music, an augmented fifth () is an interval produced by widening a perfect fifth by a chromatic semitone. For instance, the interval from C to G is a perfect fifth, seven semitones wide, and both the intervals from C to G, and from C to G are augmented fifths, spanning eight semitones. Being augmented, it is considered a dissonant interval.

Its inversion is the diminished fourth, and its enharmonic equivalent is the minor sixth.

The augmented fifth only began to make an appearance at the beginning of the common practice period of music as a consequence of composers seeking to strengthen the normally weak seventh degree when composing music in minor modes.

This was achieved by chromatically raising the seventh degree (or subtonic) to match that of the unstable seventh degree (or leading tone) of the major mode (an increasingly widespread practice that led to the creation of a modified version of the minor scale known as the harmonic minor scale).

A consequence of this was that the interval between the minor mode&#x27;s already lowered third degree (mediant) and the newly raised seventh degree (leading note), previously a perfect fifth, had now been &quot;augmented&quot; by a semitone.

Another result of this practice was the appearance of the first augmented triads, built on the same (mediant) degree, in place of the naturally occurring major chord.

As music became increasingly chromatic, the augmented fifth was used with correspondingly greater freedom and also became a common component of jazz chords. Near the end of the nineteenth century the augmented fifth became commonly used in a dominant chord. This would create an augmented dominant (or V) chord. The augmented fifth of the chord would then act as a leading tone to the third of the next chord. This augmented V chord would never precede a minor tonic (or i) chord since the augmented fifth of the dominant chord is identical to the third of the tonic chord.

In an equal tempered tuning, an augmented fifth is equal to eight semitones, a ratio of 22/3:1 (about 1.587:1), or 800 cents. The 25:16 just augmented fifth arises in the C harmonic minor scale between E and B. 

The augmented fifth is a context-dependent dissonance. That is, when heard in certain contexts, such as that described above, the interval will sound dissonant. In other contexts, however, the same eight-semitone interval will simply be heard (and notated) as its consonant enharmonic equivalent, the minor sixth.


==Pythagorean augmented fifth==
The Pythagorean augmented fifth is the ratio 6561:4096, or about 815.64 cents.

==See also==
* List of meantone intervals

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="3" end="26" title="Western classical music" label="Western classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927888" start="31" end="46" title="Augmented fifth" label="augmented fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q189962" start="56" end="64" title="Interval (music)" label="interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q760435" start="77" end="85" title="augmentation (music)" label="widening"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372854" start="88" end="101" title="perfect fifth" label="perfect fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820455" start="107" end="125" title="chromatic semitone" label="chromatic semitone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029382" start="344" end="353" title="consonance and dissonance" label="dissonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q137685" start="369" end="378" title="Inversion (interval)" label="inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277371" start="386" end="403" title="diminished fourth" label="diminished fourth"/>
<link wikidata="Q837294" start="413" end="423" title="enharmonic" label="enharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801010" start="442" end="453" title="minor sixth" label="minor sixth"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753264" start="533" end="555" title="common practice period" label="common practice period"/>
<link wikidata="Q184567" start="674" end="684" title="minor mode" label="minor mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q202021" start="709" end="722" title="chromatic scale" label="chromatically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243318" start="754" end="762" title="subtonic" label="subtonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q979988" start="813" end="825" title="leading tone" label="leading tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q190812" start="834" end="844" title="major mode" label="major mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q184567" start="936" end="947" title="minor scale" label="minor scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621436" start="961" end="981" title="harmonic minor scale" label="harmonic minor scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334910" start="1089" end="1096" title="mediant" label="mediant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667924" start="1293" end="1308" title="augmented triad" label="augmented triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="1541" end="1545" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q899391" start="1639" end="1653" title="dominant chord" label="dominant chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927888" start="1699" end="1700" title="Augmented fifth" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927888" start="1822" end="1823" title="Augmented fifth" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927888" start="1868" end="1869" title="Augmented fifth" label="i"/>
<link wikidata="Q723441" start="1978" end="1992" title="equal temperament" label="equal tempered"/>
<link wikidata="Q724178" start="2091" end="2096" title="cent (music)" label="cents"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621436" start="2145" end="2165" title="harmonic minor scale" label="harmonic minor scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029382" start="2228" end="2238" title="consonance and dissonance" label="dissonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029382" start="2449" end="2458" title="consonance and dissonance" label="consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q724178" start="2605" end="2610" title="Cent (music)" label="cents"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627797" start="2628" end="2654" title="List of meantone intervals" label="List of meantone intervals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424234" wikidata="Q44757" url="?curid=424234" title="Chaco Province">
<text>Chaco (; Wichi: &quot;To-kós-wet&quot;), officially the Province of Chaco ( ) is one of the 23 provinces of Argentina. Its capital and largest city is Resistencia. It is located in the north-east of the country.

It is bordered by Salta and Santiago del Estero to the west, Formosa to the north, Corrientes to the east, and Santa Fe to the south. It also has an international border with the Paraguayan department of Ñeembucú. With an area of and a population of 1,142,963 as of 2022, it is the twelfth most extensive, and the eleventh most populated, of Argentina&#x27;s provinces.

In 2010, Chaco became the second province in Argentina to adopt more than one official language. These are the Kom, Moqoit and Wichí languages, spoken by the Toba, Mocovi and Wichí peoples respectively. Chaco has historically been among Argentina&#x27;s poorest provinces, and currently ranks last both by GDP per capita and Human Development Index.

== Etymology ==
Chaco derives from &quot;chaku&quot;, the Quechua word used to name a hunting territory or the hunting technique used by the people of the Inca Empire.

Annually, large groups of up to thirty thousand hunters would enter the territory, forming columns and circling their prey. 
Jesuit missioner Pedro Lozano wrote in his book &quot;Chorographic Description of the Great Chaco Gualamba&quot;, published in Cordoba, Spain in 1733: &quot;Its etymology indicates the multitude of nations that inhabit that region. When they go hunting, the Indians gather from many parts the vicuñas and guanacos; that crowd is called &quot;chacu&quot; in the Quechua language, which is common in Peru, and that Spaniards have corrupted into &quot;Chaco&quot;&quot;.

However, the earliest known mention of the term in a document was in a letter written to Fernando Torres de Portugal y Mesía, Viceroy of Peru, dated in 1589, by the then Governor of Tucumán, Juan Ramírez de Velasco, who referred to the region as &quot;Chaco Gualamba&quot;. (The term &quot;Gualamba&quot; is of uncertain origin and has since fallen into disuse.)

== Geography ==

The province of Chaco lies within the southern part of the Gran Chaco region, a vast lowland plain that covers territories in Argentina, Paraguay, and Bolivia.

Chaco Province covers an area of and ranks as the twelfth largest Argentinian province. The highest ground in the province is also the most western, near the municipality of Taco Pozo, at an elevation of above sea level.

The Paraná and Paraguay rivers separate Chaco province from Corrientes Province and the Republic of Paraguay. To the north, the river Bermejo forms another natural border, dividing Chaco Province from Formosa Province.

In the south, the border follows the 28th parallel south, separating the region from Santa Fe Province, while in the west it borders Salta and Santiago del Estero.

Other important rivers include: the Negro, Tapenagá, Palometa, and Salado, all tributaries or anabranches of the river Paraná.

===Climate===
The province has a subtropical climate. It is divided in two different climate zones: a more humid one in the east and a drier subtropical climate in the center and west. The eastern parts of the province have a humid subtropical climate (&quot;Cfa&quot; under the Köppen climate classification) with no dry season. In the west where precipitation is lower, it has a subtropical climate with a dry winter and is classified as a semi-arid climate (&quot;BS&quot; under the Köppen climate classification) due to potential evapotranspiration exceeding precipitation.

===Precipitation===
In the most humid (eastern) parts of the province, precipitation falls throughout the year with no dry season. These areas receive around of precipitation per year. Precipitation decreases westwards and become more concentrated in the summer months.

===Temperature===
Mean annual temperatures range between , which decreases from north to south. Summers are hot with temperatures that can reach up to in the eastern parts of the province. The western parts experience more variation in temperatures due continental influences; extreme temperatures in summer are more extreme with temperatures that frequently exceed . During winters, incursions of cold, polar air from the south can lead to frosts and temperatures that fall below freezing. Being under an area of high solar radiation during summer, a consequence is that a low pressure system forms over the province during summer.

===Humidity===
Humidity in the province is high due to its climate, particularly in the north, the wettest portion of the province. Most of the winds that transport humid air come from the north and east. Winters are the most humid seasons (high humidity) due to this season being characterized by frequent fogs.

==History==
The area was originally inhabited by various hunter-gatherers speaking languages from the Mataco-Guaicru family. Native tribes including the Toba, and Wichí survive in the region and have important communities in this province as well as in Formosa Province.

In 1576, the governor of a province in Northern Argentina commissioned the military to search for a huge mass of iron, which he had heard that natives used for their weapons. The natives called the area Heavenly Fields, which was translated into Spanish as Campo del Cielo. This area is now a protected region situated on the border between the provinces of Chaco and Santiago del Estero where a group of iron meteorites fell in a Holocene impact event some four to five thousand years ago. In 2015, Police arrested four alleged smugglers trying to steal over a ton of legally protected meteoric iron.

The first European settlement was founded by Spanish conquistador Alonso de Vera y Aragón, in 1585, and was called Concepción de Nuestra Señora. It was abandoned in 1632. During its existence, it was one of the most important cities in the region, but attacks from local Indians forced the residents to leave. In the 17th century, the &quot;San Fernando del Río Negro&quot; Jesuit mission was founded in the area of the modern-day city of Resistencia, but it was abandoned fifteen years later.

The Gran Chaco region remained largely unexplored, and uninhabited, by either Europeans or Argentines until the late 19th century, after numerous confrontations between Argentina and Paraguay during the War of the Triple Alliance. San Fernando was re-established as a military outpost, and was renamed Resistencia in 1876.

The Territorio Nacional del Gran Chaco was established in 1872. This territory, which included the current Formosa Province and lands presently inside Paraguay, was superseded by Territorio Nacional del Chaco upon its administrative division, in 1884.

== 20th century ==
Between the end of the nineteenth and the first decades of the twentieth centuries, the province received a variety of immigrants, among them Volga Germans and Mennonites from Russia, Germany, and Canada. They, alongside other immigrants, transformed Chaco into a productive farming region known for its dairy and beef production.

=== Political structure ===
In 1951, the territory became a province; further, its name was changed to Provincia Presidente Perón. The province was renamed again in 1955 when the government of President Juan Perón was overthrown, returning to the historical name of Chaco. Chaco voters, however, continued to support Peronist candidates in subsequent elections, notably Deolindo Bittel whose three terms as governor in the 1960s and 1970s were each cut short by military intervention. Bitell subsequently ran for vice-president in the 1983 Argentine Presidential elections and later served as mayor of the provincial capital, Resistencia.

=== Infrastructure ===
With few paved highways, and thus an overdependence on passenger rail services, Chaco was adversely impacted by the national rail privatizations and line closures of the early 1990s. In 1997, the services that had been previously run by the state-owned company Ferrocarriles Argentinos since railway nationalization in 1948, were taken over by the Servicios Ferroviarios del Chaco S.A. (SEFECHA) (Chaco Railway Services), making SEFECHA, at the time, the only publicly owned commuter rail service in Argentina. SEFECHA currently carries nearly a million passengers a year and has contributed to the province&#x27;s vigorous recovery from the 2002 crisis.

=== Poverty ===
Chaco Province continues to suffer from the worst social indicators in the country with 49.3% of its population living below the poverty line by income and with 17.5% of children between the ages of two and five in a state of malnutrition in 2009. Among Argentine provinces, it ranks last by GDP per capita and 21st by Human Development Index, only above its neighbors Formosa and Santiago del Estero.

=== Official languages ===
In 2010, Chaco became the second province in Argentina to declare indigenous languages official within the province, after Corrientes. Three local languages gained official status in Chaco besides Spanish: Kom, Moqoit, and Wichí.

== Demographics ==

According to the 2022 Argentine national census, the province of Chaco has 1,142,963 inhabitants.

==Economy==
Chaco&#x27;s economy, like most in the region, is relatively underdeveloped, yet has recovered vigorously since 2002. It was estimated to be US$4.397 billion in 2006, or US$4,467 per capita (half the national average and the third-lowest in Argentina). Chaco&#x27;s economy is diversified, but its agricultural sector has suffered from recurrent droughts over the past decade. 
Agricultural development in Chaco is predominantly associated with the commercial growing of &quot;quebracho&quot; wood and cotton. Chaco currently produces 60% of Argentina&#x27;s national cotton production. Agricultural food production accounts for 17% of Argentina&#x27;s output. This includes crops such as soy, sorghum, and maize. Sugarcane is also cultivated in the south, as well as rice and tobacco to a lesser degree.

Cattle breeds consisting of crosses with zebu are regarded as better adapted to the high temperatures, grass shortage and occasional flooding than intensively reared pure-breeds.

Industrial contributes approximately 10% to the provincial economy and includes textiles produced from local cotton, oil and coal production, and sugar, alcohol and paper, all derived from sugar cane.

Chaco is home to the Chaco National Park, but tourism is not a well-developed industry in the province. The province&#x27;s main airport, Resistencia International Airport, serves around 100,000 passengers annually.

== Government ==
The provincial government is divided into the usual three branches: the executive, headed by a popularly elected governor, who appoint the cabinet; the legislative; and the judiciary, headed by the Supreme Court and completed by several inferior tribunals.

The Constitution of Chaco Province forms the formal law of the province.

In Argentina, the most important law enforcement organization is the Argentine Federal Police; additional work is also carried out by the Chaco Provincial Police.

== Political organization ==
The province is divided into 25 departments (Spanish: &quot;departamentos&quot;).

==Villages==

==See also==
*Campo del Cielo
*Napalpí massacre

==References==
==External links==
*Official website (Spanish)
*Pictures of Chaco </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44757" start="0" end="5" title="Chaco Province" label="Chaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027047" start="9" end="14" title="Wichi languages" label="Wichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q44757" start="56" end="73" title="Chaco Province" label="Province of Chaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q44753" start="95" end="104" title="provinces of Argentina" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="108" end="117" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q44206" start="151" end="162" title="Resistencia, Chaco" label="Resistencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44803" start="231" end="236" title="Salta Province" label="Salta"/>
<link wikidata="Q44827" start="241" end="260" title="Santiago del Estero Province" label="Santiago del Estero"/>
<link wikidata="Q44761" start="274" end="281" title="Formosa Province" label="Formosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q44758" start="296" end="306" title="Corrientes Province" label="Corrientes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44823" start="324" end="332" title="Santa Fe Province" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q133346" start="362" end="382" title="international border" label="international border"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="392" end="400" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q815068" start="403" end="413" title="Departments of Paraguay" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q755115" start="417" end="425" title="Ñeembucú" label="Ñeembucú"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113756" start="695" end="698" title="Toba Qom language" label="Kom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027906" start="700" end="706" title="Mocoví language" label="Moqoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027047" start="711" end="716" title="Wichí languages" label="Wichí"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542227" start="742" end="746" title="Toba people" label="Toba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099764" start="748" end="754" title="Mocoví" label="Mocovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562143" start="877" end="881" title="List of Argentine provinces by gross domestic product" label="last"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="890" end="904" title="GDP per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888682" start="909" end="932" title="List of Argentine provinces by Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="993" end="1000" title="Quechua language" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="1090" end="1101" title="Inca Empire" label="Inca Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="1229" end="1245" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit missioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="1356" end="1363" title="Cordoba (Spain)" label="Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="1487" end="1494" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q125422609" start="1522" end="1528" title="vicuña" label="vicuña"/>
<link wikidata="Q172886" start="1534" end="1541" title="guanaco" label="guanaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q932055" start="1787" end="1822" title="Fernando Torres de Portugal y Mesía" label="Fernando Torres de Portugal y Mesía"/>
<link wikidata="Q886517" start="1824" end="1839" title="Viceroy of Peru" label="Viceroy of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q44829" start="1880" end="1887" title="Tucumán" label="Tucumán"/>
<link wikidata="Q5952204" start="1889" end="1912" title="Juan Ramírez de Velasco" label="Juan Ramírez de Velasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q208347" start="2138" end="2148" title="Gran Chaco" label="Gran Chaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12183361" start="2164" end="2171" title="lowland" label="lowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="2172" end="2177" title="plain" label="plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="2205" end="2214" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="2216" end="2224" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="2230" end="2237" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579288" start="2414" end="2423" title="Taco Pozo" label="Taco Pozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q127892" start="2466" end="2472" title="Paraná River" label="Paraná"/>
<link wikidata="Q179396" start="2477" end="2485" title="Paraguay River" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q44758" start="2522" end="2541" title="Corrientes Province" label="Corrientes Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="2550" end="2570" title="Republic of Paraguay" label="Republic of Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q270467" start="2596" end="2603" title="Bermejo River" label="Bermejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q44761" start="2663" end="2679" title="Formosa Province" label="Formosa Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390455" start="2719" end="2738" title="28th parallel south" label="28th parallel south"/>
<link wikidata="Q44823" start="2767" end="2784" title="Santa Fe Province" label="Santa Fe Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q44803" start="2815" end="2820" title="Salta Province" label="Salta"/>
<link wikidata="Q44827" start="2825" end="2844" title="Santiago del Estero Province" label="Santiago del Estero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458720" start="2883" end="2888" title="Negro River (Chaco)" label="Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684532" start="2890" end="2898" title="Tapenagá River" label="Tapenagá"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128616" start="2900" end="2908" title="Palometa River" label="Palometa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162365" start="2914" end="2920" title="Salado River (Argentina)" label="Salado"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="2926" end="2937" title="tributary" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q661702" start="2941" end="2950" title="anabranch" label="anabranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q127892" start="2966" end="2972" title="Paraná River" label="Paraná"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="3008" end="3027" title="subtropical climate" label="subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="3201" end="3226" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3254" end="3283" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="3417" end="3434" title="semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q828158" start="3509" end="3527" title="evapotranspiration" label="evapotranspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="4830" end="4846" title="hunter-gatherers" label="hunter-gatherers"/>
<link wikidata="Q255512" start="4875" end="4889" title="Mataco-Guaicuru languages" label="Mataco-Guaicru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542227" start="4926" end="4930" title="Toba (tribe)" label="Toba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284276" start="4936" end="4941" title="Wichí" label="Wichí"/>
<link wikidata="Q44761" start="5026" end="5042" title="Formosa Province" label="Formosa Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031478" start="5302" end="5317" title="Campo del Cielo" label="Campo del Cielo"/>
<link wikidata="Q827989" start="5450" end="5464" title="iron meteorite" label="iron meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="5476" end="5484" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5485" end="5497" title="impact event#Holocene" label="impact event"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="5693" end="5700" title="Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="5701" end="5713" title="conquistador" label="conquistador"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158373" start="5763" end="5791" title="Concepción de Buena Esperanza" label="Concepción de Nuestra Señora"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="6022" end="6028" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="6029" end="6036" title="mission (Christian)" label="mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q44206" start="6087" end="6098" title="Resistencia, Chaco" label="Resistencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208347" start="6147" end="6157" title="Gran Chaco" label="Gran Chaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q58947" start="6346" end="6372" title="Paraguayan War" label="War of the Triple Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q312574" start="6881" end="6893" title="Volga German" label="Volga German"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="6899" end="6908" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="6915" end="6921" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="6923" end="6930" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="6936" end="6942" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="7274" end="7284" title="Juan Perón" label="Juan Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q464555" start="7388" end="7396" title="Peronist" label="Peronist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259989" start="7441" end="7456" title="Deolindo Bittel" label="Deolindo Bittel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062345" start="7606" end="7643" title="Argentine general election, 1983" label="1983 Argentine Presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q44206" start="7697" end="7708" title="Resistencia, Chaco" label="Resistencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q477253" start="8163" end="8170" title="SEFECHA" label="SEFECHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="8535" end="8547" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="8632" end="8644" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562143" start="8684" end="8694" title="List of Argentine provinces by gross domestic product" label="ranks last"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="8698" end="8701" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888682" start="8717" end="8721" title="List of Argentine provinces by Human Development Index" label="21st"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="8725" end="8748" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8959" end="8969" title="Corrientes Province#Official languages" label="Corrientes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113756" start="9042" end="9045" title="Qom language (South America)" label="Kom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027906" start="9047" end="9053" title="Moqoit language" label="Moqoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027047" start="9059" end="9064" title="Wichí language" label="Wichí"/>
<link wikidata="Q11305327" start="9669" end="9695" title="Quebracho wood" label="&amp;quot;quebracho&amp;quot; wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="9700" end="9706" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="9887" end="9890" title="soy" label="soy"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="9892" end="9899" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="9905" end="9910" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="9912" end="9921" title="Sugarcane" label="Sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q46889" start="10045" end="10049" title="zebu" label="zebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q912362" start="10151" end="10169" title="intensive animal farming" label="intensively reared"/>
<link wikidata="Q611989" start="10407" end="10426" title="Chaco National Park" label="Chaco National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495781" start="10524" end="10557" title="Resistencia International Airport" label="Resistencia International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981682" start="11021" end="11045" title="Argentine Federal Police" label="Argentine Federal Police"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11090" end="11113" title="Chaco Provincial Police" label="Chaco Provincial Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q952274" start="11177" end="11188" title="Departments of Argentina" label="departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031478" start="11256" end="11271" title="Campo del Cielo" label="Campo del Cielo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239076" start="11273" end="11289" title="Napalpí massacre" label="Napalpí massacre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424237" wikidata="Q2585567" url="?curid=424237" title="Diminished triad">
<text>In music theory, a diminished triad is a triad consisting of two minor thirds above the root. It is a minor triad with a lowered (flattened) fifth. When using chord symbols, it may be indicated by the symbols &quot;dim&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;m5&quot;, or &quot;(5)&quot;. However, in most popular-music chord books, the symbol &quot;dim&quot; or &quot;&quot; represents a diminished seventh chord (a four-tone chord), which in some modern jazz books and music theory books is represented by the &quot;dim7&quot; or &quot;7&quot; symbols. 

For example, the diminished triad built on B, written as B, has pitches B-D-F:

:&lt;score sound=&quot;1&quot;&gt;
{ \omit Score.TimeSignature \relative c&#x27; { 1 } }
&lt;/score&gt;

The chord can be represented by the integer notation {0, 3, 6}.

In the common practice period, the diminished triad is considered dissonant because of the diminished fifth (or tritone).

==Harmonic function==
In major scales, a diminished triad occurs only on the seventh scale degree. For instance, in the key of C, this is a B diminished triad (B, D, F). Since the triad is built on the seventh scale degree, it is also called the &quot;leading-tone triad&quot;. This chord has a dominant function. Unlike the dominant triad or dominant seventh, the leading-tone triad functions as a prolongational chord rather than a structural chord since the strong root motion by fifth is absent.

On the other hand, in natural minor scales, the diminished triad occurs on the second scale degree; in the key of C minor, this is the D diminished triad (D, F, A). This triad is consequently called the &quot;supertonic diminished triad&quot;. Like the supertonic minor triad found in a major key, the supertonic diminished triad has a predominant function, almost always resolving to a dominant functioning chord.

If the music is in a minor key, diminished triads can also be found on the raised seventh note, vii. This is because the ascending melodic minor scale has a raised sixth and seventh degree. For example, the chord progression vii–i is common.

The leading-tone diminished triad and supertonic diminished triad are usually found in first inversion (vii6 and ii6, respectively) since the spelling of the chord forms a diminished fifth with the bass. This differs from the fully diminished seventh chord, which commonly occurs in root position. In both cases, the bass resolves up and the upper voices move downwards in contrary motion.

==In popular music==

Walter Everett writes that &quot;In rock and pop music, the diminished triad nearly always appears on the second scale degree, forming a generally maudlin and dejected ii with its members, 2–4–6.&quot; Songs that feature ii include Santo &amp; Johnny&#x27;s &quot;Sleep Walk&quot;, Jay and the Americans&#x27; &quot;Cara Mia&quot;, and the Hollies&#x27; &quot;The Air That I Breathe&quot;. Not so rare but rare enough so as to imply knowledge of and conscious avoidance on the part of rock musicians, examples of its use include Oasis&#x27; &quot;Don&#x27;t Look Back in Anger&quot;, David Bowie&#x27;s &quot;Space Oddity&quot;, and two in Daryl Hall&#x27;s &quot;Everytime You Go Away&quot;.

The vii in major keys is relatively less common than the ii, but still does happen. It is almost always used to tonicize the relative minor, in progressions such as vii–V7/vi–vi, which resembles ii–V7–i in the relative minor.

== Tuning ==
In a twelve-tone equal temperament, a diminished triad has three semitones between the third and fifth, three semitones between the root and third, and six semitones between the root and fifth. 

In 5-limit just intonation, the diminished chord on VII (in C: B–D–F) is 15:8, 9:8, and 4:3, while on II (in C: D–F–A) it is 9:8, 4:3, and 8:5 (135:160:192). According to Georg Andreas Sorge, the trumpet, in its overtone series on C, gives the diminished triad E–G–B = 5:6:7 (&quot;perfect diminished chord&quot;), but the 7 is too flat and 45:54:64 is preferred. Helmholtz describes the diminished triad as 1 − D | F, giving a just minor third and Pythagorean minor third (45:54:64) in the notation system used in &quot;On the Sensations of Tone as a Physiological Basis for the Theory of Music&quot;. 

Play , (5-limit major), or on C.

==Diminished chord table==

==See also==
* Half-diminished seventh chord
* Secondary leading-tone chord
* Augmented triad
* Diminished seventh chord

==References==

Sources</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="3" end="15" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585567" start="19" end="35" title="Diminished triad" label="diminished triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q944899" start="41" end="46" title="triad (music)" label="triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711875" start="65" end="76" title="minor third" label="minor third"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879974" start="88" end="92" title="root (chord)" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585587" start="102" end="113" title="Minor chord" label="minor triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7001368" start="130" end="139" title="flat (music)" label="flattened"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447454" start="141" end="146" title="Fifth (chord)" label="fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504804" start="159" end="172" title="Chord names and symbols (popular music)" label="chord symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857020" start="376" end="400" title="diminished seventh chord" label="diminished seventh chord"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="765" end="781" title="Pitch class#Integer notation" label="integer notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753264" start="801" end="823" title="common practice period" label="common practice period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029382" start="860" end="869" title="Consonance and dissonance" label="dissonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q623939" start="885" end="901" title="Tritone" label="diminished fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q190812" start="942" end="954" title="Major scale" label="major scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q586277" start="1002" end="1014" title="Degree (music)" label="scale degree"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1169" end="1187" title="Leading-tone#Leading-tone triad" label="leading-tone triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q899391" start="1212" end="1229" title="dominant function" label="dominant function"/>
<link wikidata="Q899391" start="1242" end="1256" title="dominant triad" label="dominant triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q920305" start="1260" end="1276" title="Dominant seventh chord" label="dominant seventh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249641" start="1316" end="1328" title="prolongation" label="prolongation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184567" start="1440" end="1460" title="Natural minor scale" label="natural minor scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482078" start="1627" end="1637" title="supertonic" label="supertonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239700" start="1754" end="1774" title="Predominant chord" label="predominant function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919626" start="1955" end="1984" title="ascending melodic minor scale" label="ascending melodic minor scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q20686965" start="2164" end="2179" title="first inversion" label="first inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857020" start="2303" end="2333" title="fully diminished seventh chord" label="fully diminished seventh chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q73415181" start="2360" end="2373" title="root position" label="root position"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785483" start="2450" end="2465" title="contrary motion" label="contrary motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="2526" end="2530" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="2535" end="2538" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473123" start="2722" end="2740" title="Santo &amp;amp; Johnny" label="Santo &amp;amp; Johnny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486623" start="2754" end="2764" title="Sleep Walk" label="Sleep Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038771" start="2772" end="2793" title="Jay and the Americans" label="Jay and the Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034346" start="2806" end="2814" title="Cara Mia" label="Cara Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q282925" start="2826" end="2837" title="the Hollies" label="the Hollies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149692" start="2850" end="2872" title="The Air That I Breathe" label="The Air That I Breathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="3019" end="3024" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070349" start="3037" end="3066" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Back in Anger" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Back in Anger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="3074" end="3085" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q581952" start="3099" end="3111" title="Space Oddity" label="Space Oddity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166988" start="3130" end="3140" title="Daryl Hall" label="Daryl Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139941" start="3154" end="3175" title="Everytime You Go Away" label="Everytime You Go Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232807" start="3296" end="3304" title="Tonicization" label="tonicize"/>
<link wikidata="Q21087560" start="3429" end="3458" title="twelve-tone equal temperament" label="twelve-tone equal temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q738785" start="3489" end="3497" title="semitone" label="semitone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079199" start="3623" end="3630" title="5-limit" label="5-limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q752518" start="3631" end="3646" title="just intonation" label="just intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q88592" start="3791" end="3810" title="Georg Andreas Sorge" label="Georg Andreas Sorge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3816" end="3823" title="trumpet#Fingering" label="trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971526" start="3943" end="3944" title="harmonic seventh" label="7"/>
<link wikidata="Q60024" start="3984" end="3993" title="Hermann von Helmholtz" label="Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450963" start="4141" end="4215" title="On the Sensations of Tone as a Physiological Basis for the Theory of Music" label="On the Sensations of Tone as a Physiological Basis for the Theory of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857025" start="4302" end="4331" title="Half-diminished seventh chord" label="Half-diminished seventh chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411564" start="4334" end="4362" title="Secondary leading-tone chord" label="Secondary leading-tone chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667924" start="4365" end="4380" title="Augmented triad" label="Augmented triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857020" start="4383" end="4407" title="Diminished seventh chord" label="Diminished seventh chord"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424238" wikidata="Q2879974" url="?curid=424238" title="Root (chord)">
<text>In the music theory of harmony, the root is a specific note that names and typifies a given chord. Chords are often spoken about in terms of their root, their quality, and their extensions. When a chord is named without reference to quality, it is assumed to be major—for example, a &quot;C chord&quot; refers to a C major triad, containing the notes C, E, and G. In a given harmonic context, the root of a chord need not be in the bass position, as chords may be inverted while retaining the same name, and therefore the same root.

In tertian harmonic theory, wherein chords can be considered stacks of third intervals (e.g. in common practice tonality), the root of a chord is the note on which the subsequent thirds are stacked. For instance, the root of a triad such as E Minor is E, independently of the vertical order in which the three notes (E, G and B) are presented. A triad can be in three possible positions, a &quot;root position&quot; with the root in the bass (i.e., with the root as the lowest note, thus E, G, B or E, B, G from lowest to highest notes), a first inversion, e.g. G, B, E or G, E, B (i.e., with the note which is a third interval above the root, G, as the lowest note) and a second inversion, e.g. B, E, G or B, G, E, in which the note that is a fifth interval above the root (B) is the lowest note.

Regardless of whether a chord is in root position or in an inversion, the root remains the same in all three cases. Four-note seventh chords have four possible positions. That is, the chord can be played with the root as the bass note, the note a third above the root as the bass note (first inversion), the note a fifth above the root as the bass note (second inversion), or the note a seventh above the root as the bass note (third inversion). Five-note ninth chords know five positions, six-note eleventh chords know six positions, etc., but the root position always is that of the stack of thirds, and the root is the lowest note of this stack (see also Factor (chord)).


== Identifying roots ==
The idea of chord root links to that of a chord&#x27;s root position, as opposed to its inversion. When speaking of a &quot;C triad&quot; (C E G), the name of the chord (C) also is its root. When the root is the lowest note in the chord, it is in root position. When the root is a higher note (E G C or G C E), the chord is inverted but retains the same root. Classified chords in tonal music usually can be described as stacks of thirds (even although some notes may be missing, particularly in chords containing more that three or four notes, i.e. 7ths, 9ths, and above). The safest way to recognize a chord&#x27;s root, in these cases, is to rearrange the possibly inverted chord as a stack of thirds: the root then is the lowest note.

There are shortcuts to this: in inverted triads, the root is directly above the interval of a fourth, in inverted sevenths, it is directly above the interval of a second. With chord types, such as chords with added sixths or chords over pedal points, more than one possible chordal analysis may be possible. For example, in a tonal piece of music, the notes C, E, G, A, sounded as a chord, could be analyzed as a C major sixth chord in root position (a major triad – C, E, G – with an added sixth – A – above the root) or as a first inversion A minor seventh chord (the A minor seventh chord contains the notes A, C, E and G, but in this example, the C note, the third of the A minor chord, is in the bass). Deciding which note is the root of this chord could be determined by considering context. If the chord spelled C, E, G, A occurs immediately before a D7 chord (spelled D, F, A, C), most theorists and musicians would consider the first chord a minor seventh chord in first inversion, because the progression ii7–V7 is a standard chord movement.

Various devices have been imagined to notate inverted chords and their roots:
*Chord names and symbols (e.g., C major, A minor, G7 etc.)
*Roman numeral analysis (e.g., I to indicate the tonic chord and V to indicate the dominant chord)
*Slash chords (e.g., G/B bass, which instructs the chord-playing performer to play a G major triad with a &quot;B&quot; in bass voice/lowest note)

The concept of root has been extended for the description of intervals of two notes: the interval can either be analyzed as formed from stacked thirds (with the inner notes missing): third, fifth, seventh, etc., (i.e., intervals corresponding to odd numerals), and its low note considered as the root; or as an inversion of the same: second (inversion of a seventh), fourth (inversion of a fifth), sixth (inversion of a third), etc., (intervals corresponding to even numerals) in which cases the upper note is the root. See Interval.

Some theories of common-practice tonal music admit the sixth as a possible interval above the root and consider in some cases that chords nevertheless are in root position – this is the case particularly in Riemannian theory. Chords that cannot be reduced to stacked thirds (e.g. chords of stacked fourths) may not be amenable to the concept of root, although in practice, in a lead sheet, the composer may specify that a quartal chord has a certain root (e.g., a fake book chart that indicates that a song uses an Asus4(add7) chord, which would use the notes A, D, G. Even though this is a quartal chord, the composer has indicated that it has a root of A.)

A major scale contains seven unique pitch classes, each of which might serve as the root of a chord:
Chords in atonal music are often of indeterminate root, as are equal-interval chords and mixed-interval chords; such chords are often best characterized by their interval content.

== History ==
The first mentions of the relation of inversion between triads appears in Otto Sigfried Harnish&#x27;s &quot;Artis musicae&quot; (1608), which describes &quot;perfect&quot; triads in which the lower note of the fifth is expressed in its own position, and &quot;imperfect&quot; ones, in which the &quot;base&quot; (i.e., &quot;root&quot;) of the chord appears only higher. Johannes Lippius, in his &quot;Disputatio musica tertia&quot; (1610) and &quot;Synopsis musicae novae&quot; (1612), is the first to use the term &quot;triad&quot; (&quot;trias harmonica&quot;); he also uses the term &quot;root&quot; (&quot;radix&quot;), but in a slightly different meaning. Thomas Campion, &quot;A New Way of Making Fowre Parts in Conterpoint&quot;, London, , notes that when chords are in first inversions (sixths), the bass is not &quot;a true base&quot;, which is implicitly a third lower. Campion&#x27;s &quot;true base&quot; is the root of the chord.

Full recognition of the relationship between the triad and its inversions is generally credited to Jean-Philippe Rameau and his &quot;Traité d’harmonie&quot; (1722). Rameau was not the first to discover triadic inversion, but his main achievement is to have recognized the importance of the succession of roots (or of chords identified by their roots) for the construction of tonality (see below, Root progressions).

== Root &quot;vs&quot; fundamental ==
The concept of chord root is not the same as that of the fundamental of a complex vibration. When a harmonic sound, i. e. a sound with harmonic partials, lacks a component at the fundamental frequency itself, the pitch of this fundamental frequency may nevertheless be heard: this is the missing fundamental. The effect is increased by the fact that the missing fundamental also is the difference tone of the harmonic partials.

Chord notes, however, do not necessarily form a harmonic series. In addition, each of these notes has its own fundamental. The only case where the chord notes may seem to form a harmonic series is that of the major triad. However, the major triad may be formed of the intervals of a third and a fifth, while the corresponding harmonic partials are distant by the intervals of a 12th and a 17th. For instance, C3 E3 G3 is a major triad, but the corresponding harmonic partials would be C3, G4 and E5. The root of the triad is an abstract C, while the (missing) fundamental of C3 E3 G3 is C1 – which would usually not be heard.

== Assumed root ==
An assumed root (also absent, or omitted root) is &quot;when a chord does not contain a root ([which is] not unusual)&quot;. In any context, it is the unperformed root of a performed chord. This &#x27;assumption&#x27; may be established by the interaction of physics and perception, or by pure convention. &quot;We only interpret a chord as having its root omitted when the habits of the ear make it absolutely necessary for us to think of the absent root in such a place.&quot;[emphasis original]. &quot;We do not acknowledge omitted Roots except in cases where the mind is &quot;necessarily&quot; conscious of them ... There are also cases in instrumental accompaniment in which the root having been struck at the commencement of a measure, the ear &quot;feels&quot; it through the rest of the measure&quot; (emphasis in original).

In guitar tablature, this may be indicated, &quot;to show you where the root would be&quot;, and to assist one with, &quot;align[ing] the chord shape at the appropriate fret&quot;, with an assumed root in grey, other notes in white, and a sounded root in black.

An example of an assumed root is the diminished seventh chord, of which a note a major third below the chord is often assumed to be the absent root, making it a ninth chord. The diminished seventh chord affords, &quot;singular facilities for modulation&quot;, as it may be notated four ways, to represent four different assumed roots.

===In jazz===
In jazz and jazz fusion, roots are often omitted from chords when chord-playing musicians (e.g., electric guitar, piano, Hammond organ) are improvising chords in an ensemble that includes a bass player (either double bass, electric bass, or other bass instruments), because the bass player plays the root. For example, if a band is playing a tune in the key of C major, if there is a dominant seventh chord played on the dominant chord (i.e., G7), the chord-playing musicians typically do not play the &quot;G&quot; note in their voicing of the chord, as they expect the bass player to play the root. The chord playing musicians usually play a voicing that includes the third, seventh, and additional extensions (often the ninth and thirteenth, even if they are not specified in the chord chart). Thus a typical voicing by a chord-playing musician for a G7 chord would be the notes B and F (the third and flat seventh of the chord), along with the notes A and E (the ninth and thirteenth of the G7 chord). One possible voicing for this G7 chord would be the notes B, E, F, A (the third, thirteenth, seventh and ninth of the G7 chord). (Note: the thirteenth interval is the same &quot;pitch class&quot; as the sixth, except that it is one octave higher; the ninth is the same &quot;pitch class&quot; as the second interval, except that it is one octave higher.)

== Root progressions in music ==
The fundamental bass (&quot;basse fondamentale&quot;) is a concept proposed by Jean-Philippe Rameau, derived from the thoroughbass, to notate what would today be called the progression of chord roots rather than the actual lowest note found in the music, the bassline. From this Rameau formed rules for the progression of chords based on the intervals between their roots. Subsequently, music theory has typically treated chordal roots as the defining feature of harmony.

Roman numeral analysis may be said to derive from the theory of the fundamental bass, although it does not particularly theorize the succession of roots. The theory of the fundamental bass properly speaking has been revived in the 20th century by Arnold Schoenberg, Yizhak Sadaï and Nicolas Meeùs.

== See also ==
* Figured bass

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="7" end="19" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="23" end="30" title="harmony" label="harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879974" start="36" end="40" title="Root (chord)" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q263478" start="55" end="59" title="Note (music)" label="note"/>
<link wikidata="Q170439" start="92" end="97" title="chord (music)" label="chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504804" start="159" end="166" title="Chord quality" label="quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421879" start="178" end="188" title="Chord extensions" label="extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372455" start="262" end="267" title="major chord" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q638833" start="428" end="445" title="bass note" label="the bass position"/>
<link wikidata="Q137685" start="464" end="472" title="Inversion (music)" label="inverted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705248" start="537" end="544" title="tertian" label="tertian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753264" start="630" end="645" title="common practice period" label="common practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q192822" start="646" end="654" title="tonality" label="tonality"/>
<link wikidata="Q263478" start="684" end="688" title="Musical note" label="note"/>
<link wikidata="Q944899" start="761" end="766" title="triad (music)" label="triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q20686965" start="1074" end="1089" title="first inversion" label="first inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q360636" start="1207" end="1223" title="second inversion" label="second inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344463" start="1991" end="2005" title="Factor (chord)" label="Factor (chord)"/>
<link wikidata="Q73415181" start="2089" end="2102" title="root position" label="root position"/>
<link wikidata="Q137685" start="2122" end="2131" title="Inversion (music)" label="inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504804" start="3906" end="3929" title="Chord names and symbols (popular music)" label="Chord names and symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358919" start="3965" end="3987" title="Roman numeral analysis" label="Roman numeral analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q210411" start="4013" end="4024" title="tonic chord" label="tonic chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q899391" start="4047" end="4061" title="dominant chord" label="dominant chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279242" start="4064" end="4075" title="Slash chord" label="Slash chord"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4735" end="4743" title="Interval (music)#Interval root" label="Interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q189962" start="4801" end="4806" title="Interval (music)" label="sixth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333124" start="4953" end="4970" title="Riemannian theory" label="Riemannian theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810479" start="5124" end="5134" title="lead sheet" label="lead sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810479" start="5210" end="5219" title="fake book" label="fake book"/>
<link wikidata="Q190812" start="5408" end="5419" title="major scale" label="major scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760309" start="5442" end="5453" title="pitch class" label="pitch class"/>
<link wikidata="Q211745" start="5517" end="5523" title="atonality" label="atonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883851" start="5596" end="5616" title="mixed-interval chord" label="mixed-interval chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q95700" start="6074" end="6090" title="Johannes Lippius" label="Johannes Lippius"/>
<link wikidata="Q455618" start="6365" end="6379" title="Thomas Campion" label="Thomas Campion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145" start="6747" end="6767" title="Jean-Philippe Rameau" label="Jean-Philippe Rameau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7045" end="7062" title="Root (chord)#Root progressions in music" label="Root progressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q263961" start="7204" end="7212" title="harmonic series (music)" label="harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="7213" end="7218" title="sound" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431822" start="7392" end="7411" title="missing fundamental" label="missing fundamental"/>
<link wikidata="Q384169" start="7490" end="7505" title="difference tone" label="difference tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q143217" start="9017" end="9033" title="guitar tablature" label="guitar tablature"/>
<link wikidata="Q636309" start="9183" end="9187" title="fret" label="fret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857020" start="9314" end="9338" title="diminished seventh chord" label="diminished seventh chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996188" start="9438" end="9449" title="ninth chord" label="ninth chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="9630" end="9634" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="9639" end="9650" title="jazz fusion" label="jazz fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="9724" end="9739" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="9741" end="9746" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="9748" end="9761" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="9837" end="9848" title="double bass" label="double bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="9850" end="9863" title="electric bass" label="electric bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q920305" start="10011" end="10027" title="dominant seventh" label="dominant seventh"/>
<link wikidata="Q899391" start="10048" end="10062" title="dominant chord" label="dominant chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="11409" end="11421" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q349603" start="11811" end="11823" title="Figured bass" label="Figured bass"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424246" wikidata="Q662102" url="?curid=424246" title="Casbah of Algiers">
<text>The Casbah (, &quot;qaṣba&quot;, meaning citadel) is the citadel of Algiers in Algeria and the traditional quarter clustered around it. In 1992, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) proclaimed &quot;Kasbah of Algiers&quot; a World Cultural Heritage Site, as &quot;There are the remains of the citadel, old mosques and Ottoman-style palaces as well as the remains of a traditional urban structure associated with a deep-rooted sense of community.&quot;

==Etymology==
More generally, a kasbah is the walled citadel of many North African cities and towns. The name made its way into English from French in the late 19th century (the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; states 1895), and can be spelled &quot;kasbah&quot; or &quot;casbah&quot;.

== History ==
The Casbah of Algiers is founded on the ruins of old Icosium in the 10th century. It was a city built on a hill, stretching towards the sea, divided into the &quot;High city&quot; and the &quot;Low city&quot;. One finds there masonry and mosques dating from the 17th century: Ketchaoua Mosque (built in 1794 by the Dey Baba Hassan) flanked by two minarets; Djama’a al-Djedid (1660, at the time of the Ottomans) with its large finished ovoid cupola points some and its four cupolas; Djamaâ el Kebir (the oldest of the mosques), built by Almoravid ruler Yusuf ibn Tashfin; and Ali Bitchin Mosque (Raïs, 1623). The Casbah also contained several palaces, including Dar Aziza, Dar Mustapha Pacha, Palace of the Dey, and Dar Hassan Pacha which was built in 1791 to house the Pasha, who lived there for eight years.

In 1839, shortly after the French conquest, the French governor moved into Dar Hassan Pacha. In 1860, Napoleon III and Eugénie de Montijo visited. Before French rule, the casbah contained around 13 Jama Masjids, 109 mosques, 32 mausoleums and 12 Zawiyas, total of 166 religious-related buildings. However, the majority of these religious buildings were destroyed during the occupation. In 1862, there were only nine Jama Masjids, 19 mosques, 15 mausoleums and five Zawiyas left. Many mosques such as Ketchauoua Mosque and Berrani Mosque were converted into buildings with non-Islamic purposes, such as military barracks and churches.

The Casbah played a central role during the Algerian War of Independence (1954–1962). During the early years of the war, the Casbah was the epicenter of the insurgency planning of the National Liberation Front (FLN), from which it planned and executed attacks against French citizens and law enforcement agents in Algeria at the time. In order to counter their efforts, the French authorities launched operations in the Casbah during the Battle of Algiers.

== Current condition ==
The ANSS, the conservation agency of the Algerian government, reported that 373 buildings in the Casbah have collapsed. Of the 1816 buildings that remain, 40% are ruined or in a critical state, and 10% are boarded up.

Reuters reported in August 2008 that the Casbah was in a state of neglect and certain areas were at risk of collapse.

Algerian authorities list age, neglect and overpopulation as the principal contributors to the degeneration. Overpopulation makes the problem especially difficult to solve because of the effort it would take to relocate the residents. Estimates range from 40,000 to 70,000 people, although it is difficult to be certain due to the number of squatters in vacant buildings. One reason that the government wants to improve the condition of the Casbah is that it is a potential hideout for criminals and terrorists. In the late 1950s and during the civil insurrection and struggle against French colonial rule it was the hideout for the National Liberation Army (Algeria).

Preservationist Belkacem Babaci described the situation as difficult, but not insurmountable, saying: “I still believe it’s possible to save it, but you need to empty it and you need to find qualified people who will respect the style, the materials. It’s a huge challenge.” Restoration projects have been plagued by delays and endemic corruption.

== Climate change ==

Since the Casbah of Algiers is a coastal landmark, it is vulnerable to sea level rise. In 2022, the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report included it in the list of African cultural sites which would be threatened by flooding and coastal erosion by the end of the century, but only if climate change followed RCP 8.5, which is the scenario of high and continually increasing greenhouse gas emissions associated with a warming of over 4°C., and is no longer considered very likely. The other, more plausible scenarios result in lower warming levels and consequently lower sea level rise: yet sea level rise would continue for about 10,000 years in all of them. Even if the warming is limited to 1.5°C, global sea level rise is still expected to exceed after 2000 years (and higher warming levels will see larger increases by then), consequently exceeding 2100 levels of sea level rise under RCP 8.5 (~ with a range of ) well before the year 4000. Thus, it is a matter of time before the Casbah of Algiers is threatened by water levels, unless it can be protected by adaptation efforts such as sea walls.

==In popular culture==
*The Casbah of Algiers plays a central role in the 1937 French film &quot;Pépé le Moko&quot; and the 1938 American film &quot;Algiers&quot;, in which the noted jewel thief Pepe le Moko, played by Jean Gabin in the French version and Charles Boyer in the American version, hide there after a heist in France, and he becomes a local leader, but as time passes, he begins to feel trapped in the district. Although in the American film, Boyer never said to costar Hedy Lamarr &quot;Come with me to ze Casbah&quot;, this line was in the Hollywood movie trailer, and it would stick with him, thanks to generations of impressionists and Looney Tunes parodies. 
*Boyer&#x27;s role as Pepe Le Moko was already world-famous when animator Chuck Jones based the character of Pepé Le Pew, the romantic skunk introduced in 1945&#x27;s Warner Bros. cartoon &quot;Odor-able Kitty&quot;, on Boyer, his voice – imitated by Mel Blanc – and the catch phrase &quot;Come with me to ze Casbah&quot; from his most well-known performance. 
*The Casbah of Algiers plays a central role in the 1966 Italian-Algerian war film &quot;The Battle of Algiers&quot;, co-written and directed by Gillo Pontecorvo.

==Notable people==
* Abd al-Rahman al-Tha&#x27;alibi (1384-1479)
* Abdelhalim Bensmaia (1866-1933)
* Mohamed Charef (1908-2011)
* Brahim Boushaki (1912-1997)
* Abderrahmane Taleb (1930-1958)
* Djamila Bouhired (born 1935)
* Djamila Boupacha (born 1938)
* Mustapha Toumi (1937-2013)

== See also ==
* &quot;Pépé le Moko&quot;
* &quot;Casbah City&quot; (TV series)
* Medina quarter
* List of cultural assets of Algeria

== References ==

== External links ==

* Images of Algiers Casbah in Manar al-Athar digital heritage archive resource
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q662102" start="4" end="10" title="Casbah of Algiers" label="Casbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q89468" start="14" end="31" title="Kasbah" label="&amp;quot;qaṣba&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q88291" start="41" end="48" title="citadel" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="68" end="75" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="79" end="86" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="215" end="221" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="266" end="294" title="World Cultural Heritage Site" label="World Cultural Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q89468" start="526" end="532" title="kasbah" label="kasbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="678" end="703" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502671" start="853" end="860" title="Icosium" label="Icosium"/>
<link wikidata="Q272999" start="1026" end="1033" title="masonry" label="masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="1038" end="1045" title="mosques" label="mosques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471799" start="1076" end="1092" title="Ketchaoua Mosque" label="Ketchaoua Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q48356" start="1147" end="1154" title="minaret" label="minaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192958" start="1157" end="1174" title="Djama’a al-Djedid" label="Djama’a al-Djedid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11346334" start="1241" end="1247" title="cupola" label="cupola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386475" start="1282" end="1297" title="Djamaâ el Kebir" label="Djamaâ el Kebir"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="1336" end="1345" title="Almoravid dynasty" label="Almoravid"/>
<link wikidata="Q369981" start="1352" end="1369" title="Yusuf ibn Tashfin" label="Yusuf ibn Tashfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25453544" start="1375" end="1393" title="Ali Bitchin Mosque" label="Ali Bitchin Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q20971021" start="1461" end="1470" title="Dar Aziza" label="Dar Aziza"/>
<link wikidata="Q30624915" start="1472" end="1490" title="Dar Mustapha Pacha" label="Dar Mustapha Pacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q12232990" start="1492" end="1509" title="Palace of the Dey" label="Palace of the Dey"/>
<link wikidata="Q27603011" start="1515" end="1531" title="Dar Hassan Pacha" label="Dar Hassan Pacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q184951" start="1569" end="1574" title="Pasha" label="Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="1658" end="1664" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="1712" end="1724" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q157130" start="1729" end="1747" title="Eugénie de Montijo" label="Eugénie de Montijo"/>
<link wikidata="Q218272" start="1764" end="1775" title="French Algeria" label="French rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454820" start="1808" end="1819" title="Jama Masjid" label="Jama Masjid"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="1838" end="1847" title="mausoleum" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001465" start="1856" end="1862" title="Zawiya (institution)" label="Zawiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q25453602" start="2132" end="2146" title="Berrani Mosque" label="Berrani Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="2289" end="2317" title="Algerian War" label="Algerian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323212" start="2402" end="2412" title="insurgency" label="insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q204543" start="2429" end="2454" title="National Liberation Front (Algeria)" label="National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761043" start="2683" end="2700" title="Battle of Algiers (1956–1957)" label="Battle of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="2946" end="2953" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113866" start="3108" end="3122" title="overpopulation" label="overpopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44854" start="3406" end="3415" title="squatters" label="squatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="3610" end="3628" title="Algerian War" label="civil insurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746356" start="3698" end="3732" title="National Liberation Army (Algeria)" label="National Liberation Army (Algeria)"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="4177" end="4191" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q103843442" start="4206" end="4234" title="IPCC Sixth Assessment Report" label="IPCC Sixth Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="4314" end="4322" title="flooding" label="flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542312" start="4327" end="4342" title="coastal erosion" label="coastal erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="4382" end="4396" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4406" end="4413" title="Representative Concentration Pathway#RCP 8.5" label="RCP 8.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="4472" end="4486" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359152" start="5189" end="5197" title="sea wall" label="sea wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241684" start="5298" end="5310" title="Pépé le Moko" label="Pépé le Moko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414527" start="5350" end="5357" title="Algiers (1938 film)" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23842" start="5420" end="5430" title="Jean Gabin" label="Jean Gabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105987" start="5457" end="5470" title="Charles Boyer" label="Charles Boyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49034" start="5684" end="5695" title="Hedy Lamarr" label="Hedy Lamarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q622435" start="5854" end="5866" title="Looney Tunes" label="Looney Tunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q312657" start="5952" end="5963" title="Chuck Jones" label="Chuck Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q614094" start="5987" end="5998" title="Pepé Le Pew" label="Pepé Le Pew"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="6045" end="6057" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q16253784" start="6072" end="6087" title="Odor-able Kitty" label="Odor-able Kitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q349690" start="6129" end="6138" title="Mel Blanc" label="Mel Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q784812" start="6327" end="6348" title="The Battle of Algiers" label="The Battle of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q53031" start="6383" end="6399" title="Gillo Pontecorvo" label="Gillo Pontecorvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483161" start="6423" end="6454" title="Abd al-Rahman al-Tha&amp;#x27;alibi" label="Abd al-Rahman al-Tha&amp;#x27;alibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12222575" start="6469" end="6488" title="Abdelhalim Bensmaia" label="Abdelhalim Bensmaia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6503" end="6517" title="Mohamed Charef" label="Mohamed Charef"/>
<link wikidata="Q25455059" start="6532" end="6547" title="Brahim Boushaki" label="Brahim Boushaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821267" start="6562" end="6580" title="Abderrahmane Taleb" label="Abderrahmane Taleb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667094" start="6595" end="6611" title="Djamila Bouhired" label="Djamila Bouhired"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032788" start="6626" end="6642" title="Djamila Boupacha" label="Djamila Boupacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993467" start="6657" end="6671" title="Mustapha Toumi" label="Mustapha Toumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241684" start="6708" end="6720" title="Pépé le Moko" label="Pépé le Moko"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612766" start="6729" end="6764" title="Casbah City (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Casbah City&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128906" start="6767" end="6781" title="Medina quarter" label="Medina quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q14806973" start="6784" end="6818" title="List of cultural assets of Algeria" label="List of cultural assets of Algeria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424247" wikidata="Q132978" url="?curid=424247" title="Telephone-pole beetle">
<text>The telephone-pole beetle (Micromalthus debilis) is a beetle native to the eastern United States and the only known living representative of the otherwise extinct family Micromalthidae. Larvae of the beetle live in decaying wood and can be pests to wooden structures, lending them their common name, the &#x27;telephone-pole beetle.&#x27;

The larvae of &quot;Micromalthus debilis&quot; start as tiny white creatures with well-developed legs, resembling carabid larvae. Larvae bore into moist, decaying chestnut and oak logs, creating galleries as they consume wood fibers. Adult beetles are dark brown to blackish with vestigial reproductive organs. Mating behavior includes sex-role reversal, with females exhibiting more aggression and competition for mates. &quot;Micromalthus&quot;″s evolutionary history dates back millions of years, with fossil records found in various ambers. Their larvae infest timber, weakening structures and attracting fungi, as seen in South African gold mines in the 1930s.

The telephone-pole beetle used to have reproducing adults, but has evolved to become obligately paedogenetic. The rare adult is sometimes referred to as a &#x27;ghost adult&#x27; due to its vestigial existence. They have an unusual reproductive system involving asexually reproducing (parthenogenetic) female larvae. Being one of few parthenogenetic haplodiploid species, the telephone-pole beetle is an interesting subject of coleopteran reproductive behavior and physiology.

== Distribution ==
Reports of the species are infrequent and it is unknown whether they are rare, or common and unrecognized. A recent study by Bertone &quot;et al.&quot; (2016) found telephone-pole beetles in a survey of the indoor arthropod fauna in 50 houses located in and around Raleigh, North Carolina. A recent survey found that the species had spread to every continent except Australia. With finds in South Africa, Hong Kong, Belize, Cuba, Brazil, Japan, Hawaii, Italy and Austria, the dispersal is likely connected to the timber trade.

==Taxonomy==
Classification of &quot;M. debilis&quot; was historically controversial and unsettled. The species, first reported by John Lawrence LeConte in 1878, was long considered one of the Polyphaga, and placed in the Lymexylidae or Telegeusidae, or as a family within the Cantharoidea. However, characteristics of larvae, wings, and male genitalia show that it is in the suborder Archostemata, where it has been placed since 1999.

==Description==

=== Larvae ===
&quot;Female-producing (thelytokous) female larvae&quot;

The thelytokous female larva resembles a carabid larva when first hatched. The first instar larva is the smallest in length, measuring about 1.26mm. The body is white, distinct lateral bulges are present, and the legs are well-developed. The second instar and subsequent instars have similar morphologies, with the head and body size and width increasing with each subsequent instar. The larvae measure between 2.7 and 3.3 millimeters in length. The head displays a light brown hue and notable sclerotization. In almost all segments, the cuticle covering the thorax and abdomen lacks pigmentation. The body is characterized by its slender, elongated form, maintaining parallel sides and cylindrical shape, featuring dorsal and ventral ampullae along with lateral bulges on numerous segments. The thorax is shorter than the combined length of abdominal segments I to III. In later instars, the body is slightly flatter, broader, and shorter. Legs are not present in second and older instars which is considered a trait unique to &quot;M. debilis&quot;.

&quot;Male-producing (arrhenotokous) female larvae&quot;

The penultimate instar of the male-producing larva is vaguely described as having a dense white color due to much fat. The body is cylindrically shaped and marked by segmented constrictions.

&quot;Male larvae&quot;

Unlike female larvae, which resemble the carabid type when first hatched, male larvae resemble that of a weevil. The body is short and stubby with stump-like legs.

=== Adults ===
The adult beetle is elongated and a dark brown to blackish color, with brownish-yellow legs and antennae. The head is larger than the thorax, with large eyes protruding from either side. According to H.S. Barber, the adult female is responsible for

== Feeding ==
The larvae are wood-borers that feed on moist and decaying chestnut and oak logs. Telephone-pole beetle larvae infest timber by burrowing into the wood, where they feed and develop. They tunnel through the timber, creating galleries as they consume the wood fibers.

==Life cycle==

The life cycle of &quot;M. debilis&quot; is one of the most complicated life cycles among beetles because it involves viviparity, hypermetamorphosis, parthenogenesis, and paedogenesis. The life cycle is also highly unusual because the larvae rarely mature into adults in both sexes. Haplodiploidy is another notable feature of this species; haploid males are hatched from eggs within the mother&#x27;s body via haploid parthenogenesis, and diploid females are birthed live via diploid parthenogenesis.

=== Females ===
Upon being birthed live, the larva emerges as a minute white creature with long, slender legs that resemble the carabid type. This stage is primarily focused on migration, with the young larvae crawling away from the location of their birth to find new areas within their habitat. During this phase, they may consume the remains of their mother before migration. After a period of wandering, the larvae begin to burrow into wood or other suitable substrates again. They feed minimally during this time and undergo their first molt, transforming into a legless form that resembles the larva of cerambycid beetles. This stage is characterized by the development of an inconspicuous anal armature. Additional molts occur in this form, likely to accommodate head growth and overall body development. The larvae continue to bore through wood, packing their galleries with dust as they progress. The color of their bodies may darken due to the accumulation of food in their alimentary tract. As the larvae near maturity, the eggs in the ovaries of what will become the paedogenetic form become visible. At this stage, the larvae reverse their position in the gallery, construct a cell, and enter an aestivation phase. During aestivation, their bodies gradually turn white as they consume all available food in their system.

Depending on circumstances, the larvae may either pupate (though this is described as rare) or undergo another molt, ultimately revealing the paedogenetic form, in which they can produce young. Paedogenesis is the process by larvae reproduce by giving birth to more larvae without the production of adults and is a process exclusive to females. Once the paedogenetic form emerges, it typically takes around two weeks for the new generation to be born. The young larvae are born tail-first and begin the cycle anew, continuing the species&#x27; life cycle.

=== Males ===
Male larvae are hatched from a single, large egg that adheres to the male-producing larva&#x27;s body for 8–10 days. The larvae feed on the mother&#x27;s body and will grow rapidly. The male rarely pupates and transforms into the imago, and will often die as a larva. While male adults only develop from uni-oviparous paedogenetic females, adult females only develop from cerambycoid paedogenetic females.

=== Larval sex ratio ===
In naturally occurring paedogenetic larvae, the sex ratio is strongly biased toward females. None of the three canonical explanations for biased sex ratios, local mate competition, local resource competition, and local resource enhancement, are likely explanations for the biased sex ratio in telephone-pole beetle larvae. Local mate competition selects for female-biased sex ratios when male siblings compete to fertilize their female siblings, but this is unlikely in this species which females tend to avoid mating with siblings. Local resource competition selects for biased sex ratios but typically involves competition between females for resources and thus selects for male-biased ratios. Lastly, local resource enhancement can select for biased sex ratios if the offspring of one sex increases the fitness of parents. However, because female offspring feed on the mother, there is more likely competition between female larvae, contradicting this explanation. As such, the cause of sex ratio deviation remains unclear.

=== Adulthood ===
Adult telephone-pole beetles are unable to copulate, and adult females do not have the physiological mechanisms to reproduce because they are unable to lay eggs or produce live progeny, either sexually or by parthenogenesis.

Since adults do not have a role in reproduction, they are not a physiological part of the life cycle. Thus, the rarity of adult development in the natural world may be an evolutionary response to the lack of their reproductive role. In laboratory settings, development into adults can be induced by high temperatures, but this also results in high mortality because only one out of hundreds of heat-treated larvae will survive and pupate into an adult.

The adult females live for about six days and males only live for around 12 hours, with a strongly biased sex ratio towards females. The adults of both sexes are sterile and are vestigial remnants of a time when the life cycle involved sexual reproduction. The loss of sexual reproduction is likely associated with its infection by &quot;Wolbachia&quot; bacteria.

== Literature ==
Limited observations and experiments on &quot;M. debilis&quot; have resulted in conflicting observational conclusions, particularly regarding the beetle&#x27;s reproduction, in the existing literature. Pollock &amp; Normack reported the existence of reproductive adult males, but this was based on the incorrect conclusions by Barber. However, all existing experimental literature states that adults are sterile.

== Mating behavior ==
A 2016 experimental study used heating to generate substantial numbers of adults to simulate the now non-functional adult reproductive behavior. Due to parthenogenetic reproduction in telephone-pole beetles, information on the sexual mating system of this beetle was previously lost, but recent research is working to uncover this information. Both adult female and adult male modern telephone-pole beetles are sterile, but they still exhibit mating behavior.

=== Sex role reversal ===
The study revealed sex-role reversal, meaning that females face more competition for mates compared to males. This was demonstrated by greater initiative by females to mate and increased fighting between females in the presence of unrelated males. Female also display more aggressive mating behavior, as they may grasp the male genitalia with their own genitalia.

=== Rejection behavior ===
Adult female beetles exhibit rejection behavior to avoid inbreeding with related males, which are adult male beetles that are located on the same natal log. Right after pupating, males expose their reproductive organs as a mate-seeking gesture. Despite tending to compete for male mates, females will ignore these males because they originate from the same log. The males would need to take a short flight to a neighboring log for female mates. Females also perform a &#x27;kin dance&#x27; involving shaking of their abdomens and beating of their wing, which is thought to be a deterring signal to related males. Such rejection behaviors demonstrate that sex roles are not fixed because females can also display choosy behavior. The rejection behavior also supports that the female-biased sex ratio is not due to local mate competition.

=== Mounting ===
Females initiated more interactions by actively mounting males, further supporting that female compete for male mates. In cases where several females pile on top of a male, a female may try to dislodge the others with her mandible. Female-female mounting can also occur, and the frequency of this does not change depending on the presence or absence of males.

== Evolutionary history ==
Genetic studies have placed &quot;Micromalthus&quot; as more closely related to Ommatidae than to Cupedidae within Archostemata. A close relationship between Ommatidae and Micromalthidae is supported by several morphological characters, including those of the mandibles and male genitalia. A close relationship to the enigmatic family Crowsoniellidae has been suggested by some sources. The oldest record of Micromalthidae is &quot;Archaeomalthus&quot; from the Upper Permian of Russia around 252 million years old, which is morphologically similar in many respects to &quot;Micromalthus&quot; including an only weakly sclerotised body. Several other fossil genera of the family are known including &quot;Cretomalthus&quot;, known from a larva found in Early Cretaceous (Barremian) Lebanese amber, as well as &quot;Protomalthus&quot; from the mid-Cretaceous (Albian-Cenomanian) Burmese amber of Myanmar.

Fossils of &quot;Micromalthus&quot; are known from the Miocene aged Dominican amber (adults and larvae, which were found to not be distinguishable from the living species) and Mexican amber (larvae), the late Eocene aged Rovno amber of Ukraine (&quot;Micromalthus priabonicus&quot;), and the early Eocene (Ypresian) aged Oise amber of France (&quot;Micromalthus eocenicus&quot;). A possible specimen of &quot;Micromalthus&quot; is known from Burmese amber, but the poor preservation of the specimen makes the assignment tentative.

== Wood pests ==
Telephone-pole beetle larvae infest timber by burrowing into the wood, where they feed and develop. They tunnel through the timber, creating galleries as they consume the wood fibers. This activity weakens the structural integrity of the timber, leading to decay and potential collapse. Additionally, their presence can attract fungi, further contributing to the degradation of the timber.

In the 1930s, telephone-pole beetle larvae were reported as the perpetrators of a gold mine infestation in the Witwatersrand Basin in South Africa. The primary timbers employed in the mines, including &quot;Acacia&quot;, &quot;Eucalyptus&quot;, and &quot;Pinus&quot; species, are all susceptible to infestation, particularly in conditions with ample moisture. Heavy infestations were noted in aged timbers within poorly ventilated shafts, especially in environments with temperatures ranging from 88 to 93 °F. The presence of stagnant or running water may cause even further decay, sometimes resulting in complete pulverization.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Tree of Life page, with pictures and video
* The life cycle of Micromalthus debilis</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q132978" start="4" end="25" title="Telephone-pole beetle" label="telephone-pole beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="54" end="60" title="beetle" label="beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="83" end="96" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="163" end="169" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q13171513" start="170" end="184" title="Micromalthidae" label="Micromalthidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="186" end="191" title="Larva" label="Larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="344" end="349" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q27046" start="454" end="461" title="carabid" label="carabid"/>
<link wikidata="Q627214" start="620" end="629" title="Vestigiality" label="vestigial"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="877" end="882" title="amber" label="amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q603178" start="1103" end="1115" title="paedogenesis" label="paedogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="1292" end="1307" title="parthenogenetic" label="parthenogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098692" start="1357" end="1369" title="Haplodiploidy" label="haplodiploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="1434" end="1444" title="coleoptera" label="coleoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="1769" end="1792" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q83534" start="2163" end="2184" title="John Lawrence LeConte" label="John Lawrence LeConte"/>
<link wikidata="Q147877" start="2225" end="2234" title="Polyphaga" label="Polyphaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q749983" start="2254" end="2265" title="Lymexylidae" label="Lymexylidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q109984856" start="2269" end="2281" title="Telegeusidae" label="Telegeusidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4212620" start="2309" end="2321" title="Cantharoidea" label="Cantharoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q131126" start="2417" end="2429" title="Archostemata" label="Archostemata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291674" start="2525" end="2536" title="Thelytoky" label="thelytokous"/>
<link wikidata="Q27046" start="2600" end="2607" title="carabid" label="carabid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179631" start="2644" end="2650" title="instar" label="instar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475960" start="3053" end="3067" title="sclerotization" label="sclerotization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797676" start="3097" end="3104" title="Cuticle (arthropod)" label="cuticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q942508" start="3118" end="3124" title="Thorax (arthropod anatomy)" label="thorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795952" start="3634" end="3647" title="Arrhenotoky" label="arrhenotokous"/>
<link wikidata="Q383963" start="3992" end="3998" title="weevil" label="weevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q204664" start="4163" end="4171" title="antenna (biology)" label="antennae"/>
<link wikidata="Q9645" start="4201" end="4207" title="thorax" label="thorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="4335" end="4341" title="larvae" label="larvae"/>
<link wikidata="Q129324" start="4390" end="4398" title="chestnut" label="chestnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="4403" end="4406" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q120446" start="4732" end="4742" title="viviparity" label="viviparity"/>
<link wikidata="Q590871" start="4744" end="4762" title="hypermetamorphosis" label="hypermetamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="4764" end="4779" title="parthenogenesis" label="parthenogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q205295" start="5726" end="5736" title="Cerambycidae" label="cerambycid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="6101" end="6117" title="Gastrointestinal tract" label="alimentary tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q822123" start="6326" end="6337" title="aestivation" label="aestivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="7221" end="7225" title="pupa" label="pupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q207254" start="7253" end="7258" title="imago" label="imago"/>
<link wikidata="Q212306" start="7327" end="7340" title="Oviparity" label="uni-oviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q920316" start="7395" end="7406" title="Cerambycoidea" label="cerambycoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068155" start="9287" end="9296" title="sex ratio" label="sex ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q627214" start="9359" end="9368" title="Vestigiality" label="vestigial"/>
<link wikidata="Q283526" start="9519" end="9528" title="Wolbachia" label="Wolbachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q135044" start="12201" end="12210" title="Ommatidae" label="Ommatidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q133150" start="12219" end="12228" title="Cupedidae" label="Cupedidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131126" start="12236" end="12248" title="Archostemata" label="Archostemata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189598" start="12456" end="12471" title="Crowsoniellidae" label="Crowsoniellidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12553" end="12567" title="Archaeomalthus" label="Archaeomalthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="12583" end="12596" title="Upper Permian" label="Upper Permian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12826" end="12838" title="Cretomalthus" label="Cretomalthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q732702" start="12892" end="12901" title="Barremian" label="Barremian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822792" start="12903" end="12917" title="Lebanese amber" label="Lebanese amber"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12936" end="12948" title="Protomalthus" label="Protomalthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8980" start="12980" end="12986" title="Albiano d&amp;#x27;Ivrea" label="Albian"/>
<link wikidata="Q185567" start="12987" end="12997" title="Cenomanian" label="Cenomanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q865750" start="12999" end="13012" title="Burmese amber" label="Burmese amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="13081" end="13088" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q898798" start="13094" end="13109" title="Dominican amber" label="Dominican amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q25323811" start="13202" end="13215" title="Mexican amber" label="Mexican amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="13235" end="13241" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q16912821" start="13247" end="13258" title="Rovno amber" label="Rovno amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q508691" start="13332" end="13340" title="Ypresian" label="Ypresian"/>
<link wikidata="Q116449373" start="13347" end="13357" title="Oise amber" label="Oise amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q587808" start="14077" end="14096" title="Witwatersrand Basin" label="Witwatersrand Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81666" start="14173" end="14179" title="Acacia" label="Acacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45669" start="14193" end="14203" title="Eucalyptus" label="Eucalyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="14221" end="14226" title="Pinus" label="Pinus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424248" wikidata="Q13171513" url="?curid=424248" title="Micromalthidae">
<text>Micromalthidae is an ancient family of small beetles belonging to the suborder Archostemata. The only known living representative is the telephone-pole beetle, &quot;Micromalthus debilis&quot;. A few extinct species have been described, the oldest being the Late Permian &quot;Archaeomalthus synoriacos&quot;. It is one of the oldest families of beetles still existing today.

&quot;Micromalthus debilis&quot; is remarkable for its paedogenetic reproductive strategy which is almost unique in the animal kingdom, with the partial exception of Loricifera, and that could have already evolved in prehistoric Micromalthidae.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13171513" start="0" end="14" title="Micromalthidae" label="Micromalthidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="29" end="35" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="45" end="51" title="beetle" label="beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131126" start="79" end="91" title="Archostemata" label="Archostemata"/>
<link wikidata="Q132978" start="137" end="158" title="telephone-pole beetle" label="telephone-pole beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077390" start="258" end="270" title="Late Permian" label="Late Permian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="277" end="302" title="Archaeomalthus synoriacos" label="Archaeomalthus synoriacos"/>
<link wikidata="Q603178" start="432" end="444" title="neoteny" label="paedogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="497" end="511" title="Metazoa" label="animal kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183" start="543" end="553" title="Loricifera" label="Loricifera"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424249" wikidata="Q1916887" url="?curid=424249" title="Rosthern">
<text>Rosthern is a town at the juncture of Highway 11 and Highway 312 in central Saskatchewan, Canada. It is roughly halfway between the cities of Prince Albert and Saskatoon.

== History ==
Mennonite settlers, led by Gerhard Ens, began arriving in the area around 1890, with the establishment of the Qu&#x27;Appelle, Long Lake &amp; Saskatchewan Railway to Prince Albert. The post office was established in 1893, and by 1898 the community achieved village status. In 1903, Rosthern was incorporated as a town.

There are several apocryphal versions of the story about how the town got its name. One is that in the late 1880s when the railway ran through from Regina to Prince Albert a man by the name of Ross drowned in the creek that flows through the town. &quot;Terne&quot; is old English for tarn meaning a pool, and the name stuck. In all likelihood, however, the town&#x27;s name echoes an old world name brought over by a homesick worker on the railroad, in this case that of Rostherne, a village in the United Kingdom.

== Attractions and recreation ==

Rosthern has a public library, many parks and walking trails, Valley Regional Park with an 18-hole grass green golf course, two ball-diamonds, two indoor hockey rinks, a curling rink, bowling alley, and three school gyms. An outdoor swimming pool was completed in 2005. Rosthern is also home to the Youth Farm Bible Camp.

Nearby Rosthern is the Seager Wheeler Farm, a National Historic Site of Canada, and the Rosthern Mennonite Heritage Museum ( 1909–1910). It is a Municipal Heritage Property on the Canadian Register of Historic Places.

== Valley Regional Park ==

Valley Regional Park (), founded in 1974, is a regional park about north-east of Rosthern on the western shore of Rempel Lake. The park has an 18-hole golf course, campground, and picnic area. There is also a 100-foot slide and an 80-foot zip line. The campground has about 80 campsites and modern washrooms and showers. Access to the park is from Highway 11.

Valley Regional Park Golf Club is an 18-hole, par 72 course with grass greens and 6,577 total yards. There is a pro shop, practice green, and a licensed clubhouse.

== Churches ==
Rosthern is home to over ten churches including Mennonite, Ukrainian Orthodox, Swedenborgian, Pentecostal, Anglican, Roman Catholic, Ukrainian Catholic, Lutheran, Seventh-day Adventist, Christian &amp; Missionary Alliance, and Baptist.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Rosthern had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.
== Notable people ==
*Bill Braden, politician
*George Braden, 2nd Premier of Northwest Territories
*Russ Brayshaw, hockey player
*Onésime Dorval, educator
*Wayne Elhard, politician
*Isaak Elias, politician
*Gerhard Ens, town founder
*Jerry Friesen, football player
*Ben Heppner, politician
*Jim Hrycuik, hockey player
*Roger Kortko, hockey player
*George Langley, politician
*Frederick Loveroff, artist
*Archibald Peter McNab, 6th Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan
*Myles Morin, politician
*Earle Morris, curler
*Barbara Nickel, writer
*Erdman Penner, Disney screenwriter
*Jim Penner, businessman and politician
*J. D. Denis Pelletier, judge
*Richie Regehr, hockey player
*Robyn Regehr, hockey player
*Jeanne Thomarat, artist
*Maurice Vellacott, politician
*Seager Wheeler, author
*Art Wiebe, hockey player
*Berny Wiens, politician
== See also ==
* List of towns in Saskatchewan
* List of communities in Saskatchewan

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1916887" start="0" end="8" title="Rosthern" label="Rosthern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872823" start="38" end="48" title="Saskatchewan Highway 11" label="Highway 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425270" start="53" end="64" title="Saskatchewan Highway 312" label="Highway 312"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="76" end="88" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q671431" start="142" end="155" title="Prince Albert, Saskatchewan" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566" start="160" end="169" title="Saskatoon" label="Saskatoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="186" end="195" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550655" start="213" end="224" title="Gerhard Ens" label="Gerhard Ens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268200" start="296" end="349" title="Qu&amp;#x27;Appelle, Long Lake and Saskatchewan Railroad and Steamboat Company" label="Qu&amp;#x27;Appelle, Long Lake &amp;amp; Saskatchewan Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q671431" start="353" end="366" title="Prince Albert, Saskatchewan" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123" start="655" end="661" title="Regina, Saskatchewan" label="Regina"/>
<link wikidata="Q545862" start="979" end="988" title="Rostherne" label="Rostherne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440433" start="1404" end="1423" title="Seager Wheeler Farm" label="Seager Wheeler Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568567" start="1427" end="1459" title="National Historic Site of Canada" label="National Historic Site of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1675" end="1688" title="List of protected areas of Saskatchewan#Regional parks" label="regional park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154882" start="1867" end="1875" title="zip line" label="zip line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872823" start="1976" end="1986" title="Saskatchewan Highway 11" label="Highway 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="2217" end="2226" title="Mennonites" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651499" start="2228" end="2246" title="Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada" label="Ukrainian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654539" start="2248" end="2261" title="The New Church (Swedenborgian)" label="Swedenborgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="2263" end="2274" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="2276" end="2284" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2286" end="2300" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149375" start="2302" end="2320" title="Catholic Church in Ukraine" label="Ukrainian Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="2322" end="2330" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="2332" end="2353" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272897" start="2355" end="2390" title="Alliance World Fellowship" label="Christian &amp;amp; Missionary Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="2396" end="2403" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="2432" end="2457" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="2471" end="2488" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908228" start="2687" end="2698" title="Bill Braden" label="Bill Braden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537189" start="2712" end="2725" title="George Braden" label="George Braden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240368" start="2731" end="2763" title="Premier of Northwest Territories" label="Premier of Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7221627" start="2765" end="2778" title="Russ Brayshaw" label="Russ Brayshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095215" start="2795" end="2809" title="Onésime Dorval" label="Onésime Dorval"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566827" start="2821" end="2833" title="Wayne Elhard" label="Wayne Elhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077492" start="2847" end="2858" title="Isaak Elias" label="Isaak Elias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550655" start="2872" end="2883" title="Gerhard Ens" label="Gerhard Ens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183615" start="2899" end="2912" title="Jerry Friesen" label="Jerry Friesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885829" start="2931" end="2942" title="Ben Heppner (politician)" label="Ben Heppner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195777" start="2956" end="2967" title="Jim Hrycuik" label="Jim Hrycuik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358485" start="2984" end="2996" title="Roger Kortko" label="Roger Kortko"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541539" start="3013" end="3027" title="George Langley (politician)" label="George Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q108837119" start="3041" end="3059" title="Frederick Loveroff" label="Frederick Loveroff"/>
<link wikidata="Q633393" start="3069" end="3090" title="Archibald Peter McNab" label="Archibald Peter McNab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6947694" start="3133" end="3144" title="Myles Morin" label="Myles Morin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326459" start="3158" end="3170" title="Earle Morris (curler)" label="Earle Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859185" start="3180" end="3194" title="Barbara Nickel" label="Barbara Nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11285682" start="3204" end="3217" title="Erdman Penner" label="Erdman Penner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197458" start="3240" end="3250" title="Jim Penner" label="Jim Penner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104032" start="3280" end="3301" title="J. D. Denis Pelletier" label="J. D. Denis Pelletier"/>
<link wikidata="Q474203" start="3310" end="3323" title="Richie Regehr" label="Richie Regehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395276" start="3340" end="3352" title="Robyn Regehr" label="Robyn Regehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q52275136" start="3369" end="3384" title="Jeanne Thomarat" label="Jeanne Thomarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301505" start="3394" end="3411" title="Maurice Vellacott" label="Maurice Vellacott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440431" start="3425" end="3439" title="Seager Wheeler" label="Seager Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797141" start="3449" end="3458" title="Art Wiebe" label="Art Wiebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894244" start="3475" end="3486" title="Berny Wiens" label="Berny Wiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643756" start="3516" end="3545" title="List of towns in Saskatchewan" label="List of towns in Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852752" start="3548" end="3583" title="List of communities in Saskatchewan" label="List of communities in Saskatchewan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424251" wikidata="Q597638" url="?curid=424251" title="Mennonite Church Canada">
<text>Mennonite Church Canada, informally known as the General Conference, is a Mennonite denomination in Canada, with head offices in Winnipeg, Manitoba. It is a member of the Mennonite World Conference and the Evangelical Fellowship of Canada.

==History==

The first Mennonites in Canada arrived from Pennsylvania in 1786. The majority of the Mennonites that migrated to Canada over the next 150 years came directly from Europe. The first annual meeting of Mennonite ministers was held in 1810, which eventually led to founding the &quot;Mennonite Conference of Ontario&quot; (later the &quot;Mennonite Conference of Ontario and Quebec&quot;). The &quot;Conference of Mennonites in Central Canada&quot; was formed in 1903. When other bodies arriving in Canada began to settle outside this &quot;central&quot; base, the name was changed to the &quot;General Conference of Mennonites in Canada&quot; in 1932 (later the &quot;Conference of Mennonites in Canada&quot;). The &quot;Ontario Amish Mennonite Conference&quot; (later &quot;Western Ontario Mennonite Conference&quot;) was founded in 1923, and the &quot;Conference of United Mennonite Churches in Ontario&quot; in 1945. In 1988, the &quot;Western Ontario Mennonite Conference&quot;, the &quot;Conference of United Mennonite Churches in Ontario&quot; and the &quot;Mennonite Conference of Ontario and Quebec&quot; united to form the &quot;Mennonite Conference of Eastern Canada&quot;.

Beginning in 1989, a series of consultations, discussions, proposals, and sessions led to the unification of two North American bodies (the &quot;Mennonite Church &amp; General Conference Mennonite Church&quot;) and the related Canadian &quot;Conference of Mennonites in Canada&quot; into the Mennonite Church USA and the Mennonite Church Canada in 2002.

According to a census published in 2018, it had 203 churches and 26,000 baptized members.

==Beliefs==
The doctrinal faith of the Mennonite Church Canada is set forth in &quot;The Confession of Faith in a Mennonite Perspective&quot;. This confession was adopted in 1995 by the &quot;General Conference Mennonite Church&quot; and the &quot;Mennonite Church&quot; at Wichita, Kansas. It contains 24 articles on the following: &quot;God; Jesus Christ; Holy Spirit; Scripture; Creation and Divine Providence; the Creation and Calling of Human Beings; Sin; Salvation; The Church of Jesus Christ; The Church in Mission; Baptism; The Lord&#x27;s Supper; Foot Washing; Discipline in the Church; Ministry and Leadership; Church Order and Unity; Discipleship and the Christian Life; Christian Spirituality; Family, Singleness, and Marriage; Truth and the Avoidance of Oaths; Christian Stewardship; Peace, Justice, and Nonresistance; The Church&#x27;s Relation to Government and Society; and The Reign of God.&quot;

The church ordains women as pastors. In 2015, the first same-gender marriage was officiated in a congregation of the Mennonite Church Canada with the denomination in 2016 clarifying that each congregation is free to decide its own position on the issue.

==Structure==
The organizational structure of the &quot;Mennonite Church Canada&quot; is divided into five Area Churches - Mennonite Church Alberta, Mennonite Church British Columbia, Mennonite Church Eastern Canada, Mennonite Church Manitoba, and Mennonite Church Saskatchewan. Denominational work is administered through a board elected by the delegates to the biennial assembly. Mennonite Church Canada participates in the Canadian Council of Churches, the Evangelical Fellowship of Canada, and the Mennonite World Conference.

==Schools==

It has 2 theological institutes, the Columbia Bible College in Abbotsford, British Columbia, and the Anabaptist Mennonite Biblical Seminary in Elkhart, in Indiana (United States).

It has 2 universities, the Conrad Grebel University College in Waterloo, Ontario and the Canadian Mennonite University in Winnipeg (Manitoba).

==Periodical==
&quot;Canadian Mennonite&quot; is the official conference periodical. The conference also published the German-language &quot;Der Bote&quot; newspaper until 2008, when it ceased publication.

==Notes==

==Further reading==
* Ens, Adolf. &quot;Subjects Or Citizens?: The Mennonite Experience in Canada, 1870-1925&quot; (1994) 
* Epp, Frank. &quot;Mennonites in Canada, 1786-1920&quot; (1996)
* Epp, Marlene. &quot;Mennonite Women in Canada: A History&quot; (Winnipeg, University of Manitoba Press, 2008. xiii + 378 pp.)
* Regehr, T. D.&quot;Mennonites in Canada, 1939-1970: Volume 3: A People Transformed &quot; (1996) 
* Reimer, Margaret Loewen. &quot;One Quilt Many Pieces: A Guide to Mennonite Groups in Canada&quot; (2008) 
* Suderman, Robert J. &quot;God&#x27;s People Now: Face to face With Mennonite Church Canada&quot; (2007)

==External links==
*Official website
*Mennonite Church Canada &quot;in Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q597638" start="0" end="23" title="Mennonite Church Canada" label="Mennonite Church Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q597638" start="49" end="67" title="Mennonite Church Canada" label="General Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="74" end="83" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="100" end="106" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="129" end="147" title="Winnipeg, Manitoba" label="Winnipeg, Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q744587" start="171" end="197" title="Mennonite World Conference" label="Mennonite World Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838271" start="206" end="238" title="Evangelical Fellowship of Canada" label="Evangelical Fellowship of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="298" end="310" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531795" start="1606" end="1641" title="General Conference Mennonite Church" label="General Conference Mennonite Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920636" start="1730" end="1750" title="Mennonite Church USA" label="Mennonite Church USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="2158" end="2173" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="2228" end="2233" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="2234" end="2240" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q37302" start="2242" end="2253" title="Holy Spirit" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="2407" end="2414" title="Baptism" label="Baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="2416" end="2438" title="Eucharist" label="The Lord&amp;#x27;s Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351369" start="2440" end="2452" title="Feet washing" label="Foot Washing"/>
<link wikidata="Q744587" start="3556" end="3582" title="Mennonite World Conference" label="Mennonite World Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149619" start="3635" end="3657" title="Columbia Bible College" label="Columbia Bible College"/>
<link wikidata="Q271730" start="3661" end="3689" title="Abbotsford, British Columbia" label="Abbotsford, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750556" start="3699" end="3737" title="Anabaptist Mennonite Biblical Seminary" label="Anabaptist Mennonite Biblical Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008706" start="3741" end="3748" title="Elkhart, Indiana" label="Elkhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="3753" end="3760" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162525" start="3806" end="3838" title="Conrad Grebel University College" label="Conrad Grebel University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q639408" start="3842" end="3859" title="Waterloo, Ontario" label="Waterloo, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030319" start="3868" end="3897" title="Canadian Mennonite University" label="Canadian Mennonite University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="3901" end="3909" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261136" start="4064" end="4072" title="Der Bote" label="Der Bote"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424252" wikidata="Q3306313" url="?curid=424252" title="Culture of Bolivia">
<text>[[Bolivia]] is a country in South America, bordered by Brazil to the north and east, Paraguay and Argentina to the south, Chile to the west, and Peru to the west.

The cultural development of what is now Bolivia is divided into three distinct periods: pre-Columbian, colonial, and republican. Important archaeological ruins, gold and silver ornaments, stone monuments, ceramics, and weavings remain from several important pre-Columbian cultures. Major ruins include Tiwanaku, Samaipata, Inkallaqta and Iskanwaya. The country abounds in other sites that are difficult to reach and hardly explored by archaeologists.

The Spanish brought their own tradition of religious art which, in the hands of local indigenous and &quot;mestizo&quot; builders and artisans, developed into a rich and distinctive style of architecture, literature, and sculpture known as &quot;Mestizo Baroque.&quot; The colonial period produced not only the paintings of Perez de Holguin, Flores, Bitti, and others, but also the works of skilled but unknown stonecutters, woodcarvers, goldsmiths, and silversmiths. An important body of native baroque religious music of the colonial period was recovered in recent years and has been performed internationally to wide acclaim since 1994. Bolivian artists of stature in the 20th century include, among others, Guzman de Rojas, Arturo Borda, María Luisa Pacheco, Master William Vega, Alfredo Da Silva, and Marina Núñez del Prado.

==Festivals==
Pagan rites from the pre-Columbian era are still common during the religious festivals of the Natives. The clothing used during the festivals is reminiscent of the dress of pre-Columbian Indians and 16th century Spaniards. The at the annual carnival of Oruro are among the great folkloric events of South America, as are the lesser known indigenous &quot;Anata Andina&quot; and the &quot;carnival&quot; at Tarabuco (&quot;Pujllay&quot;), or the &quot;Tinku&quot; - fertility rites held at Macha every 3 May. They also celebrate Dia de los Muertos.

==Dances==
Many dances and songs contain elements from both the native and European cultures. &quot;Caporales&quot; seems to be the most popular Bolivian dance of present times – in a few decades it has developed into an enormously popular dance, not only in the Highlands where it originated, but also in the Lowlands and in Bolivian communities outside the country. In the Highlands, other traditional and still very popular dances are: 

* Awki awki
* Cambitas
* Ch&#x27;utas
* Diablada
* Kullawada
* Llamerada
* Morenada
* Pukllay
* Afro-Bolivian Saya
* Siklla (Wayra, Doctorcitos)
* Suri Sikuri
* Tango
* Tinku
* Tobas
* Waka Waka 
In the Lowlands, there are:
* Macheteros
* Taquirari
* Chovena
==Clothing==

Clothing of Andean people of indigenous descent includes the pollera (pleated-skirt), the 19th century European bowler hat, and a silky shawl known as a manta. The pollera was originally a simple Spanish dress that colonial authorities forced the indigenous populations to wear. The pollera is a symbol of pride for the indigenous people, who live in La Paz, and for people in rural areas.
The inhabitants of Santa Cruz de la Sierra, from babies to seniors, wear the same kind of clothes that are typical in western countries, like jeans, shorts (which are the most common because of the heat), t-shirts, dresses, etc.

==Sports==
Association football is the most popular sport in Bolivia. The governing body of football in Bolivia is the Federación Boliviana de Fútbol (FBF), which controls the national teams. The FBF organises the men&#x27;s, women&#x27;s, and futsal national teams.

The Bolivia national football team is currently ranked 75th in the world, with their best FIFA ranking being 18th in the world. The national team has competed at the FIFA World Cup three times, the Copa América 23 times, and the Confederations Cup once.

La Paz has the highest tournament-class golf course in the world.

Bolivia&#x27;s national basketball team finished 8th at the 2016 South American Basketball Championship. There, Bolivia beat Ecuador 75-74 for its first victory ever at the event. Bolivia&#x27;s women&#x27;s national basketball team won the silver medal at the 1978 South American Basketball Championship for Women.

=== Stadiums in Bolivia ===

For football stadiums in Bolivia, see List of football stadiums in Bolivia. Indoor stadiums in Bolivia can be found in the table below.
==Cuisine==
Bolivian cuisine stems mainly from the combination of Spanish cuisine with traditional native Bolivian ingredients, with later influences from Germans, Italians, Basques, Croats, Russians, and Poles, due to the arrival of immigrants from those countries. The three traditional staples of Bolivian cuisine are maize, potatoes, and beans. These ingredients have been combined with a number of staples brought by the Europeans, such as rice, wheat, and meat, such as beef, pork, and chicken.

==Music==
Bolivia&#x27;s regional folk music is distinctive and varied. In the Andean regions, music is played during the festivals and dances. Some tunes contain strong Spanish influences.

The most common musical instruments are:
* &quot;Sicu&quot; (also &quot;sicus&quot;)
* &quot;Tarka&quot; or &quot;tharqa&quot;
* &quot;Pinkillo&quot;
* Skin drums
* Copper bells
* Wood
* Guitar
* Flute
* &quot;Zampoña&quot;
* &quot;Matraca&quot;
* &quot;Mandolina&quot;
* Charango
* &quot;Quena&quot;

==See also==

* Architecture of Bolivia
* Andean culture
* Hispanic culture
* Latin American culture
* Performing Life, Inc, NGO
* Lists of stadiums

==References==

==External links==
* Culture of Bolivia (languagecrossing.com)
* Languages spoken in Bolivia
* Culture of the Andes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3306313" start="0" end="11" title="Culture of Bolivia" label="[[Bolivia]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="55" end="61" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="85" end="93" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="98" end="107" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="122" end="127" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="145" end="149" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="369" end="377" title="Pottery" label="ceramics"/>
<link wikidata="Q61750" start="466" end="474" title="Tiwanaku" label="Tiwanaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014461" start="476" end="485" title="Samaipata, Bolivia" label="Samaipata"/>
<link wikidata="Q970713" start="487" end="497" title="Inkallaqta" label="Inkallaqta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674009" start="502" end="511" title="Iskanwaya" label="Iskanwaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794820" start="1027" end="1039" title="Stonemasonry" label="stonecutters"/>
<link wikidata="Q211423" start="1054" end="1063" title="goldsmith" label="goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216340" start="1070" end="1081" title="silversmith" label="silversmith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1327" end="1342" title="Guzman de Rojas" label="Guzman de Rojas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1344" end="1356" title="Arturo Borda" label="Arturo Borda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218688" start="1358" end="1377" title="María Luisa Pacheco" label="María Luisa Pacheco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1379" end="1398" title="Master William Vega" label="Master William Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723751" start="1400" end="1416" title="Alfredo Da Silva" label="Alfredo Da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763879" start="1422" end="1444" title="Marina Núñez del Prado" label="Marina Núñez del Prado"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="1461" end="1466" title="Paganism" label="Pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="1482" end="1495" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="1673" end="1682" title="Spaniards" label="Spaniards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500828" start="1702" end="1719" title="Carnaval de Oruro" label="carnival of Oruro"/>
<link wikidata="Q115203595" start="1883" end="1890" title="Pujllay" label="Pujllay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529199" start="1912" end="1917" title="Tinku" label="Tinku"/>
<link wikidata="Q536422" start="2110" end="2119" title="Caporales" label="Caporales"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002041" start="2453" end="2462" title="Awki awki" label="Awki awki"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080921" start="2491" end="2499" title="Diablada" label="Diablada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200329" start="2502" end="2511" title="Kullawada" label="Kullawada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835724" start="2514" end="2523" title="Llamerada" label="Llamerada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640587" start="2526" end="2534" title="Morenada" label="Morenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q115203595" start="2537" end="2544" title="Pukllay" label="Pukllay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826241" start="2547" end="2560" title="Afro-Bolivian" label="Afro-Bolivian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189458" start="2568" end="2574" title="Siklla" label="Siklla"/>
<link wikidata="Q338450" start="2612" end="2617" title="Tango" label="Tango"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529199" start="2620" end="2625" title="Tinku" label="Tinku"/>
<link wikidata="Q951315" start="2628" end="2633" title="Tobas (dance)" label="Tobas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191101" start="2636" end="2645" title="Waka waka (dance)" label="Waka Waka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135871" start="2785" end="2792" title="pollera" label="pollera"/>
<link wikidata="Q650570" start="2836" end="2846" title="bowler hat" label="bowler hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751959" start="2877" end="2882" title="Manta (dress)" label="manta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6091085" start="3044" end="3061" title="Indigenous peoples in Bolivia" label="indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="3355" end="3375" title="Association football" label="Association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q834333" start="3463" end="3493" title="Federación Boliviana de Fútbol" label="Federación Boliviana de Fútbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q193386" start="3558" end="3568" title="Bolivia national football team" label="men&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q891377" start="3570" end="3582" title="Bolivia women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="women&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q135093" start="3588" end="3594" title="Bolivia national futsal team" label="futsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q193386" start="3616" end="3646" title="Bolivia national football team" label="Bolivia national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q125351662" start="3702" end="3714" title="FIFA ranking" label="FIFA ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="3778" end="3792" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q178750" start="3810" end="3822" title="Copa América" label="Copa América"/>
<link wikidata="Q171789" start="3841" end="3859" title="Confederations Cup" label="Confederations Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589918" start="3934" end="3973" title="Bolivia&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Bolivia&amp;#x27;s national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q22674803" start="3994" end="4037" title="2016 South American Basketball Championship" label="2016 South American Basketball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988659" start="4059" end="4066" title="Ecuador national basketball team" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q11327683" start="4114" end="4166" title="Bolivia&amp;#x27;s women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Bolivia&amp;#x27;s women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948950" start="4200" end="4248" title="South American Basketball Championship for Women" label="South American Basketball Championship for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620893" start="4318" end="4354" title="List of football stadiums in Bolivia" label="List of football stadiums in Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006895" start="4428" end="4444" title="Bolivian cuisine" label="Bolivian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q622512" start="4482" end="4497" title="Spanish cuisine" label="Spanish cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="4571" end="4578" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="4580" end="4588" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="4590" end="4597" title="Basques" label="Basques"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="4599" end="4605" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="4607" end="4615" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="4621" end="4626" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="4737" end="4742" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="4744" end="4752" title="potatoes" label="potatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="4758" end="4763" title="beans" label="beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="4861" end="4865" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="4867" end="4872" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q192628" start="4892" end="4896" title="beef" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q191768" start="4898" end="4902" title="pork" label="pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="4908" end="4915" title="chicken" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="4952" end="4962" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q905244" start="5158" end="5162" title="Siku (instrument)" label="Sicu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123270" start="5202" end="5207" title="Tarka (flute)" label="Tarka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123270" start="5223" end="5229" title="tharqa" label="tharqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372035" start="5244" end="5252" title="Pinkillo" label="Pinkillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="5296" end="5302" title="Guitar" label="Guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="5305" end="5310" title="Flute" label="Flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q905244" start="5319" end="5326" title="Zampoña" label="Zampoña"/>
<link wikidata="Q954753" start="5341" end="5348" title="Matraca" label="Matraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158627" start="5363" end="5372" title="Mandolina conchera" label="Mandolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q468776" start="5381" end="5389" title="Charango" label="Charango"/>
<link wikidata="Q841005" start="5398" end="5403" title="Quena" label="Quena"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065942" start="5427" end="5450" title="Architecture of Bolivia" label="Architecture of Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753658" start="5453" end="5467" title="Andean culture (disambiguation)" label="Andean culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="5470" end="5486" title="Hispanic culture" label="Hispanic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496275" start="5489" end="5511" title="Latin American culture" label="Latin American culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168287" start="5514" end="5534" title="Performing Life, Inc" label="Performing Life, Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="5536" end="5539" title="NGO" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196333" start="5542" end="5559" title="Lists of stadiums" label="Lists of stadiums"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424253" wikidata="Q9539" url="?curid=424253" title="GarageBand">
<text>GarageBand is a software application by Apple for macOS, iPadOS, and iOS devices that allows users to create music or podcasts. It is a lighter, amateur-oriented offshoot of Logic Pro. GarageBand was originally released for macOS in 2004 and brought to iOS in 2011. The app&#x27;s music and podcast creation system enables users to create multiple tracks with software synthesizer presets (to be played on a MIDI keyboard and/or sequenced on a piano roll), pre-made and user-created loops, an array of various effects, and voice recordings.

== History ==
GarageBand was developed by Apple under the direction of Dr. Gerhard Lengeling. Dr. Lengeling was formerly from the German company Emagic, makers of Logic Audio (later renamed Logic Pro). Apple acquired Emagic in July 2002. It developed GarageBand as a lighter version of Logic Pro (with the intermediate application Logic Express offered for a brief period), and each version of GarageBand resembles the current version of Logic aesthetically in addition to featuring its audio engine. 

Steve Jobs announced the application in his keynote speech at the Macworld Conference &amp; Expo in San Francisco on January 6, 2004. Musician John Mayer assisted with its demonstration. It is part of the iLife &#x27;04 package.

Apple announced GarageBand 2 at the 2005 Macworld Conference &amp; Expo on January 11, 2005. It shipped, as announced, around January 22, 2005. Notable new features included the abilities to view and edit music in musical notation. It was also possible to record up to eight tracks at once and to fix timing and pitch of recordings. Apple added automation of track pan position and the master pitch. Transposition of both audio and MIDI has been added by Apple along with the ability to import MIDI files. It is part of iLife &#x27;05.

GarageBand 3, announced at 2006&#x27;s Macworld Conference &amp; Expo, includes a &#x27;podcast studio&#x27;, including the ability to use more than 200 effects and jingles, and integration with iChat for remote interviews. It is part of iLife &#x27;06.

GarageBand 4, also known as GarageBand &#x27;08, is part of iLife &#x27;08. It incorporates the ability to record sections of a song separately, such as bridges, and chorus lines. Additionally, it provides support for the automation of tempos and instruments, the creation, and exportation of iPhone ringtones, and a &quot;Magic GarageBand&quot; feature which includes a virtual jam session with a complete 3D view of the Electric instruments.

GarageBand 5 is part of the iLife &#x27;09 package. It includes music instruction and allows the user to buy instructional videos by contemporary artists. It also contains new features for electric guitar players, including a dedicated 3D Electric Guitar Track containing a virtual stomp box pedalboard, and virtual amplifiers with spring reverb and tremolo. GarageBand 5 also includes a redesigned user interface as well as Project Templates.

GarageBand 6, also known as GarageBand &#x27;11, is part of the iLife &#x27;11 package, which Apple released on October 20, 2010. This version brings new features such as Flex Time, a tool to adjust the rhythm of a recording. It also includes the ability to match the tempo of one track with another instantly, additional guitar amps and stomp boxes, 22 new lessons for guitar and piano, and &quot;How Did I Play?&quot;, a tool to measure the accuracy and progress of a piano or guitar performance in a lesson.

Apple released GarageBand 10 along with OS X 10.9 Mavericks in October 2013. This version has lost Magic GarageBand and the podcast functionality.

Apple updated GarageBand 10 for Mac on March 20, 2014. Version 10.0.2 adds the ability to export tracks in MP3 format as well as a new drummer module, but removed support for podcasting; users with podcast files created in GarageBand 6 can continue to edit them using the older version.

GarageBand was updated to version 10.0.3 on October 16, 2014. This version adds a dedicated Bass Amp Designer, global track effects and dynamic track resizing.

Apple released GarageBand 10.2 on June 5, 2017.

== Features ==

=== Audio recording ===
GarageBand is a digital audio workstation (DAW) and music sequencer that can record and play back multiple tracks of audio. Built-in audio filters that use the AU (audio unit) standard allow the user to enhance the audio track with various effects, including reverb, echo, and distortion amongst others. GarageBand also offers the ability to record at both 16-bit and 24-bit Audio Resolution, but at a fixed sample rate of 44.1 kHz. An included tuning system helps with pitch correction and can effectively imitate the Auto-Tune effect when tuned to the maximum level. It also has a large array of preset effects to choose from, with an option to create one&#x27;s own effects.

=== Virtual software instruments ===
GarageBand includes a large selection of realistic, sampled instruments and software-modeled synthesizers. These can be used to create original compositions or play music live through the use of a USB MIDI keyboard connected to the computer. An on-screen virtual keyboard is also available as well as using a standard QWERTY keyboard with the &quot;musical typing&quot; feature. The synthesizers were broken into two groups: [virtual] analog and digital. Each synthesizer has a wide variety of adjustable parameters, including richness, glide, cut off, standard attack, decay, sustain, and release; these allow for a wide array of sound creation. The five synth thumbnails are the ARP 2600, the Minimoog, the Waldorf Wave, the Nord Lead 1 and the Yamaha DX7.

=== Guitar features ===
In addition to the standard tracks, Garageband allows for guitar-specific tracks that can use a variety of simulated amplifiers, stomp boxes, and effects processors. These imitate popular hardware from companies including Marshall Amplification, Orange Music Electronic Company, and Fender Musical Instruments Corporation. Up to five simulated effects can be layered on top of the virtual amplifiers, which feature adjustable parameters including tone, reverb, and volume. Guitars can be connected to Macs using the built-in input (requires hardware that can produce a standard stereo signal using a 3.5mm output) or a USB interface.

=== MIDI editing ===
GarageBand can import MIDI files and offers piano roll or notation-style editing and playback. By complying with the MIDI Standard, a user can edit many different aspects of a recorded note, including pitch, velocity, and duration. Pitch was settable to 1/128 of a semitone, on a scale of 0–127 (sometimes described on a scale of 1–128 for clarity). Velocity, which determines amplitude (volume), can be set and adjusted on a scale of 0–127. Note duration can be adjusted manually via the piano roll or in the score view. Note rhythms can be played via the software instruments, or created in the piano roll environment; rhythm correction is also included to lock notes to any time signature subdivision. GarageBand also offers global editing capabilities to MIDI information with Enhanced Timing, also known as Quantizing. While offering comprehensive control over MIDI files, GarageBand does not include several features of professional-level DAWs, such as a sequencer for drum tracks separate from the normal piano roll. However, many of these shortcomings have been addressed with each successive release of GarageBand.

Also of note, MIDI sequences edited or created in GarageBand cannot be exported to other DAWs or programs without first being converted to audio. A MIDI file can be extracted from a loop file created from a region, but this is not a general MIDI export facility, using manual steps and an open-source program.

=== Music lessons ===
A new feature included with GarageBand &#x27;09 and later is the ability to download pre-recorded music lessons from GarageBand&#x27;s Lesson Store for guitar and piano. There are two types of lessons available in the Lesson Store: &quot;Basic Lessons&quot;, which are a free download, and &quot;Artist Lessons&quot;, which a user must purchase. The first Basic Lessons for both guitar and piano are included with GarageBand. In GarageBand 10, many sounds (aka patches, which Apple refers to as &#x27;audio units&#x27;) that are listed within the sound library are dimmed and unusable until the user pays an additional fee that allows the utilization of those sounds, bundled with the guitar and piano lessons. Attempting to click on and select the dimmed audio units to apply to the track causes promotional prompts to appear, requiring the user to log on with their Apple ID and furnish credit card information before knowing the price of the bundle.

In both types of lessons, a music teacher presents the lesson, which is in a special format offering high-quality video and audio instructions. The lessons include a virtual guitar or piano, which demonstrates finger position and a musical notation area to show the correct musical notations. The music examples used in these lessons feature popular music.

In an &quot;Artist Lesson&quot; the music teacher is the actual musician/songwriter who composed the song being taught in the lesson. the artists featured are:
*Sting (The Police) — &quot;Roxanne&quot;, &quot;Message in a Bottle&quot;, &quot;Fragile&quot;
*Sarah McLachlan — &quot;Angel&quot;
*Patrick Stump of Fall Out Boy — &quot;I Don&#x27;t Care&quot;, &quot;Sugar, We&#x27;re Goin&#x27; Down&quot;
*Norah Jones — &quot;Thinking About You&quot;
*Colbie Caillat — &quot;Bubbly&quot;
*Sara Bareilles — &quot;Love Song&quot;
*John Fogerty (Creedence Clearwater Revival) — &quot;Proud Mary&quot;, &quot;Fortunate Son&quot;, &quot;Centerfield&quot;
*Ryan Tedder (OneRepublic) — &quot;Apologize&quot;
*Ben Folds — &quot;Brick&quot;, &quot;Zak and Sara&quot;
*John Legend — &quot;Ordinary People&quot;
*Alex Lifeson (Rush) — &quot;Tom Sawyer&quot;, &quot;Limelight&quot;, &quot;Working Man&quot;, &quot;The Spirit of Radio&quot;.

No new &quot;Artist Lessons&quot; were released in 2010, and Apple has not announced plans to release additional entries.

In June 2018, the GarageBand 10.3 update made Artist Lessons free.

=== Additional audio loops ===

Garageband includes an extensive selection of pre-made audio loops to choose from with an option to import custom sound loops and an additional loop pack that is purchasable via the App Store. All loops have an edit and effects option.

The Additional Audio Loops are as follows

==== Jam Packs ====

Jam Packs are Apple&#x27;s official add-ons for GarageBand. Each Jam Pack contains loops and software instruments grouped into certain genres and styles.

The Jam Packs are as follows:
* GarageBand Jam Pack: Remix Tools
* GarageBand Jam Pack: Rhythm Section
* GarageBand Jam Pack: Symphony Orchestra
* GarageBand Jam Pack: World Music
* GarageBand Jam Pack: Voices

There was also another GarageBand Jam Pack, initially known just as GarageBand Jam Pack, later GarageBand Jam Pack 1, which Apple discontinued in January 2006. Beginning with the release of the Remix Tools and Rhythm Section Jam Packs, each Jam Pack has been designated with a number. The release of GarageBand Jam Pack: World Music also saw a redesign in packaging.

==== MainStage 2 ====
MainStage 2 by Apple also includes 40 built-in instruments – including synths, vintage keyboards, and a drum machine – to use in GarageBand. It also features an interface for live performances and includes a large collection of plug-ins and sounds.

=== Third-party instrument and Apple Loop packages ===
In addition to Apple, many other companies today offer commercial or shareware virtual software instruments designed especially for GarageBand, and collections of Apple Loops intended for GarageBand users.

GarageBand can also use any third-party software synthesizer that adheres to the Core Audio (Audio Units) standard. However, there are limitations, including that Audio Unit instruments which can respond to multiple MIDI channels or ports can be triggered only on the first channel of the first port. This means that multi-timbral instruments that contain multiple channels and respond to many MIDI channels, such as Native Instruments Kontakt and MOTU MachFive, are not ideally suited for use in GarageBand.

Third-party vendors also offer extra loops for use in GarageBand. Users can also record custom loops through a microphone, via a software instrument, or by using an audio interface to connect physically a guitar or other hardware instruments to a Mac or iOS device.

=== Sample multitrack source files ===
In 2005, Trent Reznor from the band Nine Inch Nails released the source multitrack GarageBand files for the song &quot;The Hand That Feeds&quot; to allow the public to experiment with his music, and permitted prospective GarageBand users to remix the song. He also gave permission for anyone to share their personalized remix with the world. Since then, Nine Inch Nails has released several more GarageBand source files, and several other artists have also released their GarageBand files that the public could use to experiment.

New Zealand band Evermore also released the source multi-track files for GarageBand for their song &quot;Never Let You Go&quot;.

Ben Folds released &quot;Stems &amp; Seeds&quot;, a special version of his 2008 album &quot;Way to Normal&quot;. &quot;Stems and Seeds&quot; contained a remastered version of &quot;Way to Normal&quot;, and a separate disc containing GarageBand files for each track from the album to allow fans to remix the songs.

=== Limitations ===
A lack of MIDI-out capability limits the use of external MIDI instruments. There is also only limited support for messages sent from knobs on MIDI keyboards, as only real-time pitch bend, modulation, sustain, and foot control are recognizable. However, since GarageBand &#x27;08, other parameters affected by MIDI knobs can be automated later, per-track. GarageBand has no functions for changing time signature mid-song though the software does now allow a tempo track to automate tempo changes.

Other than pitch bend, GarageBand is limited to the pitches and intervals of standard 12-tone equal temperament, so it does not natively support xenharmonic music. Logic Pro supports many different tunings. GarageBand does not support different tunings; however, audio units which support micro tuning (using or files, or some other method) can be employed in GarageBand to produce alternative pitches.

Before GarageBand 10, there was no export option, and the only option was to save files as or export to iTunes. There is no built-in MIDI export feature, although regions can be manually exported as loops and converted to MIDI files.

== GarageBand for iOS ==

On March 2, 2011, Apple announced a version of GarageBand for the iPad. It has many features similar to the macOS version. Music can be created using the on-screen instruments, which include keyboards, drums, a sampler, and various &quot;smart instruments&quot;. It also acts as a multitrack recording studio with stomp box effects and guitar amps. Songs can be emailed or sent to an iTunes Library. Additionally, projects can be imported to GarageBand for macOS, where they are further editable. This feature also allows instruments from the iOS platform to be savable to software instrument library on the Mac. However, projects created in the macOS version cannot be opened in the iOS version. The app is compatible with iPhone 3GS or higher, the third generation iPod Touch or higher, and all versions of the iPad, including the iPad Mini. The app, with all instruments included, was available for $6.99 from the Apple App Store. In 2017, it was made free.

=== Instruments ===
GarageBand comes with a wide range of instruments. All non-drum instruments (with the exception of the koto) come with the functionality to limit the note selection to different musical scales.

==== Keyboard ====
The keyboard is set up like a standard keyboard, and features several keyboard instruments, including grand piano, electric piano, various organs, clavinet, synth leads, synth pads, and bass synths. It also has many different non-keyboard instrument sounds including versions of many of the other instruments, for example users can use the keyboard to play guitar, bass and string sounds. In version 2.2, the Alchemy Synth synth engine from Logic Pro was also added to the keyboard. The keyboard has several additional features including a pitch bend, arpeggiator and &quot;autoplay&quot; function (which will play one of four rhythms for each instrument). Many of the instruments have adjustable parameters such as Attack, Cutoff and Resonance. Prior to version 2.2 there was also a separate &quot;Smart Keyboard&quot; instrument which was arranged like the other smart instruments, allowing the user to play chords on a limited selection of keyboard instruments (piano, electric piano, organ, clavinet, and four adjustable synthesizers). This functionality has since been integrated into the main keyboard instrument in version 2.2 with the new &quot;Chord Strips&quot; that allow the user to access the layout from the Smart Keyboard using any keyboard instrument.

==== Drums ====
There are three different kinds of drum instruments in GarageBand. The touch drums instrument includes by default seven acoustic drum kits with a realistic drum kit layout, and twelve electronic drum kits (including Hip Hop drums, House drums, and drum kits with Roland TR-808 and 909 samples). The electronic kits are set up like drum machines with customizable sounds that can be saved as separate drum kits. The Chinese Kit was later added in version, which included genuine Chinese sounds like the gong. The &quot;Smart Drums&quot; instrument allows the arranging of drum sounds on a grid by complexity and volume. It contains a selection of six drums (Classic Studio Kit, Live Rock Kit, Vintage Kit, Classic Drum Machine, Hip Hop Drum Machine, and House Drum Machine). The &quot;Beat Sequencer&quot; involves the placement of steps to form a beat pattern. There are many pre-set patterns to choose from and users can customise aspects of the pattern such as note velocity and probability.

==== Smart Guitar ====
GarageBand includes five guitars: an acoustic guitar, three electric guitars, and a distortion guitar. Each guitar (except for the acoustic one) has two optional sound boxes. The instrument is set up with two different modes. The first is set up like the Chord Strips, where multiple chords are playable. Each note in a chord can also be played separately, or muted by holding the left side of the string. This mode includes an autoplay feature which will play one of four different rhythms depending on which guitar is chosen.

==== Smart Bass ====
The bass instrument is set up like the guitar, where four strings can play various notes. However, the bass cannot play chords. Included are three electric basses, an acoustic orchestral bass, and four customizable synth basses. Like the smart keyboard and smart guitars, there is an &quot;autoplay&quot; feature.

==== Smart Strings ====
Smart Strings were added in version 1.2 and consist of a string section made of 1st and 2nd violins, violas, cellos, and bass. They are capable of playing notes legato, staccato, and pizzicato depending on if the user swipes up and down, flicks or taps their screen respectively. The orchestra is customizable, including four different string styles (all with a different &quot;autoplay&quot; feature) and the option to choose which instruments to play. For example, one can play a chord made up of all the available instruments, or simply play a violin note.

==== World ====
World instruments were added in version 2.3 which allow the user to play traditional Chinese and Japanese instruments. The instruments available are the pipa, erhu, koto and guzheng.

==== Drummer ====
The Drummer was added in version 2.1 and is a virtual player who will create realistic drum grooves. There are numerous drummers to choose from in various genres. Each drummer has a unique kit, which can be an acoustic, electronic or percussion drum kit. Users can also customise the playing style of each drummer, including choosing from various preset rhythms. They can also adjust which parts of the drum kit the drummer will play, the amount of swing and if the drummer should follow the rhythm of another track.

==== Sampler ====
In the sampler, the user can import or record their own sound and then play it on the keyboard (it has the same interface as the keyboard instrument). After the sound has been recorded or imported, it can be modified with a various amount of tools within the sampler in order to trim or reverse the sample, loop a section of it or adjust the tuning and volume envelope of the sample. The app comes with numerous sound effects such as a dog bark, party horn and cheering already available to use in the sampler.

==== Audio recorder ====
The audio recorded is a standard recorder for recording and editing audio. Audio can be recorded through the device&#x27;s internal microphone, a headphone microphone or external microphone connected to the device via an audio interface. After the sound has been recorded, many audio effects can be applied. The recorder comes with various presets designed for recording different sounds like guitar, piano or lead vocals, all with adjustable parameters.

==== Amp ====
The amp is designed to be played by plugging a guitar or bass into the device and recording, but can also work with sounds from the audio recorder, included Apple Loops, and imported music files. Within it are several customizable amplifiers and stomp boxes, allowing for a broad range of different sounds.

==== External apps ====
Third-party music apps can be used inside GarageBand in one of two ways. The Audio Unit Extensions feature allows third-party instruments and effect plug-ins to be played and used directly inside GarageBand as if they were native to the app. The Inter-App Audio functionality lets users record audio from another app into GarageBand.

==== Sound Library ====
The Sound Library was added in November 2017 with the 2.3.1 update and lets the user download additional free instruments, drummers and loops released as Sound Packs that are added to the app over time.

=== Updates ===

On November 1, 2011, Apple introduced GarageBand for iOS 1.1, adding support for the iPhone and iPod Touch, among other features. These included the ability to create custom and time signatures, and exporting in AAC or AIFF format.

On March 7, 2012, Apple updated GarageBand to 1.2, adding support for the third-generation iPad. It introduced the new Smart Strings instrument, a string orchestra of 1st and 2nd violins, violas, celli, and bass, capable of playing notes legato, staccato, and pizzicato. Additionally, it added synthesizers to the Smart Keyboard and Smart Bass instruments. It also added a note editor that allows users to fine-tune note placement and length and the ability to upload songs to Facebook, YouTube and SoundCloud, as well as the ability to upload projects to iCloud. It also included Jam Session, a feature that enables up to four iPhones, iPod Touches, and/or iPads with GarageBand installed to play simultaneously.

On May 1, 2012, GarageBand was updated to 1.2.1, providing minor bug fixes and stability improvements.

Alongside the new iOS 6, Apple updated GarageBand to 1.3 on September 19, 2012. The update added the ability to import music from one&#x27;s music library, ringtone creation, the ability to use the app in the background, and minor bug fixes.

GarageBand was updated to 1.4 on March 20, 2013. The update added support for Audiobus, the ability to remove grid snapping, and minor bug fixes.

GarageBand received an overhaul of design coinciding with the reveal of the iPad Air on October 22, 2013. GarageBand 2.0 features a new design to match iOS 7, an extended number of tracks per song, and new functions in the Sampler instrument.

In January 2016, version 2.1 was released in which GarageBand received a new Live Loops layout that lets users create and perform music by triggering loops and adding effects in real-time. Other features in the update included the ability to add a virtual Drummer, increased maximum number of tracks up to 32, the ability to edit volume automation curves and the addition of basic EQ and compressor plug-ins. Amplifiers for bass guitars were also added. Third-party instrument apps could now be used inside GarageBand via Audio Unit Extensions.

In January 2017, version 2.2 was released with a number of new features including the Alchemy Synth previously only available in Logic Pro. Audio Unit Extension compatibility was updated to also allow third-party effects apps to be used.

A new Sound Library was added in November 2017 which allows users to download additional free instruments and loops released as part of Sound Packs that are added to the app over time. A new Beat Sequencer for creating drum beats was also added in this update.

MIDI support was added in update 2.3.6 in September 2018.

In July 2021, GarageBand released multiple new Sound Packs with loops and instruments from many producers such as Boys Noize, as well as two Remix Sessions from Dua Lipa and Lady Gaga that allow users to remix their songs.

In August 2022, GarageBand released two Remix Sessions from Seventeen and Katy Perry.

In December 2022, GarageBand released a Remix Session from Zedd.

=== Differences from MacOS version ===

*No Music Lessons.
*Only three time signatures (, , and ).
*No master track.
*Automation is only available for volume.
*Live Loops layout.
*Audio Unit Extensions (via App Store).
*A Sound Library providing free, downloadable content such as additional keyboards, drum sets, and more.
*Limited exporting functions (As of 2.3.3, the option to export recorded projects as songs to YouTube has been removed).

== Availability ==
Prior to the launch of Apple&#x27;s Mac App Store, GarageBand was only available as a part of iLife, a suite of applications (also including iPhoto, iMovie, iDVD, and iWeb) intended to simplify the creation and organization of digital content, or available on a new Mac. On January 6, 2011, GarageBand was made available independently on the Mac App Store in addition to iPhoto and iMovie. Since then GarageBand&#x27;s user base has increased drastically.

== Notable users ==
GarageBand has been embraced by many musicians of varying levels of fame in order to record and produce music. Steve Lacy used the GarageBand app on his cracked 2012 iPhone to produce music for his solo projects, the Internet, and J. Cole. That phone is currently on display in the Smithsonian. Nine Inch Nails made their song &quot;The Hand That Feeds&quot; in the software, and released a link to the multitrack GarageBand file on the band&#x27;s website, allowing other GarageBand users to remix the song. Musicians that have collaborated with Apple to promote GarageBand include Katy Perry, John Mayer, Dua Lipa, Billie Eilish, and Lady Gaga. Charlotte Day Wilson, Doja Cat, Ellie Rowsell (of Wolf Alice), Sloan Struble (of Dayglow), Meghan Trainor, Ethel Cain, and Awkwafina all began learning to produce and create music using GarageBand. GarageBand was also used by artists such as T-Pain; Grimes for her album &quot;Visions&quot;; St. Vincent for multiple projects; Danielle Haim for Haim songs, with the song &quot;Summer Girl&quot; starting out as a GarageBand demo; and Jesse Rutherford for his sophomore solo album, GARAGEB&amp;, named after the application, as he produced most of the tracks in GarageBand. In addition, Rihanna&#x27;s hit &quot;Umbrella&quot; was born from a stock GarageBand drum track. Fiona Apple largely recorded her album &quot;Fetch the Bolt Cutters&quot; at home with GarageBand. As well, the music for the viral internet video &quot;Charlie the Unicorn&quot; was recorded in GarageBand.

== Supported music file formats ==
This app supports many music formats, including AIFF, WAV, and MIDI. The app can export songs to AAC, MP3, MP4 or AIFF format.

Support for 8-bit audio files was dropped in version 10.

== See also ==
*List of MIDI editors and sequencers
*List of music software

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9539" start="0" end="10" title="GarageBand" label="GarageBand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="16" end="24" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="40" end="45" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="50" end="55" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q64350339" start="57" end="63" title="iPadOS" label="iPadOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="69" end="72" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="109" end="114" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="118" end="126" title="Podcast" label="podcasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057445" start="174" end="183" title="Logic Pro" label="Logic Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897589" start="360" end="380" title="software synthesizer" label="software synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758908" start="483" end="488" title="Loop (music)" label="loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q875408" start="687" end="693" title="Emagic" label="Emagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057445" start="732" end="741" title="Logic Pro" label="Logic Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="1045" end="1055" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421427" start="1111" end="1141" title="Macworld Conference &amp;amp; Expo" label="Macworld Conference &amp;amp; Expo"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="1145" end="1158" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q215215" start="1188" end="1198" title="John Mayer (musician)" label="John Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9532" start="1250" end="1255" title="iLife" label="iLife"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="1489" end="1505" title="musical notation" label="musical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="1587" end="1592" title="Pitch (music)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="1707" end="1711" title="MIDI" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="1900" end="1907" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q58144" start="2007" end="2012" title="iChat" label="iChat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109478" start="2220" end="2227" title="bridge (music)" label="bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q191609" start="2233" end="2245" title="refrain" label="chorus lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="2303" end="2308" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q312543" start="2446" end="2457" title="jam session" label="jam session"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="2701" end="2716" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="2794" end="2814" title="Effects unit" label="stomp box pedalboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748503" start="2820" end="2838" title="amplifier modeling" label="virtual amplifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q107410546" start="2851" end="2857" title="Reverb effect" label="reverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064632" start="2862" end="2869" title="tremolo" label="tremolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339359" start="3279" end="3290" title="Guitar amplifier" label="guitar amps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998771" start="3295" end="3306" title="stomp boxes" label="stomp boxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="3327" end="3333" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="3338" end="3343" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q42591" start="3724" end="3727" title="MP3" label="MP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060750" start="4171" end="4196" title="digital audio workstation" label="digital audio workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q646683" start="4207" end="4222" title="music sequencer" label="music sequencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q595239" start="4315" end="4317" title="Audio Units" label="AU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431161" start="4512" end="4518" title="audio bit depth" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431161" start="4523" end="4529" title="audio bit depth" label="24-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q784762" start="4674" end="4683" title="Auto-Tune" label="Auto-Tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="4964" end="4975" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966781" start="5072" end="5085" title="MIDI keyboard" label="MIDI keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="5126" end="5133" title="Virtuality" label="virtual"/>
<link wikidata="Q901207" start="5134" end="5142" title="musical keyboard" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q253" start="5189" end="5195" title="QWERTY" label="QWERTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q296868" start="5552" end="5560" title="ARP 2600" label="ARP 2600"/>
<link wikidata="Q734687" start="5566" end="5574" title="Minimoog" label="Minimoog"/>
<link wikidata="Q834812" start="5580" end="5592" title="Waldorf Music" label="Waldorf Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099044" start="5598" end="5609" title="Nord Lead" label="Nord Lead 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q139300" start="5618" end="5628" title="Yamaha DX7" label="Yamaha DX7"/>
<link wikidata="Q671465" start="5877" end="5899" title="Marshall Amplification" label="Marshall Amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q769324" start="5901" end="5932" title="Orange Music Electronic Company" label="Orange Music Electronic Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q175391" start="5938" end="5976" title="Fender Musical Instruments Corporation" label="Fender Musical Instruments Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976095" start="7123" end="7133" title="Quantization (music)" label="Quantizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="9242" end="9247" title="Sting (musician)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q178095" start="9249" end="9259" title="The Police" label="The Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631268" start="9269" end="9276" title="Roxanne (The Police song)" label="Roxanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469156" start="9290" end="9309" title="Message in a Bottle (The Police song)" label="Message in a Bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407703" start="9323" end="9330" title="Fragile (Sting song)" label="Fragile"/>
<link wikidata="Q224650" start="9338" end="9353" title="Sarah McLachlan" label="Sarah McLachlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581351" start="9362" end="9367" title="Angel (Sarah McLachlan song)" label="Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q314877" start="9375" end="9388" title="Patrick Stump" label="Patrick Stump"/>
<link wikidata="Q485811" start="9392" end="9404" title="Fall Out Boy" label="Fall Out Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246432" start="9413" end="9430" title="I Don&amp;#x27;t Care (Fall Out Boy song)" label="I Don&amp;#x27;t Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449704" start="9444" end="9477" title="Sugar, We&amp;#x27;re Goin&amp;#x27; Down" label="Sugar, We&amp;#x27;re Goin&amp;#x27; Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q549981" start="9485" end="9496" title="Norah Jones" label="Norah Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990445" start="9505" end="9523" title="Thinking About You (Norah Jones song)" label="Thinking About You"/>
<link wikidata="Q228860" start="9531" end="9545" title="Colbie Caillat" label="Colbie Caillat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552843" start="9554" end="9560" title="Bubbly (song)" label="Bubbly"/>
<link wikidata="Q230445" start="9568" end="9582" title="Sara Bareilles" label="Sara Bareilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q276136" start="9591" end="9600" title="Love Song (Sara Bareilles song)" label="Love Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q326538" start="9608" end="9620" title="John Fogerty" label="John Fogerty"/>
<link wikidata="Q192463" start="9622" end="9650" title="Creedence Clearwater Revival" label="Creedence Clearwater Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q578320" start="9660" end="9670" title="Proud Mary" label="Proud Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012932" start="9684" end="9697" title="Fortunate Son (song)" label="Fortunate Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060038" start="9711" end="9722" title="Centerfield (song)" label="Centerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q351061" start="9730" end="9741" title="Ryan Tedder" label="Ryan Tedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438730" start="9743" end="9754" title="OneRepublic" label="OneRepublic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7468830" start="9764" end="9773" title="Apologize (OneRepublic song)" label="Apologize"/>
<link wikidata="Q435681" start="9781" end="9790" title="Ben Folds" label="Ben Folds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925118" start="9799" end="9804" title="Brick (song)" label="Brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355354" start="9818" end="9830" title="Zak and Sara" label="Zak and Sara"/>
<link wikidata="Q44857" start="9838" end="9849" title="John Legend" label="John Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231337" start="9858" end="9873" title="Ordinary People (John Legend song)" label="Ordinary People"/>
<link wikidata="Q348177" start="9881" end="9893" title="Alex Lifeson" label="Alex Lifeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="9895" end="9899" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630950" start="9909" end="9919" title="Tom Sawyer (song)" label="Tom Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549204" start="9933" end="9942" title="Limelight (Rush song)" label="Limelight"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034939" start="9956" end="9967" title="Working Man" label="Working Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q928046" start="9981" end="10000" title="The Spirit of Radio" label="The Spirit of Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736739" start="11289" end="11300" title="MainStage (software)" label="MainStage 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897589" start="11841" end="11861" title="software synthesizer" label="software synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q255018" start="12118" end="12131" title="multi-timbral" label="multi-timbral"/>
<link wikidata="Q652569" start="12218" end="12236" title="Native Instruments" label="Native Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428592" start="12237" end="12244" title="Kontakt (software)" label="Kontakt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770529" start="12249" end="12253" title="Mark of the Unicorn" label="MOTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="12422" end="12432" title="microphone" label="microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q83115456" start="12476" end="12491" title="audio interface" label="audio interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q282722" start="12626" end="12638" title="Trent Reznor" label="Trent Reznor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11647" start="12653" end="12668" title="Nine Inch Nails" label="Nine Inch Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418351" start="12736" end="12755" title="The Hand That Feeds" label="The Hand That Feeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q898598" start="13165" end="13173" title="Evermore (band)" label="Evermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004119" start="13253" end="13269" title="Never Let You Go (Evermore song)" label="Never Let You Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607426" start="13303" end="13320" title="Stems &amp;amp; Seeds" label="Stems &amp;amp; Seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975829" start="13370" end="13383" title="Way to Normal" label="Way to Normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q723441" start="14204" end="14221" title="equal temperament" label="equal temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043468" start="14255" end="14272" title="xenharmonic music" label="xenharmonic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057445" start="14274" end="14283" title="Logic Pro" label="Logic Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="14618" end="14624" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796" start="14841" end="14845" title="iPad" label="iPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="14883" end="14888" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="14977" end="14982" title="drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q320002" start="14986" end="14993" title="sampler (musical instrument)" label="sampler"/>
<link wikidata="Q300859" start="15499" end="15509" title="iPhone 3GS" label="iPhone 3GS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14094" start="15542" end="15552" title="iPod Touch" label="iPod Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q145761" start="15608" end="15617" title="iPad Mini" label="iPad Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q368215" start="15692" end="15707" title="App Store (iOS)" label="Apple App Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q289037" start="15860" end="15864" title="Koto (instrument)" label="koto"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="15935" end="15949" title="Scale (music)" label="musical scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136507" start="16086" end="16100" title="electric piano" label="electric piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="16110" end="16116" title="organ (instrument)" label="organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099153" start="16118" end="16126" title="clavinet" label="clavinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q290667" start="16687" end="16693" title="Envelope (music)" label="Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455881" start="16695" end="16701" title="Cutoff frequency" label="Cutoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q172858" start="16706" end="16715" title="Resonance" label="Resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="17472" end="17485" title="Hip hop music" label="Hip Hop drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="17487" end="17498" title="House music" label="House drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414221" start="17519" end="17532" title="Roland TR-808" label="Roland TR-808"/>
<link wikidata="Q978134" start="17537" end="17540" title="Roland TR-909" label="909"/>
<link wikidata="Q208320" start="17758" end="17762" title="gong" label="gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="18311" end="18326" title="acoustic guitar" label="acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="18358" end="18375" title="distortion (guitar)" label="distortion guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="18971" end="18986" title="bass guitar" label="electric basses"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="19011" end="19015" title="double bass" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="19243" end="19262" title="violin" label="1st and 2nd violins"/>
<link wikidata="Q80284" start="19264" end="19269" title="viola" label="viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="19272" end="19277" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q649116" start="19324" end="19330" title="legato" label="legato"/>
<link wikidata="Q466944" start="19332" end="19340" title="staccato" label="staccato"/>
<link wikidata="Q213460" start="19346" end="19355" title="pizzicato" label="pizzicato"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685124" start="19893" end="19897" title="pipa" label="pipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q726306" start="19899" end="19903" title="erhu" label="erhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q726303" start="19914" end="19921" title="guzheng" label="guzheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q337594" start="22609" end="22612" title="Advanced Audio Coding" label="AAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q758853" start="22616" end="22620" title="Audio Interchange File Format" label="AIFF"/>
<link wikidata="Q150323" start="22704" end="22725" title="iPad (third generation)" label="third-generation iPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="23107" end="23115" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="23117" end="23124" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q568769" start="23129" end="23139" title="SoundCloud" label="SoundCloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q307677" start="23467" end="23472" title="iOS 6" label="iOS 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q690856" start="23605" end="23613" title="ringtone" label="ringtone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796" start="23915" end="23923" title="iPad Air" label="iPad Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426339" start="23991" end="23996" title="iOS 7" label="iOS 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883824" start="24413" end="24430" title="Mix automation" label="volume automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104531076" start="24464" end="24466" title="Equalization (audio)" label="EQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q18433212" start="24471" end="24481" title="Dynamic range compression" label="compressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q706820" start="25303" end="25313" title="Boys Noize" label="Boys Noize"/>
<link wikidata="Q21914464" start="25350" end="25358" title="Dua Lipa" label="Dua Lipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="25363" end="25372" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524548" start="25473" end="25482" title="Seventeen (South Korean band)" label="Seventeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42493" start="25487" end="25497" title="Katy Perry" label="Katy Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q21088" start="25559" end="25563" title="Zedd" label="Zedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q9048111" start="25669" end="25681" title="master track" label="master track"/>
<link wikidata="Q932688" start="26067" end="26080" title="Mac App Store" label="Mac App Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q9553" start="26172" end="26178" title="iPhoto" label="iPhoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9558" start="26180" end="26186" title="iMovie" label="iMovie"/>
<link wikidata="Q9572" start="26188" end="26192" title="iDVD" label="iDVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q9579" start="26198" end="26202" title="iWeb" label="iWeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q56733980" start="26619" end="26629" title="Steve Lacy" label="Steve Lacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="26674" end="26680" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6349289" start="26721" end="26733" title="The Internet (band)" label="the Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q204018" start="26739" end="26746" title="J. Cole" label="J. Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="26790" end="26801" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11647" start="26803" end="26818" title="Nine Inch Nails" label="Nine Inch Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418351" start="26841" end="26860" title="The Hand That Feeds" label="The Hand That Feeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="27055" end="27060" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q42493" start="27091" end="27101" title="Katy Perry" label="Katy Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q215215" start="27103" end="27113" title="John Mayer" label="John Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q21914464" start="27115" end="27123" title="Dua Lipa" label="Dua Lipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564107" start="27125" end="27138" title="Billie Eilish" label="Billie Eilish"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="27144" end="27153" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q53469415" start="27155" end="27175" title="Charlotte Day Wilson" label="Charlotte Day Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q51120673" start="27177" end="27185" title="Doja Cat" label="Doja Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q47544144" start="27187" end="27200" title="Ellie Rowsell" label="Ellie Rowsell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029799" start="27205" end="27215" title="Wolf Alice" label="Wolf Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q105277210" start="27218" end="27231" title="Sloan Struble" label="Sloan Struble"/>
<link wikidata="Q17403494" start="27246" end="27260" title="Meghan Trainor" label="Meghan Trainor"/>
<link wikidata="Q105581073" start="27262" end="27272" title="Ethel Cain" label="Ethel Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15306031" start="27278" end="27287" title="Awkwafina" label="Awkwafina"/>
<link wikidata="Q221155" start="27397" end="27403" title="T-Pain" label="T-Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q117970" start="27405" end="27411" title="Grimes" label="Grimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q605854" start="27426" end="27445" title="Visions (Grimes album)" label="&amp;quot;Visions&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q238795" start="27447" end="27458" title="St. Vincent (musician)" label="St. Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16726247" start="27482" end="27495" title="Danielle Haim" label="Danielle Haim"/>
<link wikidata="Q868810" start="27500" end="27504" title="Haim (band)" label="Haim"/>
<link wikidata="Q66105083" start="27532" end="27543" title="Summer Girl (Haim song)" label="Summer Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q17478226" start="27589" end="27605" title="Jesse Rutherford (singer)" label="Jesse Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q36844" start="27741" end="27748" title="Rihanna" label="Rihanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q155447" start="27766" end="27774" title="Umbrella (song)" label="Umbrella"/>
<link wikidata="Q228968" start="27826" end="27837" title="Fiona Apple" label="Fiona Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q89226844" start="27871" end="27893" title="Fetch the Bolt Cutters" label="Fetch the Bolt Cutters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960903" start="27979" end="27998" title="Charlie the Unicorn" label="Charlie the Unicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q758853" start="28117" end="28121" title="Audio Interchange File Format" label="AIFF"/>
<link wikidata="Q217570" start="28123" end="28126" title="WAV" label="WAV"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="28132" end="28136" title="Standard MIDI File" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q336316" start="28176" end="28179" title="MP4" label="MP4"/>
<link wikidata="Q27666154" start="28271" end="28306" title="List of MIDI editors and sequencers" label="List of MIDI editors and sequencers"/>
<link wikidata="Q21041413" start="28308" end="28330" title="List of music software" label="List of music software"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424270" wikidata="Q681272" url="?curid=424270" title="Casselman, Ontario">
<text>Casselman is a village in eastern Ontario, Canada, in the United Counties of Prescott and Russell. Situated on the South Nation River about southeast of downtown Ottawa, along the Trans-Canada Highway 417. It is served by a station on the Montreal-Ottawa Via Rail train, twice a day in each direction.

Casselman is surrounded on all sides by The Nation since Casselman citizens refused to join the fusion of municipalities.

The village was named after Martin Casselman who built a sawmill near the site of the current town in 1844. Its post office was established in 1857. The village installed modern water and sewer services that became operational in 1977.

Casselman hosted &quot;L&#x27;écho d&#x27;un peuple&quot;, at Ferme Drouin, one of the biggest shows ever presented in Ontario, until the organization ran into financial trouble in 2008.

==Demographics==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Casselman had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

Mother tongue:
* French as first language: 79.3%
* English as first language: 17.4%
* English and French as first language: 1.9%
* Other as first language: 1.4%

==See also==
* Transit Eastern Ontario operates under the authority of &quot;The North Glengarry Prescott Russell (NGPR) Transport Board&quot;
*List of francophone communities in Ontario

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q681272" start="0" end="9" title="Casselman, Ontario" label="Casselman"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="15" end="22" title="village" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="34" end="41" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815593" start="58" end="97" title="Prescott and Russell County, Ontario" label="United Counties of Prescott and Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304550" start="115" end="133" title="South Nation River" label="South Nation River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303535" start="153" end="168" title="downtown Ottawa" label="downtown Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061576" start="180" end="200" title="Trans-Canada Highway" label="Trans-Canada Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024660" start="201" end="204" title="Ontario Provincial Highway 417" label="417"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049301" start="224" end="231" title="Casselman railway station" label="station"/>
<link wikidata="Q876720" start="255" end="263" title="Via Rail" label="Via Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932971" start="343" end="353" title="The Nation, Ontario" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="875" end="900" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="914" end="931" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072408" start="1287" end="1310" title="Transit Eastern Ontario" label="Transit Eastern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008452" start="1416" end="1458" title="List of francophone communities in ontario" label="List of francophone communities in Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424271" wikidata="Q2768808" url="?curid=424271" title="Bombay Samachar">
<text>Mumbai Samachar is the oldest continuously published newspaper in Asia. Established in 1822 by Fardunjee Marzban, it is published in Gujarati and English.

==History==

The &quot;Mumbai Samachar&quot;, Asia&#x27;s oldest continuously published newspaper, was first published on the first of July 1822 and comprised three small quarto sheets. 10 inches by 8 inches, and a half sheet supplement in all containing 14 pages of printed matter.

A brief description of the contents of this first issue will give an idea of what an Indian journal was in those days. The first sheet consists of advertisements, two of these being about things lost, and one about the sale of some property, all relating to Parsis. Then follows what may be called an article on &quot;Ourselves&quot;. Then there are four columns of short paragraphs about Government and Court appointments and changes, and powers of attorney taken from the court; about the arrival and departure of ships and of Europeans from Mumbai; and a list of European deaths; as well as of ships loading in the harbour. Six columns are given to Calcutta (now Kolkata) news taken from the Indian Gazette and the Calcutta Chronicle; one column to Madras (now Chennai) news from the Government Gazette of that city; two columns to London news, whilst a short paragraph of ten lines is devoted to news from Canton in China, given the prices of opium. Of local Mumbai news there is very little, except the short paragraph about appointments above.

A weekly till 1832, a bi-weekly till 1855 and a daily since then, it continued to grow and has gone on to become one of Western India&#x27;s premier newspapers, well read by a large segment of Gujarati-speaking people both in India and abroad. The founder, a Parsi scholar and priest by the name of Fardoonji Murazban, was a pioneer not only of journalism in Western India but of all Gujarati printed literature. He founded the first native press in 1812 and in 1814 brought out a Gujarati Calendar, fully 6 years before the first Bengali calendar was printed and published in Calcutta. He then went on to bring out his Newspaper, the Mumbai Samachar, in 1822.

He must have started all his concerns in auspicious moments, for all, his press, his calendar and his paper exist to the present day in very good and flourishing condition. Respected by both the British and Indian Government for its fair, frank, objective and critical analysis of events, the Mumbai Samachar played a very important role during India&#x27;s struggle for independence being often quoted by freedom fighters like Mahatma Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru, Vallabhbhai Patel and others.
From its inception the editorial policy was to objectively report events in a fair and honest manner and not to sensationalize news, sobriety and independence of views being a characteristic which still stands. Another notable feature of this paper which holds good to this day is the policy to allow numerous small advertisers to advertise their products on the front page rather than allow only one advertiser to occupy what is commonly referred to as solus position.

The paper passed through various hands before coming into the hands of the Cama Family, its present publishers in 1933, and Hormusji N Cama, the present director of the publication. It has since grown and expanded and today can proudly lay claim to having the most modern technology available in the publishing field. Its daily print run in four colour is effortlessly carried out on full colour high speed offset presses incorporating state of the art features.

On 14 June 2022, Prime Minister Narendra Modi participated in the &quot;Dwishatabdi Mahotsav&quot; of Mumbai Samachar and released a postage stamp to commemorate the occasion of 200 years of Mumbai Samachar.

== References ==
==External links==
*&quot;Mumbai Samachar&quot; Website in Gujarati
* &quot;Mumbai Samachar&quot;, enewspaper version</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="53" end="62" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="66" end="70" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434899" start="95" end="112" title="Fardunjee Marzban" label="Fardunjee Marzban"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137" start="133" end="141" title="Gujarati language" label="Gujarati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="1092" end="1100" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q277213" start="1135" end="1149" title="The Gazette of India" label="Indian Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="1192" end="1198" title="Madras" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="1403" end="1409" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151567" start="1850" end="1863" title="Western India" label="Western India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1972" end="1989" title="Gujarati Calendar" label="Gujarati Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="2581" end="2595" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="2597" end="2613" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q9455" start="2615" end="2632" title="Vallabhbhai Patel" label="Vallabhbhai Patel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058" start="3612" end="3625" title="Narendra Modi" label="Narendra Modi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424274" wikidata="Q4946315" url="?curid=424274" title="Borough High Street">
<text>Borough High Street is a road in Southwark, London, running south-west from London Bridge, forming part of the A3 route which runs from London to Portsmouth, on the south coast of England.

== Overview ==
Borough High Street continues southwest as Newington Causeway, here co-inciding with ancient Stane Street, the Roman road between London and Chichester. Another important connection is with the Dover Road (the modern A2 route) which diverges in a south-east direction from Borough High Street at a junction of five roads adjacent to Borough Underground station as Great Dover Street. The Dover Road mostly follows the alignment of Roman Watling Street, though, here, the original Roman route was along Tabard Street closely parallel with Great Dover Street to the north.

The stretch of Borough High Street south of the junction with Long Lane, Marshalsea Road, and Tabard Street, where stands the ancient church of St. George the Martyr, was formerly called Blackman Street after a long resident family there.
Borough Market was once held on the street, but has been moved to the west with its main entrance on Southwark Street. Southwark Cathedral, prominent on the west side of the street near London Bridge, can be reached by a small pedestrian bridge and stairs, though its postal address is actually Montague Close.

The earliest recorded name for the street is simply &#x27;The Borough&#x27; which was the part between the fork of the street and London Bridge. South of the fork it was called &#x27;St. Margaret&#x27;s Hill&#x27;. These names were subsumed in the Tudor period as &#x27;Longe Southwark&#x27; (differentiated from &#x27;Short Southwark&#x27; now Tooley Street) and by the late Georgian era as simply &#x27;High Street&#x27; and the northern section from the junction with Duke Street Hill was renamed &#x27;Wellington Street&#x27; to commemorate the Duke of Wellington. From the 1890s the London County Council started to rationalise all metropolitan street names and &#x27;Borough High Street&#x27; became the name for the current route.

==History==
Before the building of Westminster Bridge, Borough High Street was the only connection from the south bank of the Thames to London, which lay on the north bank. As a major communications node for traffic between London and Portsmouth, Dover, south-east England generally and also travellers from Europe, Borough High Street had many coaching inns. These were of considerable size, with courtyard and surrounding multi-tier galleries. There were twenty-three in total, including the Bear, the Queen&#x27;s Head, the King&#x27;s Head, the Catherine Wheel, the Tabard, the White Hart, and the George. Many of them dated back originally to the mediæval period, and were in use as coaching inns up to the mid-nineteenth century, when this mode of transport was superseded by the railway. These inns were very famous and receive mention in the work of such literary giants as Chaucer, Shakespeare and Charles Dickens, though are now all gone - apart from the George. 
On the west side of the street, the modern office block called Brandon House at 180 Borough High Street (opposite Borough Underground station) marks the site of a mansion called Suffolk Place, demolished in 1557. It is depicted by Anthony van den Wyngaerde&#x27;s sixteenth century &quot;Panorama of London&quot;, which features Borough High Street prominently in the foreground of the picture. After demolition the site of the mansion and the area to the west of Borough High Street here became notorious as the criminal enclave of The Mint.

The Marshalsea and King&#x27;s Bench Prisons were also located on Borough High Street on the east side between Newcomen Street and Tabard Street.

===Street numbering===

The present numbering of the buildings on the street is confusing because of piecemeal alteration over the past 150 years:- The street was widened and realigned to the west in the 1820s for the Rennie London Bridge. The &#x27;fork&#x27; at the junction with Southwark Street was created when that street was inserted, in 1864, to connect the London Bridge, Southwark Bridge, and Blackfriars Bridge routes together. This new route cut across Stoney Street and isolated its southern end, which section was subsequently renumbered as part of Borough High Street although it actually lies behind numbers 28–32 to their west-side. The small alleyway connecting the two branches of the &#x27;fork&#x27; is named &#x27;Counter Court&#x27; (see Borough Compter) but is not an address for any premises.

The railway viaduct across the street was also erected in 1864 and this cut across a quadrant of both the main streets. This led to the numbering on the west-side of the street ceasing at the junction with Bedale Street, at which the Southwark Street numbers begin as number &#x27;6&#x27;. However, these appear continuous with Borough High Street which only becomes apparent at the junction with Stoney Street further along to the west. Between Bedale Street and No 28 there is no &#x27;west-side&#x27; of the High Street as this is Southwark Street &#x27;west-side&#x27;. The High Street&#x27;s numbers continue at No 28, the HSBC Bank branch, which also seems to be on the south-side of Southwark Street, but that street&#x27;s south-side numbers do not start until after the junction with the &#x27;fork&#x27; going west. On the approach to the Bridge, Borough High Street northeast-side numbering starts at No 7 which is a vault shop within the railway viaduct, the lower numbers&#x27; disappearance was caused by the 1990s developments on the river side north of Duke Street Hill, the main office block north of this is actually &#x27;No 1 London Bridge&#x27; and the pedestrian only &#x27;London Bridge Walk&#x27; leading to Colechurch House and the mainline Station concourse.

To compound the eccentric numbering, the building that appears first at the northwest side of Borough High Street (Hibernia Chambers/Glaziers Hall No 9 Montague Close at its ground floor) had its first floor level connected to the Bridge level pavement in 2000 and was given the address &#x27;No 2 London Bridge&#x27;. On the northwest side, the street numbers of the High Street start after the small bridge crossing over Tooley Street as No 4 Borough High Street &#x27;Bridge House&#x27;.

With the extension of the railway viaduct in 2010 the buildings between it and the junction with Bedale Street an attempt was made to simplify the numbering system. The Victorian buildings were replaced in 2013 but this is a glazed &#x27;foyer&#x27; facility of Borough Market and is not actually numbered as premises but the section which is a store has been provided with the number &#x27;16&#x27; which means that the foyer could be numbered 18 and 20. This means the numbering is now 4, 6 - 8, 10 actually accessed as a side stairway of 6-8 (gap stairs down to Cathedral and Borough Market) 14 (vault unit within the viaduct) 16 and (Southwark Street junction) 28. 

Continuing along the &#x27;east side&#x27; of the &#x27;fork&#x27; along the main part of the street is numbered 30, 32, 34. Then returning to the &#x27;west side&#x27; of the &#x27;fork&#x27;, is numbered 36 (this is north of 34 and adjacent to 28) continuing south as 38 to 42. The building immediately next to 28 (i.e. south of Counter Court), north of the side door of 34, opposite 36 and behind 30 (to its east) is numbered &#x27;1b Southwark Street&#x27;, presumably the side door of 28 is taken as &#x27;1 Southwark Street&#x27; although not numbered as such; it is therefore actually in the High Street. Southwark Street continues properly at the junction with the &#x27;west side&#x27; of the &#x27;fork&#x27; as No 3 Southwark Street, but this number appears on its side door situated next to 36 and so is also in the west fork of the High Street.

==Amenities and features==
Borough is a cosmopolitan area of London, with many restaurants, bars and Borough Market. The street also has many cafés and food shops including Sainsbury&#x27;s Local. Public Houses include:
North to south - 
* The Barrowboy and Banker (previously a NatWest Bank branch)
* The George Inn
* The Bridge Ta (previously a The Slug and Lettuce and occupying the Town Hall Chambers building which was previous to 1989 a NatWest Bank branch)
* St Christopher&#x27;s Inn
* Belushi&#x27;s
* The Roxy Bar &amp; Screen
* The Blue Eyed Maid
* The Trinity
* The Ship

The Post Office (dated 1913) opposite Borough tube station closed in 2008. The main Post Office at the northern end of the street originated as the Women&#x27;s Ward of the 1852 development of St Thomas&#x27;s Hospital. When London Bridge Station services were extended by a viaduct to Charing Cross Station in 1868 the Hospital relocated and was partly demolished. This building remains as having been used as a goods office for the railway company.

===David Bomberg House===
David Bomberg House is a hall of residence at 282–302 Borough High Street for London South Bank University students. The building comprises 289 single en-suite bedrooms, divided into five blocks. It is close to the Borough Underground station and the main campus of London South Bank University on Borough Road north of Elephant and Castle.

The building is named after the English painter David Bomberg (1890–1957), who was a teacher at London South Bank University when it was known as Borough Polytechnic. He was the leading artist of the Borough Group during the 1940s and 1950s. A portrait of him hangs in the reception area. David Bomberg is considered to be London South Bank University&#x27;s most famous teacher. In 2009, it was announced that the University had received a gift of a collection of works by Bomberg.

In 2009, a late night licence was granted for premises on the ground floor (Costcutter), despite a significant number of objections from residents. In February 2011, the Chaze bar and restaurant on the ground floor of the building in the former Costcutter space, opposite Southwark Police Station, obtained planning permission after a four-month deferral, despite opposition by the building&#x27;s owner, London South Bank University.

== Adjoining roads ==
From South to North on east-side:
* Newington Causeway
* Harper Road
* King&#x27;s Place
* Trinity Street
* Hulme Place
* Avon Place
* Great Dover Street
* Long Lane
* Tabard Street
* Angel Place
* Layton&#x27;s Buildings
* Chapel Court
* Mermaid Court
* Newcomen Street
* Kentish Buildings
* Queen&#x27;s Head Yard
* Talbot Yard
* George Inn Yard
* White Hart Yard
* King&#x27;s Head Yard
* St Thomas Street
* London Bridge Street
* Guildable Manor Street
* Railway Approach
* Duke Street Hill
* Tooley Street
* London Bridge

From North to South on west-side:-
* Montague Close
* Green Dragon Court
* Bedale Street
* Stoney Street
* Southwark Street
* Counter Court
* Calvert&#x27;s Buildings
* St Margaret&#x27;s Court
* Maidstone Buildings
* * Union Street
* Little Dorrit Court
* Marshalsea Road
* Lant Street
* Great Suffolk Street
* Borough Road

== Transport connections ==
* London Bridge Station entrance and ticket hall of Jubilee line
* Borough Underground station
*Quietway 1 cycle route crosses Borough High Street on Great Suffolk Street/Trinity Street.

== References ==

== External links ==
* Borough High Street, Borough, c. 1926</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4946315" start="0" end="19" title="Borough High Street" label="Borough High Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273898" start="33" end="42" title="Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="44" end="50" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q130206" start="76" end="89" title="London Bridge" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577223" start="111" end="119" title="A3 road" label="A3 route"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="146" end="156" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018254" start="248" end="266" title="Newington Causeway" label="Newington Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q205511" start="298" end="310" title="Stane Street (Chichester)" label="Stane Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q888603" start="422" end="430" title="A2 road (Great Britain)" label="A2 route"/>
<link wikidata="Q894073" start="538" end="565" title="Borough tube station" label="Borough Underground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599074" start="569" end="587" title="Great Dover Street" label="Great Dover Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434239" start="642" end="656" title="Watling Street" label="Watling Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q15030877" start="839" end="848" title="Long Lane, Southwark" label="Long Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773884" start="850" end="865" title="Marshalsea Road" label="Marshalsea Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q545935" start="921" end="942" title="St George the Martyr Southwark" label="St. George the Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q894072" start="1016" end="1030" title="Borough Market" label="Borough Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q922967" start="1135" end="1154" title="Southwark Cathedral" label="Southwark Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824079" start="1673" end="1686" title="Tooley Street" label="Tooley Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q456960" start="2102" end="2120" title="Westminster Bridge" label="Westminster Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="2193" end="2199" title="River Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q966002" start="2412" end="2425" title="coaching inns" label="coaching inns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103238" start="2633" end="2643" title="the Tabard" label="the Tabard"/>
<link wikidata="Q124528125" start="2645" end="2659" title="White Hart, Southwark" label="the White Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q12058464" start="2669" end="2675" title="the George, Southwark" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="2949" end="2956" title="Chaucer" label="Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="2958" end="2969" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="2974" end="2989" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634580" start="3219" end="3232" title="Suffolk Place" label="Suffolk Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q523514" start="3272" end="3297" title="Anthony van den Wyngaerde" label="Anthony van den Wyngaerde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542202" start="3574" end="3582" title="Liberty of the Mint" label="The Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603875" start="3589" end="3599" title="Marshalsea" label="Marshalsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403975" start="3604" end="3628" title="King&amp;#x27;s Bench Prison" label="King&amp;#x27;s Bench Prison"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3946" end="3970" title="London Bridge#&amp;quot;New&amp;quot; London Bridge (1831–1967)" label="the Rennie London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571171" start="4014" end="4030" title="Southwark Street" label="Southwark Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324578" start="4113" end="4129" title="Southwark Bridge" label="Southwark Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q880843" start="4135" end="4153" title="Blackfriars Bridge" label="Blackfriars Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946306" start="4493" end="4508" title="Borough Compter" label="Borough Compter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571171" start="4785" end="4801" title="Southwark Street" label="Southwark Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635852" start="5179" end="5188" title="HSBC Bank" label="HSBC Bank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5783" end="5799" title="Colechurch House" label="Colechurch House"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037043" start="5970" end="5983" title="Glaziers Hall" label="Glaziers Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824079" start="6260" end="6273" title="Tooley Street" label="Tooley Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q894072" start="7960" end="7974" title="Borough Market" label="Borough Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q12058464" start="8161" end="8175" title="The George Inn, Southwark" label="The George Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542224" start="8206" end="8226" title="Slug and Lettuce (pub chain)" label="The Slug and Lettuce"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985834" start="8353" end="8367" title="Belushi&amp;#x27;s" label="Belushi&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8398" end="8416" title="The Blue Eyed Maid" label="The Blue Eyed Maid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143779" start="8636" end="8661" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="St Thomas&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q801125" start="8668" end="8689" title="London Bridge Station" label="London Bridge Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q801128" start="8729" end="8750" title="Charing Cross Station" label="Charing Cross Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="8946" end="8963" title="hall of residence" label="hall of residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q289348" start="8999" end="9027" title="London South Bank University" label="London South Bank University"/>
<link wikidata="Q190771" start="9072" end="9080" title="en-suite" label="en-suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193837" start="9081" end="9089" title="bedrooms" label="bedrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946324" start="9219" end="9231" title="Borough Road" label="Borough Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716414" start="9241" end="9260" title="Elephant and Castle" label="Elephant and Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q734355" start="9311" end="9324" title="David Bomberg" label="David Bomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q289348" start="9359" end="9387" title="London South Bank University" label="London South Bank University"/>
<link wikidata="Q289348" start="9409" end="9428" title="Borough Polytechnic" label="Borough Polytechnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946309" start="9463" end="9476" title="Borough Group" label="Borough Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175072" start="9823" end="9833" title="Costcutter" label="Costcutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273898" start="10019" end="10028" title="Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q861951" start="10029" end="10043" title="Police Station" label="Police Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018254" start="10241" end="10259" title="Newington Causeway" label="Newington Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10262" end="10273" title="Harper Road, Southwark" label="Harper Road"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10296" end="10310" title="Trinity Street, Southwark" label="Trinity Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599074" start="10340" end="10358" title="Great Dover Street" label="Great Dover Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q15030877" start="10361" end="10370" title="Long Lane, Southwark" label="Long Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q15030877" start="10373" end="10386" title="Tabard Street" label="Tabard Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q66778503" start="10597" end="10613" title="St Thomas Street" label="St Thomas Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840472" start="10639" end="10654" title="Guildable Manor" label="Guildable Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824079" start="10702" end="10715" title="Tooley Street" label="Tooley Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q130206" start="10718" end="10731" title="London Bridge" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q28963206" start="10770" end="10784" title="Montague Close" label="Montague Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571171" start="10840" end="10856" title="Southwark Street" label="Southwark Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947639" start="10953" end="10965" title="Union Street, Southwark" label="Union Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q565638" start="10968" end="10981" title="Little Dorrit" label="Little Dorrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773884" start="10990" end="11005" title="Marshalsea Road" label="Marshalsea Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487515" start="11008" end="11019" title="Lant Street" label="Lant Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q65965558" start="11022" end="11042" title="Great Suffolk Street" label="Great Suffolk Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946324" start="11045" end="11057" title="Borough Road" label="Borough Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q801125" start="11089" end="11110" title="London Bridge Station" label="London Bridge Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q961290" start="11139" end="11151" title="Jubilee line" label="Jubilee line"/>
<link wikidata="Q894073" start="11154" end="11181" title="Borough tube station" label="Borough Underground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6615423" start="11183" end="11193" title="Quietway" label="Quietway 1"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424276" wikidata="Q2955911" url="?curid=424276" title="Champlain, Ontario">
<text>Champlain is a township in eastern Ontario, Canada, in the United Counties of Prescott and Russell on the Ottawa River. It was formed on January 1, 1998, through the amalgamation of West Hawkesbury Township, Longueuil Township, Town of Vankleek Hill, and the Village of L&#x27;Orignal.

==Communities==
The township comprises the communities of Aberdeen, Cassburn, Green Lane, Happy Hollow, Henrys Corners, L&#x27;Ange-Gardien, L&#x27;Orignal, Pleasant Corners, Ritchance, Riviera Estate, Sandy Hill, Springhill, Vankleek Hill, Vankleek Hill Station, Village Lanthier, and St. Eugene. The township administrative offices are located in Vankleek Hill.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Champlain had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

==See also==
*List of townships in Ontario
*List of francophone communities in Ontario

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2955911" start="0" end="9" title="Champlain, Ontario" label="Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936646" start="15" end="23" title="township (Canada)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="35" end="42" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815593" start="59" end="98" title="United Counties of Prescott and Russell" label="United Counties of Prescott and Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q60974" start="106" end="118" title="Ottawa River" label="Ottawa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204697" start="428" end="442" title="L&amp;#x27;Orignal, Ontario" label="L&amp;#x27;Orignal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554614" start="513" end="526" title="Vankleek Hill, Ontario" label="Vankleek Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554614" start="636" end="649" title="Vankleek Hill, Ontario" label="Vankleek Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="678" end="703" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="717" end="734" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643835" start="927" end="955" title="List of townships in Ontario" label="List of townships in Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008452" start="957" end="999" title="List of francophone communities in ontario" label="List of francophone communities in Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424279" wikidata="Q2948382" url="?curid=424279" title="Constitution of the Czech Republic">
<text>The Constitution of the Czech Republic () is the supreme law of the Czech Republic. The current constitution was adopted by the Czech National Council on 16 December 1992. It entered into force on 1 January 1993, replacing the 1960 Constitution of Czechoslovakia and the constitutional act No. 143/1968 Col., when Czechoslovakia gave way to the Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic in a peaceful dissolution.

The constitution is a constitutional act, and together with other constitutional acts constitutes the so-called constitutional order of the Czech Republic, or the constitution (with a small c). While the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Basic Freedoms (Listina základních práv a svobod, No. 2/1993 Coll.), an equally important constitutional act, asserts human and civil rights, the Constitution is concerned with state sovereignty and territorial integrity, and defines the institutions governing the state.

The Constitution is divided into a preamble and 8 chapters. The fundamental provisions are followed by long chapters on the legislative power, the executive power (the cabinet and the president), and the judicial power (the Constitutional Court and other courts), and shorter chapters on the Supreme Audit Office, the Czech National Bank, and territorial self-government, concluding with interim provisions.

As of April 2013, the constitution has been amended eight times. The most important amendments are Act No. 395/2001 Coll. providing the legal framework for the accession to the EU in 2004, and Act No. 71/2011 Coll., which came into force on 1 October 2012, and provided for the election of the president by popular vote.

== History ==

===The federalization of Czechoslovakia===
At the 28th meeting of the National Assembly of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic on 27 October 1968, a bill called the Constitutional Act on the Czechoslovak Federation was introduced jointly by the Czech National Council, the Slovak National Council, and the Czechoslovak Cabinet. The bill was enacted the same day as Constitutional Act No. 143/1968 Coll.

On its entry into force on 1 January 1969, it created the Czech Socialist Republic and the Slovak Socialist Republic, both of them on an equal footing within the federation. The Act stipulated in article 142, paragraph 2, that both republics would in due course enact their own constitutions, and also envisaged the creation of three constitutional courts. The plan, however, was not followed through due to the onset of the &quot;period of normalization&quot;.

In fact, Czechoslovakia only functioned as a federation until the enactment of Constitutional Act No. 125/1970 Coll. in December 1970. Its explanatory notes clearly and openly articulate the need for &quot;strengthening of the structural role of the central government of the federation&quot;. This act introduced 37 direct changes and additions, which undid the original plan for federation and took away most of the powers of the federal republics. Consequently in 1970 Czechoslovakia became essentially a centrally governed country, with only &quot;prima facie&quot; attributes of a federation.

The need for a new federal constitution was first announced officially at the 17th Congress of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia in spring 1986. A working group fronted by Marián Čalfa was set up in 1987 to draft this, and in November 1988, a 153-strong committee of the Communist Party and the National Front was created, led by Miloš Jakeš. The constitution was expected to be enacted after the 18th Congress of the Communist Party, during the course of 1990. In its last draft, it was to be a single constitution serving both the federation and the two republics and, in contrast with its predecessor, did not include the leading role of the Communist Party, and somewhat expanded the list of basic human rights.

In autumn 1989, a group of members of the Federal Assembly proposed the &quot;Constitutional Act on the Mode of Enactment of the New Constitutions of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the Czech Socialist Republic, and the Slovak Socialist Republic&quot;. Despite not having seen the drafts of the constitutions themselves, on 31 October 1989, the national assemblies of both countries approved this proposal. The resolution of the Czech National Council was promulgated as Act. No. 123/1989 Coll. and the resolution of the Slovak National Council as Act No. 124/1989 Coll. These constitutional acts were intended as a prerequisite for the enactment of a single &#x27;three-in-one&#x27; constitution, serving the federation and both republics. Through the consent of both national councils, both republics waived their entitlement to their own constitutions.

However, the events of the Velvet Revolution in 1989 quickly changed everything. As early as the plenary session of the Slovak National Council on 30 November 1989, deputy Majer asked whether it would be necessary to re-enact the provision on the way of enactment together with the new constitution, or whether the resolution of the Slovak National Council from the end of October would stay intact. In its next session on 6 December 1989, the Slovak National Council had withdrawn its consent of 31 October 1989 in Resolution No. 167/1989 Coll. The Czech National Council enacted a similar provision as Resolution No. 166/1989 Coll. on 19 December 1989. Subsequently, several constitutional acts were enacted, which were supposed to pave the way towards the creation, or rather restoration of the federation. Both republics had passed constitutional acts on their symbols, and had had a number of powers devolved to them, which were hitherto vested in federal bodies. However, neither the Constitution of the federation, nor the constitutions of either of the republics had been enacted prior to the election of 1992.

=== Preparations for the dissolution of the federation ===

On 5 and 6 June 1992, elections were held for the Federal Assembly of the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic (parliament), the Czech National Council, and the Slovak National Council. In the Czech Republic, the Civic Democratic Party won the election; in its electoral programme, the party spoke of either a functional federation, or separation, although keeping the federation was the preferred option. In Slovak Republic, the winner was the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia, whose election promise was to acquire international legal subjectivity for Slovakia – although this was clearly inconsistent with the continuation of the shared state, the party convinced voters that it did not rule out the existence of the federation.

The Constitution of the Slovak Republic was enacted on 1 September 1992, and came into force on 1 October 1992, three months before the dissolution of Czechoslovakia.

The making of the Constitution of the Czech Republic also commenced soon after the election. Two committees were set up: a government committee, and a committee of the Presidium of the Czech National Council.

The government committee was chaired by Václav Klaus; its other members were Jan Kalvoda, Cyril Svoboda, Filip Šedivý, Jiří Vlach, Vojtěch Cepl, Daniel Kroupa, Václav Benda, Václav Pečich, Jan Litomiský, Miloslav Výborný, Václav Novotný, Miroslav Sylla, Pavel Zářecký, and Dušan Hendrych. The members of the committee of the Czech National Council were Marek Benda, Jiří Bílý, Pavel Hirsch, Antonín Hrazdíra, Ivana Janů, Hana Marvanová, Ivan Mašek, Jaroslav Ortman, Jiří Payne, Anna Röschová, Vítězslav Sochor, Milan Uhde, and Jan Vik. In August 1992, it was agreed that the government committee would be entrusted with drafting the Constitution.

There were several possible starting points for the new constitution. The secretary of the government committee, Cyril Svoboda, summed them up: to take the Czechoslovak Constitution of 1920 as a point of departure, to rework the existing Constitution of the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic, or to draft a brand new one. Svoboda, as well as several other members of the committee, were in favour of the first option, to make use of the Constitution of the First Czechoslovak Republic.

One of the major obstacles seemed to be the status of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms. It had been declared a part of the legal system by Constitutional Act No. 23/1991 Coll., which required other constitutional acts to comply with it. Václav Klaus was totally opposed to the Charter in any form. In particular, he was against the wording of article 17 of the Charter, concerning a right to information (Klaus would have preferred the wording &quot;a right to search out information&quot; instead) and he also disagreed with the Charter granting a right to organize in trade unions, and a right to reward for work, vested in article 28. Miroslav Výborný proposed a solution to the problem, introducing the idea of the so-called constitutional order, although influential jurists (Filip, Knapp) were critical of it.

Between 19 and 24 October 1992, work on the final draft of the constitution commenced in Karlovy Vary. The first few articles were taken from older drafts; the articles on executive power were penned by Miroslav and Jindřiška Syllovi. The articles on the powers of the president were written by Cyril Svoboda, those concerning the powers of the cabinet by Dušan Hendrych, and the articles on the judiciary by František Zoulík. Hendrych also drafted chapters on the Czech National Bank and the Supreme Audit Office, while Pavel Zářecký drafted chapters on territorial self-government.

On 23 October 1992, three experts on constitutional law arrived to review the draft: Pavel Peška, Vladimír Klokočka and Pavel Holländer.

The explanatory notes were written by Cyril Svoboda and Milena Poláková, on the weekend before it was due to be presented to prime minister Klaus.

In all, four different drafts were created during the preparation of the Constitution, written respectively by the government, the Czechoslovak Social-Democratic Party, the Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia, and the Liberal-Social Union. Only the first of these was read in the Czech National Council.

=== Enactment ===

The government bill of the Constitution of the Czech Republic was read in the Czech National Council on 16 December 1992. It was introduced by Václav Klaus, the prime minister of the Czech Republic. Out of a number of changes proposed during the reading, only deputy Pavel Hirš&#x27;s proposal was incorporated, returning into the bill proportional voting system for the Chamber of Deputies and two-round run-off system for the Senate.

The result of the vote was announced by the chair of the Czech National Assembly, Milan Uhde: &quot;[...] out of 198 deputies present, who registered their vote, 16 were against, 10 abstained, and by 172 votes in its support, the Constitution of the Czech Republic has been enacted.&quot;

== Characteristics ==

The Constitution of the Czech Republic is a written constitution, having been promulgated in the official journal, the Collection of Laws.

With reference to the provision of the article 39, paragraph 4 of the Constitution, which states that &quot;for the enactment of a constitutional act, 3/5 of all deputies must agree, and 3/5 of senators present&quot;, changing the constitution is a more difficult procedure than changing an ordinary statute, making it an entrenched constitution in the typology of constitutions. Despite the tradition of entrenched constitutions throughout Czech history, some voiced the opinion, during the preparation of the Constitution of the Czech Republic, that this one should be flexible.

With regard to Karl Loewenstein&#x27;s ontological classification of constitutions, the Czech Constitution can be characterized as &quot;normative&quot;. The political process is carried out by the rules set out in it. High level of correspondence between the constitution and reality also makes it a real constitution.

Despite being heavily influenced by the Czechoslovak Constitutional Charter of 1920, the Czech Constitution is an original one. It has been agreed on through a political process.

== The content of the Constitution ==

=== Preamble ===
Most of the preamble was written by Václav Havel and edited by Milan Uhde. The text recalls the history of Czech statehood and goes on to declare the basic values of the state, mentioning democracy and, thanks to Havel, the &quot;civic society&quot;.

=== Chapter One – Fundamental provisions ===

====The fundamental principles====
The provisions of article 1 of the Constitution enshrine fundamental principles of the whole constitutional system of the Czech Republic. It defines the state as a republic, as sovereign, unitary and democratic &quot;Rechtsstaat&quot; (state characterized by the rule of law) based on respect to rights and freedoms of the citizen and man.

The word &quot;sovereign&quot; means that the Czech Republic is fully capable of holding rights and carrying out legal acts, and is a full subject of international law, independent of any other power. Such sovereignty may, however, be voluntarily limited by membership in an international organisation (this is the so-called shared or pooled sovereignty), as is the case with the Czech Republic and the European Union.

The term &quot;unitary&quot; makes it clear that the state is not a federation or confederation.

The definition of the Czech Republic as a democratic &quot;Rechtsstaat&quot; stresses the combination of the two principles, democracy and the rule of law. To modify either of these two is forbidden by article 9 of the Constitution. The term &quot;Rechtsstaat&quot; should not be understood merely formally, but substantively. The Constitutional Court confirmed this in its adjudications. As early as December 1993, it ruled: &quot;The Constitution accepts and respects the principle of legality as a part of the overall concept of a &quot;Rechtsstaat&quot;; it does not merely link positive law to formal legality, it also subordinates the construction and application of legal norms to the substantive meaning of their content; it makes it a premise of law that it respects basic constitutive values of democratic society, and measures the application of legal norms by these values.&quot;

The statement that the Czech Republic is a state &quot;based on respecting the rights and freedoms of man and citizen&quot; defines the purpose of the state, which is binding for the government. This is closely related to the provision of article 3, pronouncing the Charter a part of the constitutional order, and article 9, forbidding everyone, including those legislating constitutional acts, to change the fundamental requisites of the democratic &quot;Rechtsstaat&quot;.

The second paragraph, added to the Constitution in the Euro-amendment, adopts the basic principle of international law, to honestly fulfill all international obligations. From this article, a duty arises for the government, namely the legislature, not to enact laws which would impede compliance with international legal obligations. As a part of the application of international legal norms, the case law of international judicial institutions responsible for application of such norms must be taken into account.

==== Government ====

In his 1863 Gettysburg Address, Abraham Lincoln spoke of three features of democracy: &quot;government of the people, by the people, for the people&quot;. Government of the people is enshrined in article 2 paragraph 1 of the Constitution, which postulates the sovereignty of the people, and the division of government into executive power, legislative power, and judicial power. The sovereignty of the people is not a legal principle, but a political principle – it means that it is the people, who have the right to create the system of values, institutions, and procedures, through which the state is governed. No government body can exist unless it derived its legitimacy from the people, directly or indirectly.

Paragraph 2 makes it possible for future enactment of a constitutional act that would introduce some institutions of direct democracy, namely via referendum. The Cabinet&#x27;s draft of the Constitution did not contain such a provision, as the Civic Democratic Party and the Civic Democratic Alliance were opposed to referendums. In the end, it did find its way into the Constitution with support from some social democratic deputies, and at the insistence of Václav Havel. Although several drafts of a constitutional act on referendum had been prepared since the enactment of the Constitution, the only nationwide referendum conducted so far was the referendum on the accession of the Czech Republic to the European Union. Paragraphs 3 and 4 embody the principle of enumerated powers and the silence of law principle. The principle of enumerated powers requires that the power of the state can only be applied in such cases, within such boundaries, and by such means, as is stipulated by law. The silence of law principle, in contrast, states that everyone may do everything law does not prohibit, and is not required to do anything, unless it is imposed on him by law. This provision is similar to article 2 of the Charter. Where the constitution talks of &quot;every citizen&quot;, the Charter widens its to &quot;everyone&quot;.

==== The Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms ====

Article 3, incorporating the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms into the constitutional order of the Czech Republic, is not a provision typical for a constitution. It was not before December 1992 that it was incorporated into the Constitution, based on political deal. While the government&#x27;s draft at first did not contain any reference to the Charter, future drafts at least mentioned it in interim and final provisions, which was considered inadequate to its importance. In the end, all committees of the Czech National Council proposed in December 1992 that a reference to the Charter be incorporated into the first section of the Constitution. The Charter, hitherto part of Constitutional Act 23/1991 Coll., was disconnected from it and newly enacted in an extraordinary resolution of the Presidium of the Czech National Council, and published as No. 2/1993, Coll. This has later been used to question the normative nature of the Charter. Similar reference to a statute regulating fundamental rights and freedoms was also enshrined in Austria&#x27;s December Constitution (Dezemberverfassung) of 1867 and the second interim constitution of the Czechoslovak Republic (No. 37/1918 Coll. and following).

====Judicial protection====
Article 4 states that fundamental rights and freedoms are subject to judicial protection. These rights are not limited to those enshrined in the Charter, but also includes those in other constitutional regulations and international treaties.

====Political system and political decision-making====
The political system of the Czech Republic is defined in article 5, which also ascribes irreplaceable role to political parties. Article 6 is dedicated to political decision-making, enshrining the principles of majority rule coupled with the protection of minorities.

====Protection of nature====
Article 7 enshrining the protection of nature was not a part of the Cabinet&#x27;s draft of the Constitution. It was written by Václav Havel, convinced that there should be an &quot;environmental paragraph&quot; in the Constitution. In the upshot, only a curtailed version of Havel&#x27;s proposal made it into the Constitution.

====Territorial self-government====
Article 8 is a basic provision granting the principle of territorial self-government. Such a provision is indispensable, as it is a substantial constitutive feature of democratic &#x27;rechsstaat&#x27;, as well as a requirement of the European Charter of Local Self-Government. Territorial self-government is further detailed in articles 99–105.

====Modification of the Constitution and the eternity clause====
There are three basic rules laid out in article 9, stating that the Constitution can only be changed by a Constitutional Act (par. 1), that not even such a change can remove or disrupt the substantive core of the Constitution (par. 3), and that not even construction or interpretation of legal regulations can remove or disrupt this core (par. 3).

The second paragraph, stating that changing substantial features of a democratic state is not admissible, is what is known as entrenched substantive core of the Constitution. Historically, such entrenchment clause first appeared in the first Constitution of the French Republic of August 1804, stating that republican form of government can not be revised. Identical construction is in the current Constitution of France.

Another important historical instance of entrenched clause in a constitution was enshrined in the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany of 1949, in reaction to development of 1919–1945. Firstly, it states that the Basic Law can only be changed by a statute that explicitly modifies or amends the wording of the Basic Law. Secondly, it contains a provision, which sets the substantive core beyond the reach of powers of the constitution-maker. This is called imperative of unchangeability or eternity clause. Unlike its Czech counterpart, the eternity clause (&quot;Ewigkeitsklausul&quot;) of the German Basic Law does specify, what its substantive core is: the subdivision of the federation into states, the states&#x27; powers in lawmaking, the dignity of a human, the principles of a democratic social state, the sovereignty of the people, the division of powers, the limitation of government by law, and the right to resist.

====International treaties====
Article 10 of the Constitution embeds key provisions in relation to incorporation of international law into domestic law. Until the &#x27;Euro-amendment&#x27; came into effect, it bestowed legal power akin to constitutional order onto international treaties on human rights and fundamental freedoms. The amendment has extended the treaties this applies to, and also granted them priority of application.

====Transfer of powers onto international organizations====
Articles 10a and 10b have been added into the Constitution by the &#x27;Euro-amendment&#x27; in reaction to the accession of the Czech Republic to the EU. Article 10a set the condition on the transfer of powers on an international organization or institution. Article 10b stipulates that regarding issues obligations arising from such a membership, it is a duty of the Cabinet to inform the Parliament, and a right of the chambers of the Parliament to give their opinion.

====Territorial integrity====
Constitutional grounds for defining what is Czech national territory are article 11, also stipulates that a constitutional act is necessary to modify Czech Republic&#x27;s national borders.

====Czech citizenship====
Article 12 sets rules about the acquisition and loss of Czech citizenship. In 2007, a bill of a constitutional act on citizenship was drafted, which said explicitly that there was no legal claim to being granted Czech citizenship. This was likely an attempt to overcome case law of the Supreme Administrative Court, which has adjudicated that there is a right to Czech citizenship.

====The capital and symbols of the state====
Prague is declared the capital in article 13. While details are left to a statute, article 14 lists the symbols of the Czech Republic: the coat of arms, the official colours, the national flag, the flag of the president, the official seal and the national anthem.

=== Chapter Two – Legislative power ===

====The Parliament, its chambers and members====
Chapter two vests legislative and constitution-making power in the Czech Parliament. Article 15 stipulates that legislative power belongs to the Parliament, consisting of two chambers, the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. Article 16 says that the Chamber of Deputies has 200 members elected for a four-year term (the election is based upon proportional system representation), while the Senate has 81 members elected for 6 years (the election is based upon majority system), election being held every two year to select one third of them. Article 17 specifies election schedule. Article 18 regulates active suffrage, or the right to be elected, and the election process.

=== Chapter Three ===
It provides for the ways in which specific executive powers shall be delineated between the President of the Republic and the government (as headed by the Prime Minister). The chapter also outlines the nature of the direct election of the President by the public as well as the limitations of presidential power in selecting a government. (Articles 54–80).

=== Chapter Four ===
In article 81, the Constitution states that the judicial power shall be carried out in the name of the republic by courts of law, independent on the legislature and the executive. The &quot;in the name of republic&quot; formula contained here is also quoted in each substantive ruling of a Czech court. Article 82 lays out the requirement of independence and impartiality of judges, and in effect of all the decision by the judiciary.

Articles 83–89 is dedicated to the Constitutional Court of the Czech Republic and states, that it is only to be governed by the constitution. Limiting its powers by a regular statute, for example, is out of question. The 15 judges, nominated by the Senate and named by the president for the period of 10 years, are granted immunity akin to the one members of parliament enjoy.

Articles 90–96 describe the court system, comprising the Supreme Court of the Czech Republic, the Supreme Administrative Court, high courts, regional courts, and district courts.

=== Chapter Five ===
The constitution establishes The Supreme Control Office (Article 97).

=== Chapter Six ===
In article 98, the constitution establishes the position and competences of the Czech National Bank (CNB). It assign the CNB the role of central bank, with the primary purpose of maintaining price stability. External interventions into its activities must be permitted by law. It was the then-governor of the national bank Josef Tošovský, who requested that the bank&#x27;s position be incorporated into the Constitution. As the lawyers drafting the document could not find a way of placing it within the three powers, the bank was given its own chapter.

=== Chapter Seven ===
The constitution provides the basis for local government, by dividing the territory of the republic into self-governing territorial districts, and regions (Articles 99–105).

=== Chapter Eight ===
The document concludes by weighing in on a number of so-called &#x27;interim&#x27; issues which mainly applied to the Republic in its first year of existence. Chiefly, it specifically delineates what officers or laws of the former Czech government as a constituent part of the Czechoslovak Federal Republic remained in force until the Czech Republic produced new officeholders or laws under the provisions found elsewhere in the constitution. Of the provisions of this chapter, by far the most lasting has been Article 112 (1), which made the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms (1991) a part of the constitution. This move has commonality with the way in which the Bill of Rights was quickly annexed to the US constitution, granting Czech citizens specific personal rights that would be extremely difficult for a future Czech government to abrogate (Articles 106–113).

== Amending the Constitution ==

=== Overall development ===
Stability has always been a characteristic of constitutional law of the Czech Republic and Czechoslovakia, and their constitutions (the sum of all constitutional acts). Since the Constitution came into force, it has only been modified a few times, and the amendments did not have a major impact on the Czech constitutional system.

=== Higher territorial self-governing units ===

The first Act of Parliament modifying the Constitution was Constitutional Act No. 347/1997 Coll, on the Creation of Higher Self-Governing Units and Amending Constitutional Act of the Czech National Assembly No. 1/1993 Coll., the Constitution of the Czech Republic. It created higher territorial self-governing units, as assumed by Article 100 paragraph 3 of the Constitution.

=== NATO ===

The wording of the Constitution was further changed by Constitutional Act No. 300/2000 Coll., relating to accession of the Czech Republic into the North Atlantic Alliance in 1999. The act changed provisions of the Constitution on matters such as deployment of armed forces, stay of allied armed forces on the territory of the Czech Republic, participation of the country in the defence systems of international organisations, and division of powers between the cabinet and the Parliament in such matters.

=== The Czech National Bank ===

Another modification to the Constitution brought Constitutional Act No. 448/2001 Coll. The Cabinet has prepared an amendment of the constitution in February 2000, but this has been this rejected by the Chamber of Deputies in second reading. Part of the bill proposed the change of article 98 of the Constitution, in preparation for the new wording of Act No. 6/1993 Coll. on the Czech National Bank. As a result of the rejection by the legislature, the Act on the Czech National bank became incompatible with the Constitution. The new wording of the Act, which entailed the necessity to modify the constitution, has become a necessity as a consequence and a requirement of the Treaty Establishing the European Economic Community and the Protocol on the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and the European Central Bank, attached to this treaty. A new bill has been drafted, limited to a technicality – replacing &quot;the stability of currency&quot; by &quot;&quot;the stability of prices&quot; &quot;in article 98.

=== The Euro-amendment ===

Passed on 18 October 2001, the so-called &#x27;Euro-amendment&#x27;, was a rather important change to the Constitution. Having entered into effect on 1 June 2002, Act No. 395/2001 Coll. added paragraph 2 into article 1, stating that the country abides by obligations arising from international law. It changed article 10, hitherto ascribing high legal force only to international treaties on basic human rights and freedoms, broadening it to grant this higher legal force to all promulgated international treaties, which the Parliament agreed to ratify. Articles 10a and 10b have been added, providing guidelines on the conditions of transfer of powers to an international organisation or organisations. With respect to obligations arising from the membership in such a body, the Cabinet has the duty to inform the Parliament, and both chambers of the Parliament have the right to give their opinion. Several other articles have been changed, including the list of laws that are binding for a judge of the Constitutional Court.

=== The referendum on the accession to the EU ===

The opposition of a part of the political class towards the introduction of features of direct democracy was the reason, for a one-off provision to have been incorporated into the Constitution, for the referendum on the accession of the Czech Republic to the European Union, published as Constitutional Act No. 515/2002 Coll.

=== Self-dissolution of the Chamber of Deputies ===

Constitutional Act No. 319/2009 Coll. has in essence been prepared back in 2001 by the standing committee of the Senate for the Constitution of the Czech Republic and parliamentary procedures. The Act has introduced the possibility of self-dissolution of the Chamber of Deputies, in reaction to a previous ruling by the Constitutional Court, which had annulled the Constitutional Act on the Shortening of the Fifth Electoral Term of the Chamber of Deputies. At the same time, the Act fixed a loophole in the Constitution, which had not foreseen and provided for the situation, when the president would not be able to call elections.

=== Direct election of the president ===

In June 2011, the government introduced into the chamber of deputies a bill of a constitutional act, providing for president to be elected by popular vote. The bill has been approved by the Chamber of Deputies in December 2011 and by the Senate in February 2012. Until the new Constitutional Act No. 71/2012 Coll. entered into force on 1 October 2012, president was elected at a joint session of both Chambers of the Parliament. The election was supposed to take place within 30 days before the incumbent president&#x27;s term of office ended, or 30 days after, in case it ended prematurely. The powers of president have been modified too. To order that a criminal procedure must not be commenced, or, had it been commenced, that it not be continued, the president now needs co-action of the government. While the general entry into force of the Act has been fixed in advance for the coming presidential election, for the part of the Act regarding the liability of president for high treason, and the condition for bringing a constitutional action against the president by the Senate, a later date has been set, 8 March 2013.


==See also==
* Principle of legality in French criminal law

==External links==
* Constitution of the Czech Republic
* Ústava České republiky</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2948382" start="4" end="38" title="Constitution of the Czech Republic" label="Constitution of the Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="68" end="82" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529439" start="128" end="150" title="Czech National Council" label="Czech National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502307" start="227" end="262" title="1960 Constitution of Czechoslovakia" label="1960 Constitution of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="314" end="328" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="345" end="360" title="Slovakia" label="Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059215" start="389" end="409" title="Dissolution of Czechoslovakia" label="peaceful dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="575" end="587" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178919" start="616" end="664" title="Charter of Fundamental Rights and Basic Freedoms" label="Charter of Fundamental Rights and Basic Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015587" start="1091" end="1098" title="Cabinet of the Czech Republic" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819381" start="1107" end="1116" title="President of the Czech Republic" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303167" start="1127" end="1141" title="Judiciary of the Czech Republic" label="judicial power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128501" start="1147" end="1167" title="Constitutional Court of the Czech Republic" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595417" start="1215" end="1235" title="Supreme Audit Office of the Czech Republic" label="Supreme Audit Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q251062" start="1241" end="1260" title="Czech National Bank" label="Czech National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819381" start="1626" end="1635" title="President of the Czech Republic" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="1639" end="1651" title="Direct election" label="popular vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800246" start="1739" end="1795" title="National Assembly (Communist Czechoslovakia)" label="National Assembly of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509725" start="1834" end="1883" title="Constitutional Act on the Czechoslovak Federation" label="Constitutional Act on the Czechoslovak Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529439" start="1914" end="1936" title="Czech National Council" label="Czech National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139204" start="1942" end="1965" title="National Council (Slovakia)" label="Slovak National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991965" start="2131" end="2155" title="Czech Socialist Republic" label="Czech Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751495" start="2164" end="2189" title="Slovak Socialist Republic" label="Slovak Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853526" start="2504" end="2527" title="Normalization (Czechoslovakia)" label="period of normalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="2581" end="2591" title="federation" label="federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="3044" end="3070" title="Unitary state" label="centrally governed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="3234" end="3267" title="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia" label="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q709968" start="3311" end="3323" title="Marián Čalfa" label="Marián Čalfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202921" start="3434" end="3448" title="National Front (Czechoslovakia)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q551665" start="3469" end="3480" title="Miloš Jakeš" label="Miloš Jakeš"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="3841" end="3853" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564203" start="3898" end="3914" title="Federal Assembly (Czechoslovakia)" label="Federal Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q182817" start="4745" end="4762" title="Velvet Revolution" label="Velvet Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201888" start="5819" end="5835" title="Czechoslovak parliamentary election, 1992" label="election of 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201888" start="5948" end="6008" title="Czechoslovak parliamentary election, 1992" label="Federal Assembly of the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270839" start="6027" end="6049" title="Czech legislative election, 1992" label="Czech National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053313" start="6059" end="6082" title="Slovak parliamentary election, 1992" label="Slovak National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q828099" start="6111" end="6133" title="Civic Democratic Party (Czech Republic)" label="Civic Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q828392" start="6343" end="6377" title="Movement for a Democratic Slovakia" label="Movement for a Democratic Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969185" start="6637" end="6672" title="Constitution of Slovakia" label="Constitution of the Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059215" start="6769" end="6798" title="dissolution of Czechoslovakia" label="dissolution of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57434" start="7051" end="7063" title="Václav Klaus" label="Václav Klaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q696669" start="7101" end="7114" title="Cyril Svoboda" label="Cyril Svoboda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7156" end="7169" title="Daniel Kroupa" label="Daniel Kroupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427640" start="7171" end="7183" title="Václav Benda" label="Václav Benda"/>
<link wikidata="Q12037503" start="7215" end="7231" title="Miloslav Výborný" label="Miloslav Výborný"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155804" start="7265" end="7278" title="Pavel Zářecký" label="Pavel Zářecký"/>
<link wikidata="Q165114" start="7364" end="7375" title="Marek Benda" label="Marek Benda"/>
<link wikidata="Q12018971" start="7432" end="7446" title="Hana Marvanová" label="Hana Marvanová"/>
<link wikidata="Q644098" start="7522" end="7532" title="Milan Uhde" label="Milan Uhde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566435" start="7815" end="7848" title="Czechoslovak Constitution of 1920" label="Czechoslovak Constitution of 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q140359" start="8119" end="8146" title="First Czechoslovak Republic" label="First Czechoslovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178919" start="8207" end="8249" title="Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms" label="Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="8733" end="8744" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8951" end="8956" title="Viktor Knapp" label="Knapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q384544" start="9069" end="9081" title="Karlovy Vary" label="Karlovy Vary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819381" start="9249" end="9258" title="President of the Czech Republic" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015587" start="9325" end="9332" title="Cabinet of the Czech Republic" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303167" start="9376" end="9385" title="Judiciary of the Czech Republic" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q251062" start="9445" end="9464" title="Czech National Bank" label="Czech National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595417" start="9473" end="9493" title="Supreme Audit Office of the Czech Republic" label="Supreme Audit Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155804" start="9501" end="9514" title="Pavel Zářecký" label="Pavel Zářecký"/>
<link wikidata="Q913567" start="10024" end="10062" title="Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia" label="Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12033327" start="10072" end="10092" title="Liberal-Social Union" label="Liberal-Social Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="10514" end="10540" title="proportional voting system" label="proportional voting system"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="10573" end="10597" title="Two-round system" label="two-round run-off system"/>
<link wikidata="Q644098" start="10697" end="10707" title="Milan Uhde" label="Milan Uhde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="10980" end="10992" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q446780" start="11006" end="11017" title="Promulgation" label="promulgated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065227" start="11025" end="11041" title="official journal" label="official journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17990855" start="11390" end="11400" title="Entrenched legislation" label="entrenched"/>
<link wikidata="Q84356" start="11665" end="11681" title="Karl Loewenstein" label="Karl Loewenstein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11689" end="11732" title="Karl Loewenstein#Ontological classification" label="ontological classification of constitutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566435" start="12011" end="12054" title="Czechoslovak Constitution of 1920" label="Czechoslovak Constitutional Charter of 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q36233" start="12243" end="12255" title="Václav Havel" label="Václav Havel"/>
<link wikidata="Q644098" start="12270" end="12280" title="Milan Uhde" label="Milan Uhde"/>
<link wikidata="Q212036" start="12303" end="12329" title="History of the Czech lands" label="history of Czech statehood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="12395" end="12404" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="12704" end="12712" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="12717" end="12726" title="Sovereignty" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="12728" end="12735" title="Unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="12740" end="12750" title="Democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209223" start="12757" end="12768" title="Rechtsstaat" label="Rechtsstaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="13284" end="13298" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q748811" start="13711" end="13724" title="Substantive law" label="substantively"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128501" start="13730" end="13750" title="Constitutional Court of the Czech Republic" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q914661" start="13982" end="13994" title="positive law" label="positive law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178919" start="14558" end="14565" title="Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms" label="Charter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14819" end="14837" title="#The Euro-amendment" label="the Euro-amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q214524" start="15318" end="15336" title="Gettysburg Address" label="Gettysburg Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="15338" end="15353" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q285950" start="15566" end="15591" title="sovereignty of the people" label="sovereignty of the people"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="15629" end="15644" title="executive power" label="executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="15646" end="15663" title="legislative power" label="legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="15669" end="15683" title="judicial power" label="judicial power"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="16169" end="16179" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q828099" start="16267" end="16289" title="Civic Democratic Party (Czech Republic)" label="Civic Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807830" start="16298" end="16323" title="Civic Democratic Alliance" label="Civic Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q341148" start="16430" end="16447" title="Czech Social Democratic Party" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773061" start="16790" end="16807" title="enumerated powers" label="enumerated powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178919" start="17444" end="17486" title="Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms" label="Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q389309" start="18482" end="18503" title="December Constitution" label="December Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="19070" end="19087" title="Political party" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="19216" end="19226" title="Minority group" label="minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377281" start="19859" end="19900" title="European Charter of Local Self-Government" label="European Charter of Local Self-Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q17990855" start="20579" end="20598" title="entrenchment clause" label="entrenchment clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q832508" start="20783" end="20805" title="Constitution of France" label="Constitution of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="20906" end="20951" title="Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q17990855" start="21307" end="21322" title="eternity clause" label="eternity clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="21613" end="21625" title="social state" label="social state"/>
<link wikidata="Q708363" start="21727" end="21742" title="right to resist" label="right to resist"/>
<link wikidata="Q133346" start="22925" end="22931" title="border" label="border"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="23023" end="23034" title="citizenship" label="citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644797" start="23247" end="23275" title="Supreme Administrative Court of the Czech Republic" label="Supreme Administrative Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="23389" end="23395" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="23412" end="23419" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q179596" start="23528" end="23540" title="Coat of arms of the Czech Republic" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23546" end="23562" title="Official colours of the Czech Republic" label="official colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q127155" start="23568" end="23581" title="Flag of the Czech Republic" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23587" end="23608" title="Flag of the President of the Czech Republic" label="flag of the president"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23614" end="23627" title="Official Seal of the Czech Republic" label="official seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q483590" start="23636" end="23651" title="Kde domov můj?" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347172" start="23811" end="23827" title="Parliament of the Czech Republic" label="Czech Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q320265" start="23933" end="23952" title="Chamber of Deputies of the Parliament of the Czech Republic" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q389423" start="23961" end="23967" title="Senate of the Parliament of the Czech Republic" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="24354" end="24362" title="suffrage" label="suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="24484" end="24499" title="executive (government)" label="executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819381" start="24533" end="24558" title="President of the Czech Republic" label="President of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q390415" start="24596" end="24610" title="List of Prime Ministers of the Czech Republic" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="24657" end="24672" title="direct election" label="direct election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303167" start="25244" end="25253" title="Judiciary of the Czech Republic" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128501" start="25291" end="25333" title="Constitutional Court of the Czech Republic" label="Constitutional Court of the Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q389423" start="25505" end="25511" title="Senate of the Parliament of the Czech Republic" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q837859" start="25596" end="25631" title="parliamentary immunity" label="the one members of parliament enjoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645005" start="25691" end="25726" title="Supreme Court of the Czech Republic" label="Supreme Court of the Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644797" start="25732" end="25760" title="Supreme Administrative Court of the Czech Republic" label="Supreme Administrative Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595417" start="25868" end="25890" title="Supreme Audit Office of the Czech Republic" label="Supreme Control Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q251062" start="26006" end="26025" title="Czech National Bank" label="Czech National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="26063" end="26075" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998866" start="26978" end="27007" title="Czech and Slovak Federal Republic" label="Czechoslovak Federal Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178919" start="27244" end="27286" title="Charter of Fundamental Rights and Basic Freedoms" label="Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q191296" start="27374" end="27388" title="Bill of rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="28559" end="28582" title="North Atlantic Alliance" label="North Atlantic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q276325" start="28672" end="28684" title="Military of the Czech Republic" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q320265" start="29153" end="29172" title="Chamber of Deputies of the Czech Republic" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q251062" start="29330" end="29349" title="Czech National Bank" label="Czech National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q167457" start="29628" end="29679" title="Treaty of Rome" label="Treaty Establishing the European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q221598" start="29719" end="29751" title="European System of Central Banks" label="European System of Central Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="29760" end="29781" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128501" start="31014" end="31034" title="Constitutional Court of the Czech Republic" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q111211169" start="33287" end="33331" title="Principle of legality in French criminal law" label="Principle of legality in French criminal law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424284" wikidata="Q7994771" url="?curid=424284" title="White Hart">
<text>The White Hart (&quot;hart&quot; being an archaic word for a mature stag) was the personal badge of Richard II, who probably derived it from the arms of his mother, Joan &quot;The Fair Maid of Kent&quot;, heiress of Edmund of Woodstock. It may also have been a pun on his name, as in &quot;Rich-hart&quot;. In the Wilton Diptych (National Gallery, London), which is the earliest authentic contemporary portrait of an English king, Richard II wears a gold and enamelled white hart jewel, and even the angels surrounding the Virgin Mary all wear white hart badges. In English Folklore, the white hart is associated with Herne the Hunter.
There are still many inns and pubs in England that sport a sign of the white hart, the fifth most popular name for a pub.

Arthur C. Clarke wrote a collection of science fictional tall tales under the title of &quot;Tales from the White Hart&quot;, which used as a framing device the conceit that the tales were told during drinking sessions in a pub named the White Hart that existed somewhere between Fleet Street and the Embankment. This pub was fictional but was based on a real pub named the White Horse where the science-fiction community of London met in the 1940s and 1950s.

==Notable British inns called the White Hart==

===Barnes, London===

&quot;Ye White Hart&quot; in Barnes is a Victorian pub which overlooks the Thames and is a prominent landmark on the course of the Boat Race. It served as a headquarters for Barnes Football Club in the mid-nineteenth century.

===Bletchingley===
The Whyte Hart Hotel in Bletchingley is said to have been founded in 1388. It was featured in a segment of a Pathé News documentary filmed in 1958 that focused on archaic dishes and methods of food preparation still in use there.

===Braintree===
The White Hart Hotel in Braintree dates back as far as the 14th Century in its current guise, and was placed at the crossroad of two Roman roads that form the centre of Braintree town and Bocking. It was a coaching inn that ran services to Sudbury and Norwich daily, up until the arrival of the railway in 1848. It has recently had a renovation by its current owners.

===Brentwood===
The White Hart in Brentwood is the oldest pub in the town, dating back to before 1480. It may have been so named after King Richard II passed through Brentwood in 1392, possibly staying at the inn. It became a coaching inn in the 18th century and survived long enough that in 1910 it even offered repairs to motor vehicles. It is now operating as a nightclub and restaurant called Sugar Hut. The building can be seen on reality TV programme, &#x27;The Only Way Is Essex&#x27;.

===Canterbury===
The facade of The White Hart in Canterbury dates from Victorian times, but is reputed to be built on the site of St Mary de Castro, demolished around 1486, the mortuary of which is now the pub&#x27;s cellar and still has a body chute. The small park next door, crossed by a diagonal path, is the graveyard, with gravestones lined up against the wall. The pub has a very nice garden, which used to hold bat and trap matches in the summer.

===Coggeshall===
Part of a quaint market village on the route between Braintree and Colchester, the White Hart Inn at Coggeshall dates back as far as 1420, and still has many of its original features, notably the timber rooms housing up to 18 beds. There is also a large meeting room available for hire.

===Colyford===
The White Hart Inn in Colyford sits on the A3052, which runs along the south coast from Bridport to Exeter.

===Crawley===
Crawley became an important coaching stop on the London to Brighton road after it became fully turnpiked in 1770. By 1668, a mid-15th century Wealden open hall-house which was originally a dwelling had been converted into an inn called &quot;The Whyte Harte&quot;, later standardised to &quot;The White Hart&quot;. The great increase in coaching traffic in the late 18th century meant its capacity was often exceeded; so it was sold in 1753 and the proceeds were used to establish a new White Hart Inn nearby. This was built around the core of an early 17th-century timber-framed building, and opened in 1770. As of 2011, it continues to trade under the White Hart name, as a tied house owned by Harveys Brewery.

===Dartington, Totnes===
The White Hart is the name of the bar and restaurant within the estate of Dartington Hall, near Totnes in Devon. The medieval Dartington Hall was built for John Holand, Earl of Huntingdon and half-brother to Richard II of England. The Dartington Morris Men side was formed at Dartington Hall in 1968 and was given permission to use the crest of the white hart on a red rose as its emblem.

===Edinburgh===
In Edinburgh, &quot;The White Hart&quot; is an inn in the Grassmarket, established early in the 16th century. It stood a few hundred steps from the place where public hangings were held, and was popular among spectators. Robert Burns and William Wordsworth were among its notable visitors, and Burke and Hare found some of the victims of their murder-for-body-parts scheme there.

===Hampshire===
There is a string of White Hart pubs along what was one of the old main coaching inn roads from London to Salisbury. These are at: Hook (The White Hart and The Old White Hart), Basingstoke, Worting, Overton, Whitchurch, Andover, Stockbridge, Gosport and Salisbury in east Wiltshire.

===Henfield===
The White Hart pub in Henfield, West Sussex was built in 1777, and sits alongside the A2037 road between Worthing and London.

===Hingham===
The White Hart in Hingham, Norfolk is a town centre boutique hotel and gastropub.

===Hull===
&quot;The Olde White Harte&quot; in Silver Street, Kingston upon Hull, was built c.1660, and remodelled in 1881 as a romantic re-imagining of a 17th-century inn. The exterior is in the &quot;Artisan Mannerist&quot; style, the interior has extensive wood panelling, including 17th century work; the building is Grade II* listed. Local legend, thought to originate in the 19th century and now considered unlikely to be correct, links the building with Sir John Hotham, and the English Civil War; the wood panelled first floor room known as the &quot;Oak Room&quot; or &quot;Plotting Parlour&quot; is the supposed location where Sir John Hotham and others took the decision to refuse King Charles I entry to the town, precipitating the First Siege of Hull.

&quot;The White Hart&quot; is in Alfred Gelder Street, Kingston upon Hull. It was built in 1904 and frequented by the poet Philip Larkin, who gave a talk to the Jazz Record Society entitled ‘My Life and Death as a Record Reviewer’ here in 1977.

===Isle of Wight===
The White Hart in Havenstreet is close to the main centre of the Isle of Wight Steam Railway and has a railway theme.

===Llangybi===
The White Hart in Llangybi was first built in the early 16th century and was to become the property of Henry VIII as part of Jane Seymour&#x27;s wedding dowry, while a century later Oliver Cromwell is reputed to have used it as his headquarters in Monmouthshire during the English Civil War. The interior still retains no fewer than 11 fireplaces from the 17th century, a wealth of exposed beams, original Tudor period plasterwork and even a priest hole.

For years, students of English literature were mystified by a couple of lines in the poem &#x27;Usk&#x27; written by T.S. Eliot. In 2003, &quot;The Guardian&quot; reported that T. S. Eliot made cryptic reference to this pub in his poem &quot;Usk&quot;, referring not to an animal but to The White Hart Village Inn. Touring Wales in 1935, the poet had visited the old hostelry which does indeed stand near the village well, once painted white and now in ruins.

===London (Drury Lane)===

The White Hart at 191 Drury Lane, one of central London&#x27;s best-known streets, has existed since the 15th century.

===Mitcham, London===

The White Hart, Mitcham is a currently closed, listed 18th century building situated near Mitcham Cricket Green. It is Mitcham&#x27;s earliest recorded inn, rebuilt in 1749–50 after fire damage. The central porch, with frieze and balustrade, is supported by four Tuscan columns. Stagecoaches used to start from a yard at the rear. It is Grade II listed. It is located in London Road.

===Ringwood===
The White Hart at Ringwood in the New Forest is said to have been the first pub so named, after King Henry VII caught such a beast nearby, had it leashed and led it back to the town in triumph, a legend with the flavour of political allegory.

===Rowen, Conwy===
White Hart Road is the name given to a section of hill land road enclosed from common land in the parish of Caerhun high above the village of Rowen, in the Conwy Valley. It was planned as a new part of the Royal Mail coach road from Llanbedr y Cennin to Abergwyngregyn before the A55 coast road was built linking Chester to Holyhead around Penmaenmawr. The enclosure award still shows the name White Hart, which is very unusual for a road name rather than inns.

===Shifnal, Shropshire===
The White Hart in Shifnal is a timber-farmed building has been dated back to the 18th century, with later additions. It was named CAMRA Telford Pub of the Year 2017, 2018 and 2019.

===Sherborne, Dorset===
There is a long-established pub called the White Hart on the high street in Sherborne.

===Sonning-on-Thames===
The Great House at Sonning in Sonning, Berkshire, on the banks of the River Thames, was formerly known as the &quot;White Hart&quot; because Richard II&#x27;s wife, Isabella of Valois was kept prisoner in the village after his death.

===South Mimms===
The White Hart, South Mimms in Hertfordshire is a Grade II listed pub built in the late 17th century or early 18th century.

===Southwark, London===
An inn at the sign of the &quot;White Hart&quot; was established in the medieval period on Borough High Street in Southwark, immediately south of London Bridge. It is mentioned by William Shakespeare in &quot;Henry VI, Part 2&quot; as the headquarters of the rebels in Jack Cade&#x27;s 1450 Kentish rebellion. Louis L&#x27;Amour mentions the Southwark White Hart in &quot;Sackett&#x27;s Land&quot;, an historical fiction taking place circa 1600. It became one of the many famous coaching inns in the days of Charles Dickens, and it was here that Sam Weller met Mr. Pickwick in the famous scene from &quot;The Pickwick Papers&quot;, chapter 10. The Inn was pulled down in the 19th century. It was next door to The George Inn and near the site of The Tabard.

Also in Southwark, but approximately 0.5 km to the west, the White Hart at 22 Great Suffolk Street was built in 1882. It survived redevelopment of the surrounding area and is now the only Victorian public house on that street.

===St Albans===

The &quot;White Hart&quot; in St Albans is a former coaching inn and a Grade II* listed building, built in around 1500. It is listed in CAMRA&#x27;s Register of Historic Pub Interiors.

===St Keverne===
The &quot;White Hart&quot; in St Keverne, Cornwall was the birthplace, in 1764, of the singer and actor Charles Incledon.

===Thatcham, Berkshire===

The White Hart in Thatcham is mentioned in &quot;Coaching Days and Coaching Ways&quot; (1888) by W. Outram Tristram.

===Wilmington===
The White Hart in Wilmington, East Devon is on the A35 road between Honiton and Axminster, where there also was a White Hart attested in the nineteenth century.

===Witham===
The White Hart Inn in Witham, Essex, is situated in the north centre of the town, and has been situated there since the late 13th Century. Based at the top of Newland Street, it sits pretty as one of the many old buildings in the town, and has since 2006 been refurbished to an authentic state that it was originally in.

===Witley===

The White Hart, the village pub in Witley, Surrey, is mostly Elizabethan and is said to stand on the site of an Anglo-Saxon inn. It is reputed to have one of the oldest continuous licences of any pub in England. Myles Birket Foster painted the picture-board for it in around 1875; this is now in the Victoria and Albert museum in London.

==American inns==

===Salisbury, Connecticut===
The White Hart Inn in Salisbury, Connecticut is named after one of the Hampshire taverns of the same name. It has operated as a post-road inn since 1867, though its physical structure dates back to 1806, when part of the current building was constructed as a private residence. It has a dining room, a pub, and numerous guest rooms and suites in the main building and in the adjoining Gideon Smith House. It was reported that the White Hart Inn in Salisbury had closed and was for sale as of November 2010. In May 2014, the Inn was sold for $2.9 million to an investor group led by Thomas Conley Rollins Jr., a New York investment banker who has a home in nearby Sharon. The group reopened the property in 2014. The property features 16 guest rooms, three dining rooms, a taproom with a full-service bar, two outdoor dining patios, a large porch with drink service, a ballroom and café. The artwork of Jasper Johns, Frank Stella, Terry Winters, Donald Baechler, Hugo Guinness and Duncan Hannah is displayed throughout the premises.

==See also==
*Heart (band), originally called White Hart
*White stag
*White boar

==References==

===Notes===
===Bibliography===
* 

==External links==

* The White Hart and other royal badges on a roll of Edward IV
*Devon enchanted by rare sighting of the mysterious white hart The Independent</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7994771" start="4" end="14" title="White Hart" label="White Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674077" start="22" end="26" title="Hart (deer)" label="hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="68" end="72" title="stag" label="stag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429148" start="91" end="96" title="badge (heraldry)" label="badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="100" end="110" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q234156" start="165" end="203" title="Joan of Kent" label="Joan &amp;quot;The Fair Maid of Kent&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q956563" start="216" end="235" title="Edmund of Woodstock, 1st Earl of Kent" label="Edmund of Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813497" start="314" end="328" title="The Wilton Diptych" label="Wilton Diptych"/>
<link wikidata="Q180788" start="330" end="354" title="National Gallery, London" label="National Gallery, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="523" end="534" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q641031" start="566" end="582" title="English Folklore" label="English Folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613706" start="618" end="634" title="Herne the Hunter" label="Herne the Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="759" end="775" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="798" end="813" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951220" start="816" end="825" title="tall tale" label="tall tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495362" start="852" end="877" title="Tales from the White Hart" label="Tales from the White Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505819" start="901" end="915" title="framing device" label="framing device"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421890" start="920" end="927" title="conceit" label="conceit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994771" start="997" end="1007" title="White Hart" label="White Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q846686" start="1039" end="1051" title="Fleet Street" label="Fleet Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251243" start="1056" end="1070" title="the Embankment" label="the Embankment"/>
<link wikidata="Q668140" start="1319" end="1325" title="Barnes, London" label="Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="1365" end="1371" title="Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q887604" start="1421" end="1430" title="Boat Race" label="Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276372" start="1464" end="1484" title="Barnes Football Club" label="Barnes Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476851" start="1560" end="1572" title="Bletchingley" label="Bletchingley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893565" start="1645" end="1655" title="Pathé News" label="Pathé News"/>
<link wikidata="Q676067" start="1807" end="1816" title="Braintree, Essex" label="Braintree"/>
<link wikidata="Q966002" start="1989" end="2001" title="coaching inn" label="coaching inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q909993" start="2186" end="2195" title="Brentwood, Essex" label="Brentwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="2287" end="2302" title="King Richard II" label="King Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q966002" start="2378" end="2390" title="coaching inn" label="coaching inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532410" start="2616" end="2637" title="The Only Way Is Essex" label="The Only Way Is Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="2695" end="2705" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q676067" start="3172" end="3181" title="Braintree, Essex" label="Braintree"/>
<link wikidata="Q184163" start="3186" end="3196" title="Colchester" label="Colchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013398" start="3220" end="3230" title="Coggeshall" label="Coggeshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q914040" start="3510" end="3518" title="Bridport" label="Bridport"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="3522" end="3528" title="Exeter" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q844908" start="3545" end="3552" title="Crawley" label="Crawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q339249" start="3573" end="3581" title="Stagecoach" label="coaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q406633" start="3640" end="3649" title="Turnpike trust" label="turnpiked"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978012" start="3687" end="3694" title="Wealden hall house" label="Wealden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923257" start="3695" end="3710" title="hall house" label="open hall-house"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752905" start="3767" end="3808" title="Ancient Priors" label="an inn called &amp;quot;The Whyte Harte&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566893" start="4026" end="4046" title="White Hart Inn, Crawley" label="a new White Hart Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800977" start="4221" end="4231" title="tied house" label="tied house"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677759" start="4241" end="4256" title="Harveys Brewery" label="Harveys Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166798" start="4358" end="4373" title="Dartington Hall" label="Dartington Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007106" start="4380" end="4386" title="Totnes" label="Totnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="4390" end="4395" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q715919" start="4440" end="4471" title="John Holand, Earl of Huntingdon" label="John Holand, Earl of Huntingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="4492" end="4513" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225635" start="4519" end="4540" title="Dartington Morris Men" label="Dartington Morris Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543570" start="4748" end="4759" title="Grassmarket" label="Grassmarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q175111" start="4857" end="4864" title="hanging" label="hanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="4911" end="4923" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="4928" end="4946" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288729" start="4984" end="4998" title="Burke and Hare" label="Burke and Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q160642" start="5193" end="5202" title="Salisbury, United Kingdom" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q616126" start="5218" end="5222" title="Hook, Hart" label="Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q810196" start="5264" end="5275" title="Basingstoke" label="Basingstoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854735" start="5286" end="5293" title="Overton, Hampshire" label="Overton"/>
<link wikidata="Q632258" start="5295" end="5305" title="Whitchurch, Hampshire" label="Whitchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q492805" start="5307" end="5314" title="Andover, Hampshire" label="Andover"/>
<link wikidata="Q547492" start="5316" end="5327" title="Stockbridge, Hampshire" label="Stockbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q160642" start="5341" end="5350" title="Salisbury, United Kingdom" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q847159" start="5408" end="5416" title="Henfield" label="Henfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568918" start="5545" end="5561" title="Hingham, Norfolk" label="Hingham, Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="5672" end="5690" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Kingston upon Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540245" start="6071" end="6086" title="Sir John Hotham, 1st Baronet" label="Sir John Hotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="6096" end="6113" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="6302" end="6316" title="Charles I of England" label="King Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510090" start="6354" end="6373" title="Siege of Hull (1642)" label="First Siege of Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="6431" end="6449" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Kingston upon Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q313758" start="6499" end="6512" title="Philip Larkin" label="Philip Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9286781" start="6660" end="6671" title="Havenstreet" label="Havenstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345666" start="6707" end="6734" title="Isle of Wight Steam Railway" label="Isle of Wight Steam Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q13129646" start="6794" end="6802" title="Llangybi, Monmouthshire" label="Llangybi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="6879" end="6889" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q182637" start="6901" end="6913" title="Jane Seymour" label="Jane Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="6929" end="6934" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="6958" end="6973" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245075" start="7024" end="7037" title="Monmouthshire (historic)" label="Monmouthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="7049" end="7066" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316201" start="7182" end="7194" title="Tudor period" label="Tudor period"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="7349" end="7359" title="T.S. Eliot" label="T.S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="7376" end="7388" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="7409" end="7420" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261392" start="7742" end="7752" title="Drury Lane" label="Drury Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="7761" end="7775" title="central London" label="central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q687798" start="7879" end="7886" title="Mitcham, London" label="Mitcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248943" start="8281" end="8289" title="Ringwood, Hampshire" label="Ringwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q277755" start="8297" end="8307" title="New Forest" label="New Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="8364" end="8373" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q638098" start="8732" end="8742" title="Royal Mail" label="Royal Mail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8759" end="8776" title="Llanbedr y Cennin" label="Llanbedr y Cennin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396898" start="8780" end="8794" title="Abergwyngregyn" label="Abergwyngregyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569297" start="9033" end="9040" title="Shifnal" label="Shifnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q586895" start="9297" end="9306" title="Sherborne" label="Sherborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q13529052" start="9337" end="9359" title="Great House at Sonning" label="Great House at Sonning"/>
<link wikidata="Q588293" start="9363" end="9370" title="Sonning" label="Sonning"/>
<link wikidata="Q23220" start="9372" end="9381" title="Berkshire" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="9403" end="9415" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="9474" end="9484" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q229901" start="9498" end="9516" title="Isabella of Valois" label="Isabella of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q26630424" start="9586" end="9613" title="The White Hart, South Mimms" label="The White Hart, South Mimms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946315" start="9826" end="9845" title="Borough High Street" label="Borough High Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273898" start="9849" end="9858" title="Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q130206" start="9881" end="9894" title="London Bridge" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="9915" end="9934" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236216" start="9944" end="9960" title="Henry VI, Part 2" label="Henry VI, Part 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126349" start="10004" end="10013" title="Jack Cade" label="Jack Cade"/>
<link wikidata="Q379895" start="10045" end="10063" title="Louis L&amp;#x27;Amour" label="Louis L&amp;#x27;Amour"/>
<link wikidata="Q966002" start="10214" end="10226" title="coaching inn" label="coaching inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="10243" end="10258" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408316" start="10281" end="10291" title="Sam Weller (fictional character)" label="Sam Weller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448415" start="10296" end="10308" title="Samuel Pickwick" label="Mr. Pickwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q460583" start="10340" end="10359" title="The Pickwick Papers" label="The Pickwick Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12058464" start="10444" end="10458" title="The George Inn, Southwark" label="The George Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103238" start="10480" end="10490" title="The Tabard" label="The Tabard"/>
<link wikidata="Q65965558" start="10571" end="10591" title="Great Suffolk Street" label="Great Suffolk Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226" start="10768" end="10777" title="St Albans" label="St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q966002" start="10790" end="10802" title="coaching inn" label="coaching inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="10809" end="10825" title="Grade II* listed" label="Grade II* listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q925258" start="10874" end="10879" title="CAMRA" label="CAMRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248904" start="10971" end="10981" title="St Keverne" label="St Keverne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="10983" end="10991" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201127" start="11045" end="11061" title="Charles Incledon" label="Charles Incledon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11188" end="11206" title="W. Outram Tristram" label="W. Outram Tristram"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022721" start="11244" end="11254" title="Wilmington, Devon" label="Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277825" start="11256" end="11266" title="East Devon" label="East Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649170" start="11277" end="11285" title="A35 road" label="A35 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q647123" start="11294" end="11301" title="Honiton" label="Honiton"/>
<link wikidata="Q792596" start="11306" end="11315" title="Axminster" label="Axminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861278" start="11423" end="11429" title="Witham" label="Witham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="11431" end="11436" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644460" start="11772" end="11778" title="Witley" label="Witley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="11780" end="11786" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="11798" end="11809" title="Elizabethan" label="Elizabethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="11849" end="11860" title="Anglo-Saxon" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11861" end="11864" title="Public house#Inns" label="inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738050" start="11949" end="11968" title="Myles Birket Foster" label="Myles Birket Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="12037" end="12063" title="Victoria and Albert museum" label="Victoria and Albert museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323182" start="12146" end="12168" title="Salisbury, Connecticut" label="Salisbury, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="12195" end="12204" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q941662" start="13171" end="13183" title="Heart (band)" label="Heart (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995696" start="13215" end="13225" title="White stag" label="White stag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995576" start="13227" end="13237" title="White boar" label="White boar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424288" wikidata="Q623073" url="?curid=424288" title="North Glengarry">
<text>North Glengarry is a township in eastern Ontario, Canada, in the United Counties of Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry. It is a predominantly rural area located between Ottawa-Gatineau, Montreal and Cornwall.

==Communities==
The township of North Glengarry comprises a number of villages and hamlets, including the following communities:

* Kenyon Township: Apple Hill, Dominionville, Dunvegan, Greenfield, Maxville; &quot;Athol&quot;, &quot;Baltic Corners&quot;, &quot;Dornie&quot;, &quot;Fiskes Corners&quot;, &quot;Fassifern&quot;, &quot;Guaytown&quot;, &quot;Laggan&quot;, &quot;McCrimmon&quot;, &quot;St. Elmo&quot;, &quot;Stewarts Glen&quot;; &quot;Fairview&quot;, &quot;Skye&quot;
* Lochiel Township: Alexandria (population 3,287), Dalkeith, Glen Robertson, Glen Sandfield, Lochiel; &quot;Breadalbane&quot;, &quot;Brodie&quot;, &quot;Kirkhill&quot;, &quot;Lochinvar&quot;, &quot;Lorne&quot;, &quot;McCormick&quot;, &quot;Pine Grove&quot;

The township administrative offices are located in Alexandria.

Alexandria is served five or six times a day by the Montreal-Ottawa Via Rail trains which almost all stop at Alexandria station in each direction. Commuter buses provide daily services from Maxville and area to Ottawa-Gatineau. Maxville was served by Via Rail until October 2011.

==History==

The area was originally settled in 1792 as part of the historic Glengarry County in which many Scottish emigrants settled from all over the Scottish Highlands due to the Highland Clearances. This first wave of heavy migration lasted till 1816, emigration still continued afterwards into the early 20th century but in a slower pace. Many of these migrants came from the Inverness-shire area of Scotland specifically. Canadian Gaelic / Scottish Gaelic has been a spoken language in the area for over four centuries [1792?]. Kenyon, which was part of Charlottenburgh Township until 1798, was named for British judge and politician Lloyd Kenyon, 1st Baron Kenyon, and Lochiel, which was part of Lancaster Township until 1818, was named for the Lochiels of Clan Cameron.

Alexandria and its nucleus &quot;Priest&#x27;s Mill&quot;, built in 1819, were named for the Catholic priest Alexander Macdonell, who resided at St. Raphael&#x27;s and later became the first bishop of Kingston.

Development in the region was significantly spurred by the development of a railway link between Ottawa and Montreal in the early 1880s. Maxville, Alexandria and Glen Robertson, in particular, became key railway hubs for farmers in the area.

Maxville was first incorporated as a village separate from Kenyon Township in 1892, and Alexandria was separated from Lochiel Township in the early 1900s.

The township of North Glengarry was established on January 1, 1998, with the amalgamation of the former townships of Kenyon and Lochiel, along with the village of Maxville and the town of Alexandria.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, North Glengarry had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.


==Culture==

Maxville (population 853) hosts the annual Glengarry Highland Games, one of North America&#x27;s largest festivals of Scottish culture, on the first long weekend in August. The Glengarry Highland Games include traditional Scottish events such as the caber toss, tug of war, and the sheaf toss.

Maxville hosts a country fair at the end of June that include a classic and new automobile show, homecraft prizes, Western performances, a holstein show including 4-H showmanship, a hunter horse and hunter pony show, a talent show, a midway, laser tag and a demolition derby.

==Sport==
The Alexandria Glens of the Central Canada Hockey League Tier 2 play at the Glengarry Sports Palace (Billy Gebbie Arena) in Alexandria. The Glens joined the new CCHL2 league in 2015. The Glens played in the Eastern Ontario Junior B Hockey League until the 2014-15 season.

The Glens won the 2007 EOJBHL Championship, defeating the Gatineau Mustangs in 7 games in the final. This marks the first time a team outside of the Metro Division of EOJBHL has won the Carson Trophy as league champions in over half a decade. This marks the Glens‘ first Junior &quot;B&quot; Championship.

The Glens won the 2008 EOJBHL Championship, defeating the Ottawa West Golden Knights in 6 games in the final. This marks the first time a team the St-Lawrence Division has won the Carson Trophy back to back as league champions. This was also the Glens‘ second Junior &quot;B&quot; Championship.

The Maxville Mustangs of the Eastern Ontario Junior C Hockey League used to play in Maxville.

==See also==
* Transit Eastern Ontario operated under the authority of &quot;The North Glengarry Prescott Russell (NGPR) Transport Board&quot;
*List of townships in Ontario
*List of francophone communities in Ontario
* Glengarry Pioneer Museum
* Canadian Gaelic

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q623073" start="0" end="15" title="North Glengarry" label="North Glengarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936646" start="21" end="29" title="township (Canada)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058779" start="33" end="48" title="eastern Ontario" label="eastern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065651" start="65" end="114" title="United Counties of Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry" label="United Counties of Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q175185" start="138" end="143" title="rural" label="rural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="165" end="171" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q141844" start="172" end="180" title="Gatineau" label="Gatineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="182" end="190" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q956690" start="195" end="203" title="Cornwall, Ontario" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q50347614" start="404" end="412" title="Maxville, Ontario" label="Maxville"/>
<link wikidata="Q876720" start="1075" end="1083" title="Via Rail" label="Via Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095610" start="1116" end="1134" title="Alexandria station (Ontario)" label="Alexandria station"/>
<link wikidata="Q668850" start="1218" end="1233" title="Ottawa-Gatineau" label="Ottawa-Gatineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568538" start="1365" end="1381" title="Glengarry County, Ontario" label="Glengarry County"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="1396" end="1414" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish emigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="1441" end="1459" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368217" start="1471" end="1490" title="Highland Clearances" label="Highland Clearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247390" start="1670" end="1685" title="Inverness-shire" label="Inverness-shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1694" end="1702" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542210" start="1717" end="1732" title="Canadian Gaelic" label="Canadian Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="1735" end="1750" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q597323" start="1849" end="1873" title="Charlottenburgh Township, Ontario" label="Charlottenburgh Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662537" start="1929" end="1959" title="Lloyd Kenyon, 1st Baron Kenyon" label="Lloyd Kenyon, 1st Baron Kenyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q597323" start="1992" end="2010" title="Lancaster Township, Ontario" label="Lancaster Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q179064" start="2053" end="2065" title="Clan Cameron" label="Clan Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q426545" start="2177" end="2196" title="Alexander Macdonell (bishop of Kingston)" label="Alexander Macdonell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="2377" end="2383" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="2388" end="2396" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="2906" end="2931" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="2945" end="2962" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568541" start="3204" end="3228" title="Glengarry Highland Games" label="Glengarry Highland Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007259" start="3279" end="3295" title="Scottish culture" label="Scottish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720968" start="3747" end="3763" title="Alexandria Glens" label="Alexandria Glens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330348" start="3771" end="3806" title="Central Canada Hockey League Tier 2" label="Central Canada Hockey League Tier 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912587" start="3844" end="3862" title="Billy Gebbie Arena" label="Billy Gebbie Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330348" start="3950" end="3988" title="Eastern Ontario Junior B Hockey League" label="Eastern Ontario Junior B Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133015" start="4623" end="4640" title="Maxville Mustangs" label="Maxville Mustangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971253" start="4648" end="4686" title="Eastern Ontario Junior C Hockey League" label="Eastern Ontario Junior C Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072408" start="4729" end="4752" title="Transit Eastern Ontario" label="Transit Eastern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643835" start="4858" end="4886" title="List of townships in Ontario" label="List of townships in Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008452" start="4888" end="4930" title="List of francophone communities in ontario" label="List of francophone communities in Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511577" start="4933" end="4957" title="Glengarry Pioneer Museum" label="Glengarry Pioneer Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542210" start="4960" end="4975" title="Canadian Gaelic" label="Canadian Gaelic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424289" wikidata="Q7408316" url="?curid=424289" title="Sam Weller (character)">
<text>Sam Weller is a fictional character in &quot;The Pickwick Papers&quot; (1836), the first novel by Charles Dickens, and the character that made Dickens famous. A humorous Cockney bootblack, Sam Weller first appeared in the fourth serialised episode. Previously the monthly parts of the book had been doing badly, selling only about 1,000 copies a month — but the humour of the character transformed the book into a publishing phenomenon, raising the sales by late autumn of 1837 to 40,000 a month.

On the impact of the character, &quot;The Paris Review&quot; stated, &quot;arguably the most historic bump in English publishing is the Sam Weller Bump.&quot; Such was the popularity of the character that William Thomas Moncrieff named his 1837 burletta &quot;Samuel Weller, or, The Pickwickians&quot; after the main comic character in the novel, rather than on Samuel Pickwick himself. Merchandise based on the character appeared, such as Sam Weller puzzles, Weller boot polish and Weller joke books.

==Character==
In chapter 10 of the novel, the eponymous hero of the novel, Mr. Pickwick, meets Sam Weller working at the White Hart Inn in The Borough and soon takes him on as a personal servant and companion on his travels. Initially, Sam Weller accepts the job as Pickwick offered a good salary and a new set of fine clothes. However, as the novel progresses, Sam becomes deeply attached to Mr. Pickwick, with the relationship between the idealistic and unworldly Pickwick and the astute cockney Weller being likened to that between Don Quixote and Sancho Panza. While the elderly Mr. Pickwick is mostly a passive and innocent figure having an almost childlike simplicity, Sam Weller is depicted as &#x27;street-wise&#x27;, being the more experienced of the two despite his youth, and probably the most intelligent character in the novel. While Pickwick is quick to lose his temper Sam maintains his composure. While Pickwick has no interest in romance or marrying, Sam courts and eventually marries Mary, his Valentine – &quot;a well-shaped female servant&quot;.

Weller&#x27;s loyalty to Pickwick is such that when the latter is sent to the Fleet Prison for debt Weller gets himself arrested so that he can join Pickwick there and continue to serve and protect him. Weller refuses to marry his sweetheart as he believes his marriage will obstruct him from continuing to care for Mr. Pickwick. However, Pickwick makes arrangements that allow Weller to continue to work for him and still marry.

==Weller as a Cockney==

In the novel Sam is the son of Tony Weller, a coachman. The Wellers, father and son, speak a form of Cockney English prevalent in London&#x27;s East End in 1836, pronouncing a &quot;v&quot; where there should be a &quot;w&quot;, and &quot;w” where there should be a &quot;v&quot; - &quot;wery&quot; instead of &quot;very&quot; and &quot;avay&quot; instead of &quot;away&quot; - in language that was outdated just 40 years after the novel&#x27;s publication. Having trouble composing his Valentine&#x27;s Card to his sweetheart, Mary, Sam consults his father, Tony Weller: 

`“Feel myself ashamed, and completely cir –” I forget what this here word is’, said Sam, scratching his head with the pen, in vain attempts to remember.

`Why don’t you look at it then?’, inquired Mr Weller.

`So I am a lookin at it’, replied Sam, `but there’s another blot. Here’s a “c”, and an “i”, and a “d”’.

`Circumwented, p’raps’, suggested Mr Weller.

`No, it ain’t that,’ said Sam, `circumscribed; that’s it’

`That ain’t as good a word as circumwented, Sammy,’ said Mr Weller, gravely.
==Wellerisms in &quot;Pickwick Papers&quot;==

Sam Weller&#x27;s way of quoting people has led to the Wellerism, often a type of proverb. Examples in &quot;Pickwick Papers&quot; include:

*&quot;Then the next question is, what the devil do you want with me, as the man said, wen he see the ghost?&quot;
* &quot;Out vith it, as the father said to his child, when he swallowed a farden.&quot; 
* &quot;Wery glad to see you, indeed, and hope our acquaintance may be a long &#x27;un, as the gen&#x27;l&#x27;m&#x27;n said to the fi&#x27; pun&#x27; note.&quot;
* &quot;All good feelin&#x27;, sir – the wery best intentions, as the gen&#x27;l&#x27;m&#x27;n said ven he run away from his wife &#x27;cos she seemed unhappy with him.&quot;
* &quot;There; now we look compact and comfortable, as the father said ven he cut his little boy&#x27;s head off, to cure him o&#x27; squintin&#x27;.&quot;
* &quot;Vich I call addin&#x27; insult to injury, as the parrot said ven they not only took him from his native land, but made him talk the English langwidge arterwards.&quot;
* &quot;Sorry to do anythin&#x27; as may cause an interruption to such wery pleasant proceedin&#x27;s, as the king said wen he dissolved the parliament.&quot;

==Notable portrayals==

*One of the first actors to portray the character on stage was W. J. Hammond in &quot;Samuel Weller, or, The Pickwickians&quot; (1837) in a production staged while Dickens was still serialising the novel.
*Digby Bell - &quot;Mr. Pickwick&quot; (1903) at the Herald Square Theatre and later the Grand Opera House.
*H. P. Owen - &quot;The Pickwick Papers&quot; (1913)
*Hubert Woodward - &quot;The Adventures of Mr. Pickwick&quot; (1921)
*Sam Kydd - &quot; The Pickwick Papers BBC TV Serial 1952
*Harry Fowler - &quot;The Pickwick Papers&quot; (1952)
*Sam Kydd - &quot;Bardell V. Pickwick&quot; (1955) 
*Teddy Green - &quot;Pickwick&quot; - West End musical (1963)
*Roy Castle - Broadway version (1965)
*Roy Castle - &quot;Pickwick&quot; - television musical (1969)
*Phil Daniels - &quot;The Pickwick Papers&quot; (1985)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7408316" start="0" end="10" title="Sam Weller (character)" label="Sam Weller"/>
<link wikidata="Q460583" start="45" end="64" title="The Pickwick Papers" label="The Pickwick Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="98" end="113" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992" start="170" end="177" title="Cockney" label="Cockney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517909" start="178" end="187" title="Shoeshiner" label="bootblack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988628" start="536" end="552" title="The Paris Review" label="The Paris Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019332" start="703" end="727" title="William Thomas Moncrieff" label="William Thomas Moncrieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q248771" start="743" end="751" title="burletta" label="burletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q105847249" start="758" end="793" title="Samuel Weller, or, The Pickwickians" label="Samuel Weller, or, The Pickwickians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448415" start="860" end="875" title="Samuel Pickwick" label="Samuel Pickwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448415" start="1076" end="1088" title="Samuel Pickwick" label="Mr. Pickwick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1122" end="1136" title="White Hart#Southwark, London" label="White Hart Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273898" start="1140" end="1151" title="Borough, London" label="The Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992" start="1491" end="1498" title="cockney" label="cockney"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="1536" end="1547" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q630823" start="1552" end="1564" title="Sancho Panza" label="Sancho Panza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427716" start="2146" end="2158" title="Fleet Prison" label="Fleet Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q106797867" start="2555" end="2566" title="Tony Weller" label="Tony Weller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992" start="2625" end="2632" title="Cockney" label="Cockney"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="2668" end="2676" title="East End of London" label="East End"/>
<link wikidata="Q37587" start="3011" end="3032" title="Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Valentine&amp;#x27;s Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473087" start="3696" end="3705" title="Wellerism" label="Wellerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140080" start="3971" end="3977" title="farthing (British coin)" label="farden"/>
<link wikidata="Q105662026" start="4903" end="4916" title="W. J. Hammond" label="W. J. Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q105847249" start="4926" end="4961" title="Samuel Weller, or, The Pickwickians" label="Samuel Weller, or, The Pickwickians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113443" start="5046" end="5056" title="Digby Bell" label="Digby Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5732648" start="5098" end="5119" title="Herald Square Theatre" label="Herald Square Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707189" start="5134" end="5151" title="Grand Opera House (Manhattan)" label="Grand Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q16679709" start="5173" end="5192" title="The Pickwick Papers (1913 film)" label="The Pickwick Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712592" start="5231" end="5261" title="The Adventures of Mr. Pickwick" label="The Adventures of Mr. Pickwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407762" start="5276" end="5284" title="Sam Kydd" label="Sam Kydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q460583" start="5294" end="5313" title="The Pickwick Papers" label="The Pickwick Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q138715" start="5334" end="5346" title="Harry Fowler" label="Harry Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757045" start="5355" end="5374" title="The Pickwick Papers (1952 film)" label="The Pickwick Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407762" start="5389" end="5397" title="Sam Kydd" label="Sam Kydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209067" start="5441" end="5452" title="Teddy Green" label="Teddy Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190950" start="5461" end="5469" title="Pickwick (musical)" label="Pickwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q460735" start="5478" end="5486" title="West End of London" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684618" start="5503" end="5513" title="Roy Castle" label="Roy Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="5516" end="5524" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932798" start="5560" end="5568" title="Pickwick (1969 film)" label="Pickwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671473" start="5604" end="5616" title="Phil Daniels" label="Phil Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817224" start="5625" end="5644" title="The Pickwick Papers (TV series)" label="The Pickwick Papers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424290" wikidata="Q3042429" url="?curid=424290" title="Elcoteq">
<text>Elcoteq SE was a Finnish consumer electronics contract manufacturer, EMS, and ODM company headquartered in Luxembourg. The company filed for bankruptcy protection in Luxembourg on October 6, 2011.

It was a manufacturer of the BlackBerry and also performed repair and refurbishment services.

==History==
Founded in 1984 as a microelectronics unit of the Lohja Corporation, the company became independent in an early 1990s management buyout.

Elcoteq made an IPO on the Helsinki Stock Exchange in November 1997.

It manufactured the ill-fated Microsoft Kin for Sharp Corporation in the late 2000s.

On October 6, 2011, Elcoteq filed for bankruptcy in Luxembourg. The loss of a major client, Nokia, to Asian sourcing outfits may have been a contributing cause.

===Production base expansion===
Its original production base was in Lohja, Finland, and in 1992 it established an Estonian base. By 1999 had expanded production to include non-European bases, too.

===Name===
Representing electronics, contract manufacturing, and technology, Elcoteq was the company&#x27;s second choice after Finnish regulators would not allow it to register the name Mikrotec.

==Clients==
The first Elcoteq customers were Ericsson and Nokia. Other clients have included:
* Aastra
* Ascom
* EADS
* Funai
* Huawei
* Humax
* Marconi Electronic Systems
* Nokia Siemens Networks
* Philips
* Research In Motion
* Sharp Corporation
* Siemens
* Sony Ericsson
* Swissvoice
* Tellabs
* Thomson SA

==Production bases==
Elcoteq has had production bases in Brazil, China, Estonia, India, Hungary, Romania, and Mexico.

==References==
==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3042429" start="0" end="10" title="Elcoteq" label="Elcoteq SE"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="17" end="24" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408259" start="46" end="67" title="contract manufacturer" label="contract manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307914" start="69" end="72" title="Electronics manufacturing services" label="EMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q761977" start="78" end="81" title="Original design manufacturer" label="ODM"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="107" end="117" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q171819" start="227" end="237" title="BlackBerry" label="BlackBerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501578" start="423" end="440" title="management buyout" label="management buyout"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="459" end="462" title="Initial public offering" label="IPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q581755" start="470" end="493" title="Helsinki Stock Exchange" label="Helsinki Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574805" start="543" end="556" title="Microsoft Kin" label="Microsoft Kin"/>
<link wikidata="Q53227" start="561" end="578" title="Sharp Corporation" label="Sharp Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214777" start="829" end="834" title="Lohja" label="Lohja"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="1202" end="1210" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="1215" end="1220" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="1270" end="1274" title="EADS" label="EADS"/>
<link wikidata="Q373798" start="1277" end="1282" title="Funai" label="Funai"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="1285" end="1291" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q483687" start="1294" end="1299" title="Humax" label="Humax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757785" start="1302" end="1328" title="Marconi Electronic Systems" label="Marconi Electronic Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q322731" start="1331" end="1353" title="Nokia Siemens Networks" label="Nokia Siemens Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="1356" end="1363" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q502121" start="1366" end="1384" title="Research In Motion" label="Research In Motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q53227" start="1387" end="1404" title="Sharp Corporation" label="Sharp Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="1407" end="1414" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q376692" start="1417" end="1430" title="Sony Ericsson" label="Sony Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517379" start="1446" end="1453" title="Tellabs" label="Tellabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365773" start="1456" end="1466" title="Thomson SA" label="Thomson SA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424293" wikidata="Q460583" url="?curid=424293" title="The Pickwick Papers">
<text>The Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club (also known as The Pickwick Papers) is the first novel by English author Charles Dickens. His previous work was &quot;Sketches by Boz&quot;, published in 1836, and his publisher Chapman &amp; Hall asked Dickens to supply descriptions to explain a series of comic &quot;cockney sporting plates&quot; by illustrator Robert Seymour, and to connect them into a novel. The book became a publishing phenomenon, with bootleg copies, theatrical performances, Sam Weller joke books, and other merchandise. On its cultural impact, Nicholas Dames in &quot;The Atlantic&quot; writes, &quot;&#x27;Literature&#x27; is not a big enough category for &quot;Pickwick&quot;. It defined its own, a new one that we have learned to call &#x27;entertainment&#x27;.&quot; &quot;The Pickwick Papers&quot; was published in 19 issues over 20 months, and it popularised serialised fiction and cliffhanger endings.

Seymour&#x27;s widow claimed that the idea for the novel was originally her husband&#x27;s, but Dickens strenuously denied any specific input in his preface to the 1867 edition: &quot;Mr. Seymour never originated or suggested an incident, a phrase, or a word, to be found in the book.&quot;

==Background==

Dickens was working as a Parliamentary reporter and a roving journalist at the age of 24, and he had published a collection of sketches on London life as &quot;Sketches by Boz&quot;. Publisher Chapman &amp; Hall was projecting a series of &quot;cockney sporting plates&quot; by illustrator Robert Seymour. There was to be a club, the members of which were to be sent on hunting and fishing expeditions into the country. Their guns were to go off by accident, and fishhooks were to get caught in their hats and trousers, and these and other misadventures were to be depicted in Seymour&#x27;s comic plates. They asked Dickens to supply the description necessary to explain the plates and to connect them into a sort of picture novel that was fashionable at the time. He protested that he knew nothing of sport, but still accepted the commission.

Only in a few instances did Dickens adjust his narrative to plates that had been prepared for him. Typically, he led the way with an instalment of his story, and the artist was compelled to illustrate what Dickens had already written. The story thus became the prime source of interest and the illustrations merely of secondary importance. Seymour provided the illustrations for the first two instalments before his suicide. Robert William Buss illustrated the third instalment, but Dickens did not like his work, so the remaining instalments were illustrated by Phiz (Hablot Knight Browne), who illustrated most of Dickens&#x27;s subsequent novels. The instalments were first published in book form in 1837.

==Summary==
&quot;The Pickwick Papers&quot; is a sequence of loosely related adventures written for serialization in a periodical. The action is given as occurring 1827–28, though critics have noted some seeming anachronisms. For example, Dickens satirized the case of George Norton suing Lord Melbourne in 1836.

The novel&#x27;s protagonist Samuel Pickwick, Esquire is a kind and wealthy old gentleman, the founder and perpetual president of the Pickwick Club. He suggests that he and three other &quot;Pickwickians&quot; should make journeys to places remote from London and report on their findings to the other members of the club. Their travels throughout the English countryside by coach provide the chief subject matter of the novel. A romantic misunderstanding with his landlady, the widow Mrs Bardell, results in one of the most famous legal cases in English literature, &quot;Bardell v. Pickwick&quot;, leading to them both being incarcerated in the Fleet Prison for debt.

Pickwick learns that the only way he can relieve the suffering of Mrs Bardell is by paying her costs in the action against himself, thus at the same time releasing himself from the prison.

==Characters==

===Central characters===
*Samuel Pickwick – the main protagonist and founder of the Pickwick Club. Following his description in the text, Pickwick is usually portrayed by illustrators as a round-faced, clean-shaven, portly gentleman wearing spectacles.
*Nathaniel Winkle – a young friend of Pickwick&#x27;s and his travelling companion; he considers himself a sportsman, though he turns out to be dangerously inept when handling horses and guns.
*Augustus Snodgrass – another young friend and companion; he considers himself a poet, though there is no mention of any of his own poetry in the novel.
*Tracy Tupman – the third travelling companion, a fat middle-aged man who nevertheless considers himself a romantic lover.
*Sam Weller – Mr Pickwick&#x27;s valet, and a source of idiosyncratic proverbs and advice.
*Tony Weller – Sam&#x27;s father, a loquacious coachman.
*Alfred Jingle – a strolling actor and charlatan, noted for telling bizarre anecdotes in a distinctively extravagant, disjointed style.

===Supporting characters===
*Joe – the &quot;fat boy&quot; who consumes great quantities of food and constantly falls asleep in any situation at any time of day; Joe&#x27;s sleep problem is the origin of the medical term &quot;Pickwickian syndrome&quot;, which ultimately led to the subsequent description of obesity hypoventilation syndrome.
*Job Trotter – Mr Jingle&#x27;s wily servant, whose true slyness is only ever seen in the first few lines of a scene, before he adopts his usual pretence of meekness.
*Mr Wardle – owner of a farm in Dingley Dell; Mr Pickwick&#x27;s friend. They meet at the military review in Rochester. Joe is his servant.
*Rachael Wardle – Mr. Wardle&#x27;s spinster sister, who tries in vain to elope with the unscrupulous Jingle.
*Mr Perker – an attorney of Mr Wardle, and later of Mr Pickwick.
*Serjeant Buzfuz – the fat, red-faced counsel for the prosecution in the case of &quot;Bardell v. Pickwick&quot;. A gifted lawyer who uses his sound grasp of rhetoric and mastery of the innate theatricality of court procedure to transmute the slenderest of evidence into an apparently damning case against the innocent Pickwick.
*Mary – &quot;a well-shaped female servant&quot; and Sam Weller&#x27;s &quot;Valentine&quot;.
*Mrs Martha Bardell – Mr Pickwick&#x27;s widowed landlady who brings a case against him for breach of promise.
*Emily Wardle – one of Mr Wardle&#x27;s daughters, very fond of Mr Snodgrass.
*Arabella Allen – a friend of Emily Wardle and sister of Ben Allen. She later elopes with Mr. Winkle and marries him.
*Benjamin &quot;Ben&quot; Allen – Arabella&#x27;s brother, a dissipated medical student.
*Robert &quot;Bob&quot; Sawyer – Ben Allen&#x27;s friend and fellow-student.
*Mr Stiggins (the &quot;deputy shepherd&quot;) – a red-nosed alcoholic, avaricious and hypocritical Nonconformist minister at the United Grand Junction, Ebenezer Temperance Association, who inadvertently causes the death of the second Mrs Weller.
==Sequel==
Pickwick, Sam Weller, and his father Tony briefly reappeared in 1840 in the magazine &quot;Master Humphrey&#x27;s Clock&quot;. Master Humphrey&#x27;s Clock is the name of a literary club founded by Mr Humphrey, whose members read out stories to the others. Pickwick is a member, and there is a mirror club in the kitchen, Mr. Weller&#x27;s Watch, run by Sam Weller.

See: Mr. Pickwick in Master Humphreys Clock Edition at the Ex-Classic Web Site

==Adaptations==
The novel has been adapted to film, television, and radio:
* 1913 – &quot;The Pickwick Papers&quot;, a silent three-reel film featuring John Bunny as Samuel Pickwick
* 1921 – &quot;The Adventures of Mr. Pickwick&quot;, a lost silent film starring Frederick Volpe and Hubert Woodward
* 1936 – On 13 November 1936 (less than two weeks after the BBC began regularly scheduled television broadcasts) &quot;The British Music Drama Opera Company&quot; under the direction of Vladimir Rosing presented the world&#x27;s first televised opera: &quot;Pickwick&quot; by Albert Coates.
*1938 – &#x27;The Pickwick Papers&#x27;, Orson Welles&#x27;s &quot;Mercury Theater on the Air&quot; radio adaptation (20 November 1938)
*1952 – starring James Hayter, Nigel Patrick, Alexander Gauge and Harry Fowler (the first sound film version, and to this day, the only sound version of the story released to cinemas)
*1985 – an animated adaptation

In 1985 BBC released a 12-part 350-minute miniseries starring Nigel Stock, Alan Parnaby, Clive Swift and Patrick Malahide. 

In 1977, BBC Radio 4 released a dramatization by Barry Campbell and Constance Cox with Freddie Jones as Mr. Pickwick. In 1997, BBC Radio 4 released a dramatization by Martyn Read with Clive Francis as Mr. Pickwick. 

There was an early attempt at a theatrical adaptation with songs by W. T. Moncrieff and entitled &quot;Samuel Weller, or, The Pickwickians&quot;, in 1837. This was followed in 1871 by John Hollingshead&#x27;s stage play &quot;Bardell versus Pickwick&quot;. The first successful musical was &quot;Pickwick&quot; (sometimes &quot;Pickwick, A Dramatic Cantata&quot;) by Sir Francis Burnand and Edward Solomon and premiered at the Comedy Theatre on 7 February 1889.

&quot;Pickwick&quot; by Cyril Ornadel, Wolf Mankowitz, and Leslie Bricusse was a musical version which premiered in Manchester in 1963 before transferring to the West End. It originally starred Harry Secombe (later cast as &quot;Mr. Bumble&quot; in the film version of &quot;Oliver!&quot;) in the title role and Roy Castle as &quot;Sam Weller&quot;. Although it was a major success in London, running for 694 performances, &quot;Pickwick&quot; failed in the United States when it opened on Broadway in 1965. In 1969, the BBC filmed the musical as the TV movie &quot;Pickwick&quot; with Secombe and Castle reprising their stage roles. Both the stage and TV versions featured the song &quot;If I Ruled the World&quot;, which became a hit for Secombe and other singers such as Tony Bennett and Sammy Davis Jr.

Part of &quot;The Pickwick Papers&quot; were featured in &quot;Charles Dickens&#x27; Ghost Stories&quot;, a 60-minute animation made by Emerald City Films (1987). These included &quot;The Ghost in the Wardrobe&quot;, &quot;The Mail Coach Ghosts&quot;, and &quot;The Goblin and the Gravedigger&quot;.

Stephen Jarvis&#x27;s novel &quot;Death and Mr Pickwick&quot; (2014) is in part a literary thriller, examining in forensic detail the question of whether the idea, character and physiognomy of Samuel Pickwick originated with Dickens, or with the original illustrator and instigator of the project, Robert Seymour. The conclusion of the narrator is that the accepted version of events given by Dickens and the publisher Edward Chapman is untrue.

==Publication==
The novel was published in 19 issues over 20 months; the last was double-length and cost two shillings. In mourning for his sister-in-law Mary Hogarth, Dickens missed a deadline and consequently, there was no number issued in May 1837. Numbers were typically issued on the last day of its given month:
*I – March 1836 (chapters 1–2);
*II – April 1836 (chapters 3–5);
*III – May 1836 (chapters 6–8);
*IV – June 1836 (chapters 9-11);
*V – July 1836 (chapters 12–14);
*VI – August 1836 (chapters 15–17);
*VII – September 1836 (chapters 18–20);
*VIII – October 1836 (chapters 21–23);
*IX – November 1836 (chapters 24–26);
*X – December 1836 (chapters 27–29);
*XI – January 1837 (chapters 30–32);
*XII – February 1837 (chapters 33–34);
*XIII – March 1837 (chapters 35–37);
*XIV – April 1837 (chapters 38–40);
*XV – June 1837 (chapters 41–43);
*XVI – July 1837 (chapters 44–46);
*XVII – August 1837 (chapters 47–49);
*XVIII – September 1837 (chapters 50–52);
*XIX–XX – October 1837 (chapters 53–57);

==Models==
Dickens drew on places that he knew from his childhood. He located the duel between Mr. Winkle and Dr. Slammer at Fort Pitt, Chatham, close to Ordnance Terrace where he had lived as a boy between 1817 and 1821.

==Influences and legacy==
The popularity of &quot;The Pickwick Papers&quot; spawned many imitations and sequels in print as well as actual clubs and societies inspired by the club in the novel. One example still in operation is the Pickwick Bicycle Club of London, established in 1870, the year of Charles Dickens&#x27;s death. Another, the Dickens Pickwick Club, was founded in 1976 by Cedric Dickens, the author&#x27;s great-grandson. Other clubs, groups, and societies operating under the name &quot;The Pickwick Club&quot; have existed since the original publication of the story.

In 1837, Charles Dickens wrote to William Howison about the Edinburgh Pickwick Club. Dickens approved of the use of the name and the celebration of the characters and spirit of the novel. He wrote:
::If a word of encouragement from me, can as you say endow you with double life, you will be the most lively club in all the Empire, from this time; for every hearty wish that I can muster for your long-continued welfare and prosperity, is freely yours. Mr Pickwick&#x27;s heart is among you always.

Other known clubs include one meeting as early as December 1836 in the East of London and another meeting at the Sun Tavern in Long Acre in London. Dickens wrote to the secretary of the latter club in 1838 about attending a meeting:
::If the dinner of the Pickwick Club had been on Monday Week, I would have joined it with all the pleasure which you will readily imagine this most gratifying recollection of my works by so many gentlemen, awakens in my mind.

In many Pickwick Clubs, members can take on the names of the characters in the novel. The website for the Pickwick Bicycle Club states &quot;Our rules state that &#x27;Each Member shall adopt the sobriquet allocated by the Management Committee, being the name of some male character in the Pickwick Papers, and be addressed as such at all meetings of the Club&#x27;.&quot;
Imitations/plagiarisms published at the same time as Dickens&#x27;s &quot;Pickwick Papers&quot; include G. W. M. Reynolds&#x27;s &quot;Pickwick Abroad; or, The Tour in France&quot;.

===Translations===
A French translation by Eugénie Niboyet appeared in 1838 in a two-volume edition. It was entitled &quot;Le Club des Pickwistes, roman comique&quot;. Later French translations have used titles such as &quot;Aventures de Monsieur Pickwick&quot;.

Benito Pérez Galdós published &quot;Aventuras de Pickwick&quot;, a Spanish translation of the &quot;Pickwick Papers&quot;, in 1868. Although Pérez Galdós was not born until after the publication of Dickens&#x27; first novel, he is sometimes described as the Spanish equivalent of Dickens.

==See also==
*A pirated edition of the complete set published in London was printed and published in 25 parts from August to December 1838, in Launceston, Tasmania. The lithographed illustrations were signed &quot;Tiz&quot; in imitation of &quot;Phiz&quot; of the London issue. They are generally considered to have been the work of Jack Briggs, a servant of Dowling the publisher. A complete set was digitised by the State Library of New South Wales and is available online. 
* George and Vulture
* Spaniards Inn
* &quot;The Moosepath League&quot; – Van Reid&#x27;s books are a tribute to the &quot;Pickwick Papers&quot; with thoroughly Pickwickian characters. In chapter four of &quot;Cordelia Underwood&quot;, Cordelia finds a copy of the &quot;Pickwick Papers&quot; in her uncle&#x27;s chest. 
* Wellerism

==References==

==External links==


Online editions
*

Other books
*Fitzgerald, Percy Hetherington. &quot;The history of Pickwick; an account of its characters, localities, allusions and illustrations, with a bibliography&quot;. London: Chapman and Hall. 1891.
*Fitzgerald, Percy Hetherington. &quot;Pickwickian manners and customs&quot;. Westminster: Roxburghe Press. 1897.
*Grego, Joseph. &quot;Pictorial Pickwickiana; Charles Dickens and his illustrators. With 350 drawings and engravings&quot; Volume 1 and Volume 2. London Chapman and Hall. 1899.
*Neale, Charles Montague. &quot;An index to Pickwick&quot;, 1897. Index of words, characters, places.

Resources
*&quot;The Pickwick Papers&quot; Bibliography, from the Dickens Project at the U of CA
*&quot;The Pickwick Papers&quot;, from The Victoria Web
*An essay on &quot;The Pickwick Papers&quot; by G. K. Chesterton</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5248657" start="86" end="97" title="Debut novel" label="first novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="116" end="131" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609480" start="161" end="176" title="Sketches by Boz" label="Sketches by Boz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054191" start="221" end="239" title="Chapman &amp;amp; Hall" label="Chapman &amp;amp; Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q444579" start="357" end="371" title="Robert Seymour (illustrator)" label="Robert Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408316" start="494" end="504" title="Sam Weller (character)" label="Sam Weller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="588" end="600" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609480" start="1398" end="1413" title="Sketches by Boz" label="Sketches by Boz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054191" start="1431" end="1449" title="Chapman &amp;amp; Hall" label="Chapman &amp;amp; Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q921595" start="2509" end="2528" title="Robert William Buss" label="Robert William Buss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737410" start="2653" end="2673" title="Hablot Knight Browne" label="Hablot Knight Browne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3055" end="3059" title="Caroline Norton#Separation and Melbourne scandal" label="case"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262876" start="3063" end="3076" title="George Chapple Norton" label="George Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q312567" start="3083" end="3097" title="William Lamb, 2nd Viscount Melbourne" label="Lord Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448415" start="3137" end="3152" title="Samuel Pickwick" label="Samuel Pickwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q618532" start="3573" end="3581" title="Landlord" label="landlady"/>
<link wikidata="Q70470674" start="3593" end="3604" title="Mrs Bardell (Pickwick Papers)" label="Mrs Bardell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427716" start="3755" end="3767" title="Fleet Prison" label="Fleet Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448415" start="4011" end="4026" title="Samuel Pickwick" label="Samuel Pickwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q105062484" start="4239" end="4255" title="Nathaniel Winkle" label="Nathaniel Winkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q105438342" start="4432" end="4450" title="Augustus Snodgrass" label="Augustus Snodgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q105663859" start="4585" end="4597" title="Tracy Tupman" label="Tracy Tupman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408316" start="4708" end="4718" title="Sam Weller (character)" label="Sam Weller"/>
<link wikidata="Q106797867" start="4799" end="4810" title="Tony Weller" label="Tony Weller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722956" start="4856" end="4869" title="Alfred Jingle" label="Alfred Jingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q202394" start="5301" end="5333" title="obesity hypoventilation syndrome" label="obesity hypoventilation syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104090" start="5818" end="5826" title="Serjeant-at-law" label="Serjeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801315" start="5855" end="5882" title="Adversarial system" label="counsel for the prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q70470674" start="6241" end="6259" title="Mrs Bardell (Pickwick Papers)" label="Mrs Martha Bardell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959116" start="6332" end="6349" title="breach of promise" label="breach of promise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203858" start="7062" end="7090" title="Master Humphrey&amp;#x27;s Clock" label="Master Humphrey&amp;#x27;s Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16679709" start="7508" end="7527" title="The Pickwick Papers (1913 film)" label="The Pickwick Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399112" start="7570" end="7580" title="John Bunny" label="John Bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448415" start="7584" end="7599" title="Samuel Pickwick" label="Samuel Pickwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712592" start="7615" end="7645" title="The Adventures of Mr. Pickwick" label="The Adventures of Mr. Pickwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268687" start="7655" end="7659" title="Lost film" label="lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938607" start="7903" end="7918" title="Vladimir Rosing" label="Vladimir Rosing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595770" start="7993" end="8006" title="Albert Coates (musician)" label="Albert Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="8049" end="8061" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757045" start="8145" end="8149" title="The Pickwick Papers (1952 film)" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287856" start="8161" end="8173" title="James Hayter (actor)" label="James Hayter"/>
<link wikidata="Q459030" start="8175" end="8188" title="Nigel Patrick" label="Nigel Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718931" start="8190" end="8205" title="Alexander Gauge" label="Alexander Gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q138715" start="8210" end="8222" title="Harry Fowler" label="Harry Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039806" start="8329" end="8333" title="The Pickwick Papers (1985 film)" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817224" start="8383" end="8412" title="The Pickwick Papers (TV series)" label="12-part 350-minute miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q517562" start="8422" end="8433" title="Nigel Stock (actor)" label="Nigel Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q19650471" start="8435" end="8447" title="Alan Parnaby (actor)" label="Alan Parnaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q776860" start="8449" end="8460" title="Clive Swift" label="Clive Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q377072" start="8465" end="8481" title="Patrick Malahide" label="Patrick Malahide"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="8494" end="8505" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163517" start="8553" end="8566" title="Constance Cox" label="Constance Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q195396" start="8572" end="8585" title="Freddie Jones" label="Freddie Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="8612" end="8623" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101902" start="8669" end="8682" title="Clive Francis" label="Clive Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019332" start="8770" end="8785" title="William Thomas Moncrieff" label="W. T. Moncrieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q105847249" start="8805" end="8840" title="Samuel Weller, or, The Pickwickians" label="Samuel Weller, or, The Pickwickians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239628" start="8886" end="8903" title="John Hollingshead" label="John Hollingshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q105658355" start="8998" end="9006" title="Pickwick (operetta)" label="Pickwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217819" start="9069" end="9088" title="F. C. Burnand" label="Sir Francis Burnand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293695" start="9093" end="9107" title="Edward Solomon" label="Edward Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190950" start="9171" end="9179" title="Pickwick (musical)" label="Pickwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352757" start="9189" end="9202" title="Cyril Ornadel" label="Cyril Ornadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029867" start="9204" end="9218" title="Wolf Mankowitz" label="Wolf Mankowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305608" start="9224" end="9239" title="Leslie Bricusse" label="Leslie Bricusse"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="9281" end="9291" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q460735" start="9327" end="9335" title="West End of London" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q762958" start="9359" end="9372" title="Harry Secombe" label="Harry Secombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q73512923" start="9394" end="9404" title="Mr. Bumble" label="Mr. Bumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q141359" start="9440" end="9447" title="Oliver! (film)" label="Oliver!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684618" start="9477" end="9487" title="Roy Castle" label="Roy Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="9655" end="9663" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="9686" end="9689" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932798" start="9731" end="9739" title="Pickwick (film)" label="Pickwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990500" start="9854" end="9874" title="If I Ruled the World" label="If I Ruled the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q296729" start="9939" end="9951" title="Tony Bennett" label="Tony Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q297816" start="9956" end="9971" title="Sammy Davis Jr." label="Sammy Davis Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q19039619" start="10693" end="10707" title="Edward Chapman (publisher)" label="Edward Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="10829" end="10837" title="shilling" label="shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296238" start="10874" end="10886" title="Mary Hogarth" label="Mary Hogarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17664052" start="11856" end="11865" title="Fort Pitt, Kent" label="Fort Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819475" start="12341" end="12355" title="Cedric Charles Dickens" label="Cedric Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q893314" start="13166" end="13175" title="Long Acre" label="Long Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102010" start="13976" end="13993" title="George W. M. Reynolds" label="G. W. M. Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060280" start="14098" end="14113" title="Eugénie Niboyet" label="Eugénie Niboyet"/>
<link wikidata="Q189869" start="14319" end="14338" title="Benito Pérez Galdós" label="Benito Pérez Galdós"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404791" start="15088" end="15106" title="George and Vulture" label="George and Vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15278847" start="15109" end="15122" title="Spaniards Inn" label="Spaniards Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752218" start="15131" end="15151" title="The Moosepath League" label="The Moosepath League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473087" start="15409" end="15418" title="Wellerism" label="Wellerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167391" start="15489" end="15519" title="Percy Hetherington Fitzgerald" label="Fitzgerald, Percy Hetherington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167391" start="15683" end="15713" title="Percy Hetherington Fitzgerald" label="Fitzgerald, Percy Hetherington"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453205" start="15797" end="15810" title="Joseph Grego" label="Grego, Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q183167" start="16277" end="16293" title="G. K. Chesterton" label="G. K. Chesterton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424295" wikidata="Q4172119" url="?curid=424295" title="Dafydd ab Hugh">
<text>Dafydd ab Hugh (born October 22, 1960) is an American science-fiction author.

On October 22, 1960, Dafydd ab Hugh was born in Los Angeles as David M. Friedman. An author of science fiction, &quot;The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction&quot; described ab Hugh as best known for his 1990 novelette, &quot;The Coon Rolled Down and Ruptured His Larinks, A Squeezed Novel by Mr. Skunk&quot;, which was published in &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Science Fiction&quot; and nominated for a Nebula Award.

==Bibliography==
&quot;The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction&quot; lists 15 novels in its ab Hugh bibliography:

===&quot;Jiana&quot;===
* 

===&quot;Arthur War Lord&quot;===
* 

===&quot;Star Trek&quot;===
====&quot;Deep Space Nine&quot;====
* 
* 

====&quot;The Next Generation&quot;====

====&quot;Voyager&quot;====

===&quot;Doom&quot;===
* With 
* With 
* With 
* With 
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4172119" start="0" end="14" title="Dafydd ab Hugh" label="Dafydd ab Hugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="127" end="138" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="174" end="189" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099499" start="197" end="232" title="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction" label="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="284" end="293" title="novelette (literature)" label="novelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q144949" start="414" end="443" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="470" end="482" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099499" start="508" end="543" title="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction" label="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424296" wikidata="Q4126349" url="?curid=424296" title="Jack Cade's Rebellion">
<text>Jack Cade&#x27;s Rebellion was a popular revolt in 1450 against the government of England, which took place in the south-east of the country between the months of April and July. It stemmed from local grievances regarding the corruption, maladministration and abuse of power of the king&#x27;s closest advisors and local officials, as well as recent military losses in France during the Hundred Years&#x27; War. Leading an army of men from south-eastern England, the rebellion&#x27;s leader Jack Cade marched on London in order to force the government to reform the administration and remove from power the &quot;traitors&quot; deemed responsible for bad governance. Apart from the Cornish rebellion of 1497, it was the largest popular uprising to take place in England during the 15th century.

Despite Cade&#x27;s attempt to keep his men under control, once the rebel forces had entered London they began to loot. The citizens of London turned on the rebels and forced them out of the city in a bloody battle on London Bridge. To end the bloodshed the rebels were issued pardons by the king and told to return home. Cade fled but was later caught on 12 July 1450 by Alexander Iden, a future High Sheriff of Kent. As a result of the skirmish with Iden, the mortally wounded Cade died before reaching London for trial. The Jack Cade Rebellion has been perceived as a reflection of the social, political, and economic issues of the time period and as a precursor to the Wars of the Roses, which saw the decline of the Lancaster dynasty and the rise of the House of York.

== Identity ==
Very little is known about the identity and origins of Jack (possibly John) Cade. Given that the rebel leader did not leave behind any personal documents, and the use of aliases was common among rebels, historians are forced to base their claims on rumour and speculation. According to Mark Antony Lower, Jack (or John) Cade was probably born in Sussex between 1420 and 1430 and historians agree for certain that he was a member of the lower ranks of society.

During the rebellion of 1450, Cade took on the title of &quot;Captain of Kent&quot; and adopted the alias &quot;John Mortimer&quot;. The name &quot;Mortimer&quot; had negative connotations for King Henry VI and his associates because Henry&#x27;s main rival for the throne of England was Richard, Duke of York, who had Mortimer ancestry on his mother&#x27;s side. The possibility that Cade may have been working with York was enough to prompt the king into moving against the rebels without delay. At the time of the rebellion the Duke of York was out of the country serving as Lieutenant of Ireland. To date, no evidence has been found indicating that he was involved in funding or inciting the uprising. It is more likely that Cade used the name &quot;Mortimer&quot; as propaganda to give his cause more legitimacy. When the rebels were issued a pardon on 7 July 1450, Cade was issued a pardon under the name &quot;Mortimer&quot;, but once it was discovered that he had lied about his identity, the pardon was rendered void.

Among his followers, Cade&#x27;s dedication to having the people&#x27;s complaints heard and restoring order within both local and central governments earned him the nickname &quot;John Mend-all&quot; or &quot;John Amend-all&quot;. It is not known whether Cade himself chose the name or not.

One tale of the time claimed that Cade was the doctor John Alymere who was married to the daughter of a squire in Surrey. Another rumour suggested that he enjoyed dabbling in the dark arts and had once worked for Sir Tomas Dacres before fleeing the country after murdering a pregnant woman.

== Origins of the Jack Cade Rebellion==

In the years preceding the Jack Cade Rebellion, England suffered from both internal and external difficulties and the animosity of the lower classes toward Henry VI was on the rise. Years of war against France had caused the country to go into debt and the recent loss of Normandy caused morale to decline and led to a widespread fear of invasion. Already the coastal regions of England such as Kent and Sussex were seeing attacks by Norman soldiers and French armies. Ill-equipped by the government, English soldiers took to raiding towns along the route to France with their victims receiving no compensation. Henry&#x27;s call to set warning beacons along the coastline confirmed peoples&#x27; suspicions that an attack by the French was possible. These fears and continuous unrest in the coastal counties inspired many Englishmen to rally in an attempt to force the King to address their problems or abdicate his throne in favour of someone more competent.
At court the different opinions on how England should proceed in the war with France led to party divisions. Henry favoured peace while his uncle the Duke of Gloucester and other nobles felt England should continue to fight for England&#x27;s claim to the French throne. Internecine fighting in court eventually led to the banishment of the king&#x27;s closest friend and advisor William de la Pole, 1st Duke of Suffolk.

To add to England&#x27;s troubles many believed that the king had surrounded himself with advisors who were ineffective and corrupt. At the heart of the corruption scandal was the Duke of Suffolk. When the duke&#x27;s body washed up on the shores of Dover the people of Kent feared retaliation. Rumours emerged claiming that the king intended to turn Kent into a Royal forest in retaliation for the duke&#x27;s death. Tired of the exploitation that the Duke of Suffolk had come to represent, the commons of Kent led by Jack Cade marched on London. It is estimated that about 5,000 people took part in the uprising. In the spring of 1450, Cade organised the creation and distribution of a manifesto entitled The Complaint of the Poor Commons of Kent. The manifesto represented not only the grievances of the people but of several MPs, lords and magnates as well. The document included a list of fifteen complaints and five demands to be brought before the king for scrutiny and dictated the causes of the revolt. The first issue to be addressed was that Cade&#x27;s followers from Kent were being unjustly blamed for the death of the Duke of Suffolk. Despite the well-known anger of the peasants towards the Duke, the Bill of Complaints dismissed the idea that the rebels were responsible. In addition the rebels called for inquiries into cases of corruption within local and national governments and for the removal of corrupt high officials. Cade&#x27;s list of complaints goes on to charge King Henry with injustice for not choosing to impeach his underlings and lords even though they were guilty of treasonous and unlawful acts. The king&#x27;s counselors and officials were accused of rigging elections, extortion, manipulating the king for their own gains and using their close position to the king to oppress those below them. Besides the Duke of Suffolk, the rebels explicitly called out Lord Saye and officials Crowmer, Isley, St Leger and Est for extortion. Affiliates of Suffolk, Lord Saye and his son-in-law Crowmer held prominent positions within the king&#x27;s household and in the local administration of Kent. Both had served several terms as High Sheriffs of Kent and as members of the king&#x27;s council. Furthermore, in 1449, Saye was appointed to the prestigious office of Lord High Treasurer. Isley and St Leger also served as Sheriffs and MPs in the county of Kent.

When the king failed to remedy their grievances the rebels marched on London.

==Rebellion==

In May 1450, the rebels began to join together in an organised fashion and began to move towards London. Cade sent out delegates to the surrounding counties to elicit aid and additional men. By early June more than 5,000 men had assembled at Blackheath, south-east of the City of London. They were mostly peasants but their numbers were swelled by shopkeepers, craftsmen, and some landowners (the list of pardoned shows the presence of one knight, two MPs, and eighteen squires). Several soldiers and sailors returning via Kent from the French wars also joined in the fray.

Hoping to disperse the rebellion before any real damage could be done, the king sent a small host of his royal contingents to quell the rebellion. The royal forces were led by Sir Humphrey Stafford (d. 1450), of Grafton in the parish of Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, and his second cousin William Stafford (d. 1450), of Southwick, Wiltshire (father of Humphrey Stafford, 1st Earl of Devon).

The royal forces underestimated the rebels&#x27; strength and were led into an ambush at Sevenoaks. In the skirmish on 18 June 1450, the two Stafford cousins were killed. Cade took the expensive clothing and armour of Sir Humphrey as his own.

On 28 June, William Ayscough, the unpopular Bishop of Salisbury, was murdered by a mob in Wiltshire. William Ayscough had been the king&#x27;s personal confessor and his position next to the king had allowed him to become one of the most powerful men in the country. Afraid that he might meet the same fate and shocked by the rebels&#x27; military ability, the king sought refuge in Warwickshire.

Gaining confidence through their victory the rebels advanced to Southwark, at the southern end of London Bridge. Cade set up headquarters in The White Hart inn before crossing the bridge and entering the city with his followers on 3 July 1450. To prevent any infringement on his comings and goings within the city Cade cut the ropes on the bridge so that they could not be raised against him.

Upon entering London, Cade stopped at the London Stone. He struck the stone with his sword and declared himself Lord Mayor in the traditional manner. By striking the stone, Cade had symbolically reclaimed the country for the Mortimers to whom he claimed to be related.

Once inside the city&#x27;s gates, Cade and his men initiated a series of tribunals dedicated to seeking out and convicting those accused of corruption. At Guildhall on 4 July, James Fiennes, 1st Baron Saye and Sele, the Lord High Treasurer, was brought in for a sham trial. Upon being found guilty of treason he was taken to Cheapside and beheaded.

Fiennes&#x27; son-in-law William Crowmer (son of William Cromer (died 1434), a former Sheriff of London, MP and twice Lord Mayor of London) was also executed by the rebels. The heads of the two men were put on pikes and unceremoniously paraded through the streets of London while their bearers pushed them together so that they appeared to kiss. Their heads were then affixed to London Bridge.

Despite Cade&#x27;s frequent assurances that his followers would maintain a proper and orderly demeanour, as the rebel host made its way through the city many of the rebels, including Cade himself, began to engage in looting and drunken behaviour.

Gradually Cade&#x27;s inability to control his followers alienated the initially sympathetic citizens of London, who eventually turned against the rebels. When, on 7 July, Cade&#x27;s army returned over the bridge to Southwark for the night, the London officials closed the bridge to prevent Cade from re-entering the city.

The next day, on 8 July, at about ten in the evening, a battle erupted on London Bridge between Cade&#x27;s army and various citizens and officials of London. The battle lasted until eight the next morning, when the rebels retreated with heavy casualties. One writer estimated that at least 40 Londoners and 200 rebels were killed at the battle.

== Cade&#x27;s fall ==

After the battle on London Bridge, Archbishop John Kemp (Lord Chancellor) persuaded Cade to call off his followers by issuing official pardons, and promising to fulfil the rebels&#x27; demands. Although King Henry VI had issued pardons to Cade and his followers, a proclamation written by the King shortly after the rebellion voided all previously issued pardons. The document was entitled &quot;Writ and Proclamation by the King for the Taking of Cade&quot;. In the document the King claimed that he revoked the previous pardons because they had not been created or approved by the Parliament. In the proclamation Cade was charged with deceiving the people of England to assemble with him in his rebellion and stated that none of the King&#x27;s subjects should join Cade or help him in any way. A reward of 1,000 marks was promised to whoever could capture and deliver Jack Cade to the king, dead or alive.

Cade fled towards Lewes but on 12 July, in a garden in which he had taken shelter, was overtaken by Alexander Iden (eventual second husband of the murdered William Cromer&#x27;s widow Elizabeth Fiennes, and a future High Sheriff of Kent). In the skirmish, Cade was fatally wounded and died before reaching London for trial. As a warning to others, Cade&#x27;s body underwent a mock trial and was beheaded at Newgate. Cade&#x27;s body was dragged through the streets of London before being quartered. His limbs were sent throughout Kent to various cities and locations that were believed to have been strong supporters of the rebel uprising.

==Aftermath==

To prevent further uprisings, Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham was given permission from the king to seek out the remainder of Cade&#x27;s followers and bring them to trial. The search took place in and around areas where support for the uprising was felt to be the strongest—Blackheath, Canterbury and the coastal areas of Faversham and the Isle of Sheppey. The inquiries by bishops and justices were so thorough that in Canterbury (the first area searched by the royal commission) eight followers were quickly found and hanged.

Although the Jack Cade Rebellion was quickly dispersed after Cade&#x27;s death, the royal commission failed to rid England of the feeling of rebellion. Inspired by Cade and his rebellion many other counties in England revolted. In Sussex the yeomen brothers John and William Merfold organised their own rebellion against King Henry VI. Unlike Cade&#x27;s revolt the men of Sussex were more radical and aggressive in their demands for reform. It is possible the animosity felt by the men of Sussex had arisen in part because the king had revoked the pardons issued to Cade and his followers. An indictment following the Sussex rebellion accused the rebels of wanting to kill the king and all his Lords, replacing them with twelve of the rioters&#x27; own men. The rebellions in Sussex did not achieve the same following as that of Cade&#x27;s.

While the minor rebellions inspired by Cade&#x27;s rebellion did not produce a large number of deaths or immediate changes they can be seen as important precursors to the Wars of the Roses. These large battles over the crown of England would result in the end of the Lancaster dynasty and the creation of the Yorks. The weakness of the Lancaster dynasty and the English government had been exposed.

In addition, the request made by the rebels in Cade&#x27;s manifesto that the king welcome the Duke of York as his advisor outright informed the king that the masses wished to see the duke return from exile. When Richard the Duke of York finally did return to England in September 1450 several of his demands and reform policies were based on those made in the manifesto issued by Cade.

== Monument ==

There is long-standing tradition that this clash between Iden and Cade took place at a small hamlet near (old) Heathfield in East Sussex. This place had since become known as Cade Street. A monument dedicated to Cade has been placed along the roadside. The monument states that on this location the rebel leader Jack Cade was captured and killed by Alexander Iden. Given that the exact location of Cade&#x27;s capture is under dispute it is possible that Cade Street was named in error. The monument was erected by Francis Newbury between 1791 and 1819.

== Literature ==

* The story of Jack Cade&#x27;s Rebellion was later dramatised by William Shakespeare in his play, &quot;Henry VI, Part 2&quot;.
* It was also dramatized in the 1835 play &quot;Aylmere&quot; (also billed as &quot;Jack Cade&quot;) by the Philadelphia politician and writer Robert T. Conrad. Though originally written for another actor, the play was for many years a principal part of the repertory of the American tragedian Edwin Forrest.
* In 1852 Conrad published a volume of poetry entitled &quot;Aylmere, or the Bondman of Kent, and other Poems&quot;.
* The novel &quot;London Bridge Is Falling&quot; (1934) by Philip Lindsay focuses on Jack Cade&#x27;s revolt.
* Jack Cade is a prominent character in the historical novel series &quot;Wars of the Roses&quot;, by Conn Iggulden.
* Jack Cade, as well as Wat Tyler, is mentioned as a failed rebel whose example the protagonist seeks to learn from in &quot;A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur&#x27;s Court&quot; by Mark Twain.
* Jack Cade appears as a resident of Heaven in Charles Erskine Scott Wood&#x27;s &quot;Heavenly Discourse&quot;.

==See also==

*Bay Fleet
*Great Slump (15th century)
*Hundred Years&#x27; War
*Jack Cade&#x27;s Cavern
*John and William Merfold
*Wars of the Roses

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
*Edward Vallance, &quot;A Radical History of Britain&quot; Abacus books, 2009; 2010 
*Alison Weir, &quot;The Wars of the Roses&quot;, Ballantine Books, Trade Paper back edition July 1996, p. 147 
*Jack Cade&#x27;s Rebellion on britainexpress.com
*&quot;The second Part of Henry the Sixth&quot;, Project Gutenberg

==External links==

* Jack Cade&#x27;s Rebellion on Medieval Archives Podcast</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4126349" start="0" end="26" title="Jack Cade&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Jack Cade&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427119" start="33" end="47" title="popular revolt" label="popular revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740947" start="238" end="255" title="maladministration" label="maladministration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975478" start="260" end="274" title="abuse of power" label="abuse of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="387" end="410" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="512" end="518" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754526" start="566" end="580" title="Administration (government)" label="administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q500395" start="682" end="707" title="Cornish rebellion of 1497" label="Cornish rebellion of 1497"/>
<link wikidata="Q130206" start="1014" end="1027" title="London Bridge" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q110622639" start="1168" end="1182" title="Alexander Iden" label="Alexander Iden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617843" start="1193" end="1213" title="High Sheriff of Kent" label="High Sheriff of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="1469" end="1486" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q105285" start="1555" end="1568" title="House of York" label="House of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766578" start="1872" end="1889" title="Mark Antony Lower" label="Mark Antony Lower"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="1932" end="1938" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q160337" start="2240" end="2253" title="Henry VI of England" label="King Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q312137" start="2335" end="2356" title="Richard of York, 3rd Duke of York" label="Richard, Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q256983" start="2391" end="2397" title="Anne de Mortimer" label="mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577042" start="2625" end="2646" title="List of chief governors of Ireland" label="Lieutenant of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q584430" start="5042" end="5081" title="William de la Pole, 1st Duke of Suffolk" label="William de la Pole, 1st Duke of Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975546" start="5447" end="5459" title="Royal forest" label="Royal forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727086" start="5791" end="5832" title="The Complaint of the Poor Commons of Kent" label="The Complaint of the Poor Commons of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="5913" end="5916" title="Member of parliament" label="MPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133874" start="6980" end="6989" title="James Fiennes, 1st Baron Saye and Sele" label="Lord Saye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617843" start="7244" end="7265" title="High Sheriff of Kent" label="High Sheriffs of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q944583" start="7379" end="7398" title="Lord High Treasurer" label="Lord High Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q880861" start="7811" end="7821" title="Blackheath, London" label="Blackheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="7841" end="7855" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q75400614" start="8324" end="8341" title="Humphrey Stafford (died 1450)" label="Humphrey Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592550" start="8356" end="8363" title="Grafton Manor" label="Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190876" start="8381" end="8391" title="Bromsgrove" label="Bromsgrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q85815750" start="8431" end="8447" title="William Stafford (died 1450)" label="William Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135985" start="8462" end="8482" title="Southwick, Wiltshire" label="Southwick, Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353098" start="8494" end="8530" title="Humphrey Stafford, 1st Earl of Devon" label="Humphrey Stafford, 1st Earl of Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q939838" start="8623" end="8632" title="Sevenoaks" label="Sevenoaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004743" start="8790" end="8806" title="William Ayscough" label="William Ayscough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636762" start="8822" end="8841" title="Bishop of Salisbury" label="Bishop of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23140" start="9161" end="9173" title="Warwickshire" label="Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273898" start="9240" end="9249" title="Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q130206" start="9274" end="9287" title="London Bridge" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9317" end="9335" title="White_Hart#Southwark,_London" label="The White Hart inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q738950" start="9612" end="9624" title="London Stone" label="London Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822560" start="9795" end="9804" title="Mortimers" label="Mortimers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961493" start="9996" end="10005" title="Guildhall" label="Guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133874" start="10017" end="10055" title="James Fiennes, 1st Baron Saye and Sele" label="James Fiennes, 1st Baron Saye and Sele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068693" start="10166" end="10175" title="Cheapside" label="Cheapside"/>
<link wikidata="Q132146893" start="10216" end="10231" title="William Cromer (died 1450)" label="William Crowmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534115" start="10240" end="10254" title="William Cromer" label="William Cromer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495002" start="10277" end="10294" title="Sheriff of London" label="Sheriff of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="10296" end="10298" title="Member of Parliament (England)" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q73341" start="10309" end="10329" title="Lord Mayor of London" label="Lord Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q284092" start="11577" end="11586" title="John Kemp" label="John Kemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="11588" end="11603" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4281830" start="12346" end="12351" title="Mark (currency)" label="marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q246884" start="12459" end="12464" title="Lewes" label="Lewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617843" start="12657" end="12677" title="High Sheriff of Kent" label="High Sheriff of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q661297" start="12930" end="12939" title="Dismemberment" label="quartered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265605" start="13128" end="13169" title="Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham" label="Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000115" start="13431" end="13440" title="Faversham" label="Faversham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500299" start="13449" end="13464" title="Isle of Sheppey" label="Isle of Sheppey"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="13880" end="13886" title="yeomen" label="yeomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265446" start="13896" end="13920" title="John and William Merfold" label="John and William Merfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="15925" end="15944" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236216" start="15964" end="15980" title="Henry VI, Part 2" label="Henry VI, Part 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350215" start="16131" end="16147" title="Robert T. Conrad" label="Robert T. Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294570" start="16282" end="16295" title="Edwin Forrest" label="Edwin Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183979" start="16473" end="16487" title="Philip Lindsay" label="Philip Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q706794" start="16626" end="16639" title="Conn Iggulden" label="Conn Iggulden"/>
<link wikidata="Q311820" start="16665" end="16674" title="Wat Tyler" label="Wat Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q848612" start="16766" end="16814" title="A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur&amp;#x27;s Court" label="A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur&amp;#x27;s Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="16824" end="16834" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q570071" start="16883" end="16909" title="Charles Erskine Scott Wood" label="Charles Erskine Scott Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110610" start="16923" end="16941" title="Heavenly Discourse" label="Heavenly Discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874000" start="16965" end="16974" title="Bay Fleet" label="Bay Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599967" start="16976" end="17002" title="Great Slump (15th century)" label="Great Slump (15th century)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="17004" end="17027" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111532" start="17029" end="17052" title="Jack Cade&amp;#x27;s Cavern" label="Jack Cade&amp;#x27;s Cavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265446" start="17054" end="17078" title="John and William Merfold" label="John and William Merfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="17080" end="17097" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424298" wikidata="Q348445" url="?curid=424298" title="René Auberjonois">
<text>René Marie Murat Auberjonois ( ; June 1, 1940 – December 8, 2019) was an American actor, best known for playing Odo on &quot;Star Trek: Deep Space Nine&quot; (1993–1999) and Clayton Endicott III on &quot;Benson&quot; (1980–1986).

He first achieved fame as a stage actor, winning the Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Musical in 1970 for his portrayal of Sebastian Baye opposite Katharine Hepburn in the André Previn-Alan Jay Lerner musical &quot;Coco&quot;. He went on to earn three more Tony nominations for performances in Neil Simon&#x27;s &quot;The Good Doctor&quot; (1973), Roger Miller&#x27;s &quot;Big River&quot; (1985), and Cy Coleman&#x27;s &quot;City of Angels&quot; (1989); he won a Drama Desk Award for &quot;Big River&quot;.

A screen actor with more than 200 credits, Auberjonois was most famous for portraying characters in the main casts of several long-running television series, including Clayton Endicott III on &quot;Benson&quot; (1980–1986), for which he was an Emmy Award nominee; and Paul Lewiston on &quot;Boston Legal&quot; (2004–2008). In films, Auberjonois appeared in several Robert Altman productions, notably Father John Mulcahy in the film version of &quot;M*A*S*H&quot; (1970); the expedition scientist Roy Bagley in &quot;King Kong&quot; (1976); Chef Louis in &quot;The Little Mermaid&quot; (1989), in which he sang &quot;Les Poissons&quot;; and Reverend Oliver in &quot;The Patriot&quot; (2000). In the American animated musical comedy film &quot;Cats Don&#x27;t Dance&quot; (1997), Auberjonois voiced Flanigan.

Auberjonois also performed as a voice actor in several video games, animated series and other productions.

== Early life ==
René Marie Murat Auberjonois was born June 1, 1940, in Manhattan, New York City. His father, Swiss-born Fernand Auberjonois, was a Cold War-era foreign correspondent and Pulitzer Prize-nominated writer. Auberjonois&#x27; mother, Princess Laure Louise Napoléone Eugénie Caroline Murat, was a great-great-granddaughter of Joachim Murat (one of Napoleon&#x27;s marshals and King of Naples during the First French Empire), and his wife—Napoleon&#x27;s youngest sister—Caroline Bonaparte. Auberjonois had a sister and a brother, and two half-sisters from his mother&#x27;s first marriage. Auberjonois wrote that his French family name, an uncommon one in the United States, means &quot;armorer.&quot;

Auberjonois&#x27; grandfather, also René Auberjonois, was a Swiss post-Impressionist painter. His maternal grandmother, Hélène Macdonald Stallo, was an American from Cincinnati, Ohio; his maternal grandfather&#x27;s mother was a Russian noblewoman, Eudoxia Michailovna Somova, and his maternal grandfather&#x27;s paternal grandmother, Caroline Georgina Fraser, who was the wife of Prince Napoleon Lucien Charles Murat, was a Scottish-American from Charleston, South Carolina.

Auberjonois&#x27; family moved to Paris after World War II. After a few years in France, the family moved back to the United States and joined the South Mountain Road artists&#x27; colony in Rockland County, New York, whose residents included Burgess Meredith, John Houseman, and Lotte Lenya.

The Auberjonois family also lived for a time in London, where Auberjonois completed high school while studying theater. To complete his education, he attended the Carnegie Institute of Technology (now Carnegie Mellon University), and graduated with a Bachelor of Fine Arts from the College of Fine Arts in 1962.

Auberjonois was a member of the original faculty of the Juilliard School&#x27;s Drama Division when it opened in 1968 under John Houseman.

== Career ==
=== Theater ===
After college, Auberjonois worked with several different theater companies, beginning with three years at the prestigious Arena Stage in Washington, D.C. (&quot;it was my graduate school,&quot; he said). He traveled between Los Angeles, California, and New York, working in numerous theater productions. He helped found Bill Ball&#x27;s American Conservatory Theater in Pittsburgh, playing the title roles in both &quot;Tartuffe&quot; and &quot;King Lear,&quot; before moving with the company to San Francisco. Then came the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles, and the Brooklyn Academy of Music Repertory Company in New York City. He was a member of the Peninsula Players summer theater program during the 1962 season.

In 1968, Auberjonois landed a role on Broadway, and appeared in three plays that season: as Fool to Lee J. Cobb&#x27;s &quot;King Lear&quot; (the longest running production of the play in Broadway history), as Ned in &quot;A Cry of Players&quot; (which played in repertory with King Lear), opposite Frank Langella, and as Marco in &quot;Fire!&quot; In 1969, he earned a Tony Award for his performance as Sebastian Baye alongside Katharine Hepburn in &quot;Coco&quot;.

He received Tony nominations for his roles in Neil Simon&#x27;s &quot;The Good Doctor&quot; (1973) opposite Christopher Plummer; as the Duke in &quot;Big River&quot; (1984), winning a Drama Desk Award; and, memorably, as Buddy Fidler/Irwin S. Irving in &quot;City of Angels&quot; (1989), written by Larry Gelbart and Cy Coleman.

Auberjonois&#x27; other Broadway appearances included Malvolio in &quot;Twelfth Night&quot; (1972); Scapin in &quot;Tricks&quot; (1973); Mr. Samsa in &quot;Metamorphosis&quot; (1989); Professor Abronsius in &quot;Dance of the Vampires&quot;, the English-language version of Jim Steinman&#x27;s musical adaptation of &quot;Tanz der Vampire&quot;; and Jethro Crouch in &quot;Sly Fox&quot; (2004), for which he was nominated for Outstanding Featured Actor in a Play, an Outer Critics Circle Award.

Auberjonois appeared many times at the Mark Taper Forum, notably as Malvolio in &quot;Twelfth Night&quot; and as Stanislavski in &quot;Chekhov in Yalta&quot;. As a member of the Second Drama Quartet, he toured with Ed Asner, Dianne Wiest, and Harris Yulin. He appeared in the Tom Stoppard and André Previn work, &quot;Every Good Boy Deserves Favor&quot;, at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington, D.C., and the Metropolitan Opera in New York.

He directed many theatrical productions, and starred in the Washington, D.C. production of &quot;12 Angry Men&quot; (2004), where he portrayed &quot;Juror #5&quot; to Roy Scheider&#x27;s &quot;#8&quot; and Robert Prosky&#x27;s &quot;#3&quot;. He made his debut at the Shakespeare Theatre Company in Washington, D.C., in 2008 as the titular character in Molière&#x27;s &quot;The Imaginary Invalid&quot;.

He was on the advisory board of Sci-Fest LA, the first annual Los Angeles Science Fiction One-Act Play Festival, held in May 2014.

In 2018, Auberjonois was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame.

=== Films ===
Auberjonois played Father Mulcahy in the original film version of &quot;M*A*S*H&quot;. His subsequent film roles included the gangster Tony in &quot;Police Academy 5: Assignment Miami Beach&quot; (1988), and Reverend Oliver in &quot;The Patriot&quot; (2000). He made cameo appearances in a number of films, including a mental asylum doctor patterned after Tim Burton, in &quot;Batman Forever&quot; (1995), and a bird expert who gradually transforms into a bird in Robert Altman&#x27;s 1970 film &quot;Brewster McCloud&quot;. He appeared as Colonel West, a minor role in the 1991 &quot;Star Trek&quot; film &quot;Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country&quot;, but his part was cut from the theatrical release. His other notable film appearances include: &quot;McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller&quot; (1971), &quot;Images &quot;(1972), &quot;Pete &#x27;n&#x27; Tillie&quot; (1972), &quot;The Hindenburg&quot; (1975), &quot;King Kong&quot; (1976), &quot;The Big Bus&quot; (1976), &quot;Eyes of Laura Mars&quot; (1978), &quot;Where the Buffalo Roam&quot; (1980), &quot;Walker&quot; (1987), &quot;My Best Friend Is a Vampire&quot; (1987), &quot;The Feud&quot; (1989), &quot;Inspector Gadget&quot; (1999), and &quot;Eulogy&quot; (2004).

Auberjonois portrayed the character of Straight Hollander in the 1993 Miramax film &quot;The Ballad of Little Jo&quot;. He voiced Professor Genius in &quot;Little Nemo: Adventures in Slumberland&quot;, Louis the Chef in the 1st and 2nd &quot;Little Mermaid&quot; films, Flanagan in &quot;Cats Don&#x27;t Dance&quot;, the Butler in &quot;&quot;, and André in &quot;&quot;.

In 2019, Auberjonois portrayed the title role in &quot;Raising Buchanan&quot; as U.S. president James Buchanan.

=== Television ===

In addition to having been a regular actor on three television shows (&quot;Benson&quot;, a situation comedy; &quot;Star Trek: Deep Space Nine&quot; in science fiction; and &quot;Boston Legal&quot;, a legal comedy drama), Auberjonois guest starred on many television series, including; &quot;Nash Bridges&quot;, &quot;Ellery Queen&quot;, &quot;Family&quot;, &quot;Grey&#x27;s Anatomy&quot;, &quot;The Rockford Files&quot;, &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels&quot;, &quot;Starsky &amp; Hutch&quot;, &quot;Wonder Woman&quot;, &quot;Harry O&quot;, &quot;The Jeffersons&quot;, &quot;The Outer Limits&quot;, &quot;Night Gallery&quot;, &quot;Hart to Hart&quot;, &quot;Matlock&quot;, &quot;Murder, She Wrote&quot;, &quot;The Bionic Woman&quot;, &quot;Frasier&quot;, &quot;Judging Amy&quot;, &quot;Chicago Hope&quot;, &quot;The Bob Newhart Show&quot;, &quot;Star Trek: Enterprise&quot;, &quot;Stargate SG-1&quot;, &quot;Warehouse 13&quot;, &quot;Archer&quot;, &quot;L.A. Law&quot;, &quot;The Practice&quot; (for which he received an Emmy nomination, playing a different character than the one he played on &quot;The Practice&quot; spinoff &quot;Boston Legal&quot;), &quot;Saving Grace&quot;, &quot;It&#x27;s Always Sunny in Philadelphia&quot;, &quot;Criminal Minds&quot;, &quot;NCIS&quot;, &quot;The Good Wife&quot;, &quot;The Librarians&quot;, and &quot;Madam Secretary&quot;.

His television film credits include &quot;The Rhinemann Exchange&quot;, &quot;The Dark Secret of Harvest Home&quot;, Disney&#x27;s &quot;Geppetto&quot;, Gore Vidal&#x27;s &quot;Billy The Kid&quot;, the remake of &quot;A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur&#x27;s Court&quot;, and the &quot;Sally Hemings: An American Scandal&quot; (2000) miniseries. He portrayed the character Fortunato in an episode of &quot;American Masters&quot; entitled &quot;Edgar Allan Poe: Terror of the Soul&quot; (1995). He received a third Emmy Award nomination for his performance in ABC&#x27;s &quot;The Legend of Sleepy Hollow&quot;. He played NASA scientist Dr. Felix Blackwell in the episode &quot;Phoenix&quot; on &quot;NCIS&quot;.
Auberjonois voiced animated roles, including characters on &quot;Snorks&quot;, &quot;&quot;, Leonard McLeish on &quot;Pound Puppies&quot; (2010), &quot;&quot;, Master Fung in the first episodes of &quot;Xiaolin Showdown&quot; (before being replaced by Maurice LaMarche), Azmuth on &quot;Ben 10: Omniverse&quot;, Renard Dumont on &quot;The Legend of Tarzan&quot;, &quot;Justice League Unlimited&quot;, &quot;Max Steel&quot;, &quot;Fantastic Max&quot;, &quot;Challenge of the GoBots&quot; (as the treacherous &quot;Dr. Braxis&quot;), &quot;Archer&quot;, &quot;Young Justice&quot;, &quot;Random! Cartoons&quot;, and &quot;Avengers Assemble&quot;. He lent his voice talents to the 2001 Public Broadcasting System (PBS) &quot;American Experience&quot; documentary &quot;Woodrow Wilson&quot; as the title character, along with the 2003 PBS historical documentary &quot;Kingdom of David: The Saga of the Israelites&quot;.

Auberjonois directed television shows, including &quot;Marblehead Manor&quot;, and various episodes of &quot;Deep Space Nine&quot;.

=== Voice acting ===

Auberjonois was active in radio drama. He read &quot;The Stunt&quot; by Mordechai Strigler for the National Public Radio (NPR) series &quot;Jewish Stories From the Old World to the New&quot;, and he recorded novels on tape. On PRI, he was featured numerous times on &quot;Selected Shorts&quot;, reading works of dramatic fiction. His voice was heard in Disney&#x27;s &quot;The Little Mermaid&quot; (receiving alphabetical top billing as Louis the Chef and singing &quot;Les Poissons&quot;), and as The Skull in &quot;The Last Unicorn&quot;.

He did voice work on the &quot;Challenge of the GoBots&quot; series in 1980s as Dr. Braxis and was the voice of Peter Parker on the 1972 Buddah Records Spider-Man LP &quot;From Beyond the Grave&quot; (BDS 5119), a radio-style narrative replete with sound effects and rock and roll song interludes.

He voice acted in The Last Unicorn as the Skull that guards the clock that serves as an entryway into the Red Bull&#x27;s lair. Beagle praised Auberjonois&#x27; performance, saying &quot;he could have played any role in that movie and I would have been happy ... He&#x27;s that talented.&quot;

In 1984–1985, he lent his voice to DeSaad, an associate of the villainous Darkseid on the animated series &quot;Super Friends&quot;. From 1986 to 1987, he voiced Alvinar in the cartoons series &quot;Wildfire&quot;. He also provided the voice of Professor Genius in &quot;Little Nemo: Adventures in Slumberland&quot;.

He provided the voice for Janos Audron, an ancient vampire in the &quot;Legacy of Kain&quot; video game series; he was in &quot;Soul Reaver 2&quot;, &quot;Blood Omen 2&quot;, and &quot;Legacy of Kain: Defiance&quot;. He provided the voice of Angler in the &quot;Pirates of the Caribbean: At World&#x27;s End&quot; video game. He voice-played General Zod in the Joseph Ruby-Kenneth Spears animated &quot;Superman&quot; series episode titled &quot;The Hunter&quot;.

Auberjonois provided minor character voices for &quot;Justice League&quot;, reprising his role as DeSaad, and additionally voicing villain Kanjar Ro and Green Lantern Galius Zed.

In 2003, he provided the voice of Natori in the English dubbed version of semi-sequel to the Hayao Miyazaki film &quot;Whisper of the Heart&quot;, &quot;The Cat Returns&quot;. He reprised an animated version of his character Odo from &quot;Star Trek: Deep Space Nine&quot; in a cutaway joke in &quot;Family Guy&quot;″s &quot;Stewie Griffin: The Untold Story&quot;. The cutaway featured a more humanoid-faced Odo threatening Stewie&#x27;s alleged cousin Quark Griffin. Auberjonois also lent his voice to &quot;&quot;.

In 2011, he voiced villain Mark Desmond in Cartoon Network&#x27;s &quot;Young Justice&quot;. He was also the voice of Leonard McLeish in the &quot;Pound Puppies&quot; series, Pepé Le Pew in 2011 on &quot;The Looney Tunes Show&quot;, Azmuth in &quot;Ben 10: Omniverse&quot;, and Ebony Maw in &quot;Avengers Assemble&quot;.

==== Video games ====

One of Auberjonois&#x27; earliest forays into video game voice acting was the role of Janos Audron in &quot;Soul Reaver 2&quot;; he continued to voice the character in subsequent releases in the &quot;Legacy of Kain&quot; series. According to a behind-the-scenes featurette in &quot;Soul Reaver 2&quot;, showing candid discussions among the voice actors during recording, he was surprised at the quality of the writing, asking, &quot;This is for a video game?!&quot; when the purpose of the recordings was brought to light.

Auberjonois provided the voice of Karl Schäfer, the honorable German explorer in the video game &quot;Uncharted 2: Among Thieves&quot;, and Mr. House, the reclusive New Vegas casino owner in the 2010 video game &quot;&quot;. He also voiced Dr. Ignatio Mobius in &quot;Command &amp; Conquer: Renegade&quot;. He reprised his role as Odo in the game &quot;Star Trek: Deep Space Nine: The Fallen&quot;. In June 2018 he reprised his role as Odo in the massively multiplayer online role-playing game &quot;Star Trek Online&quot;.

== Personal life ==
Auberjonois was married to his wife Judith Helen Mihalyi from 1963 until his death in 2019. They had two children, a daughter, Tessa, and a son, Rèmy-Luc, both of whom also became actors.

In an interview with &quot;Compassion &amp; Choices Magazine&quot;, Judith Auberjonois revealed that René underwent chemotherapy for lung cancer in 2018. It was discovered in 2019 that the cancer had spread to his brain. Due to the potential for serious cognitive side effects, Auberjonois chose not to pursue the whole-brain radiation treatment suggested by his doctors.

==Death==
As a resident of California, Auberjonois decided to seek medical aid in dying under the California End of Life Option Act. On December 6, 2019, he spent his final hours with his family at his home in Los Angeles reminiscing over photos and listening to music. He then took the medication prescribed for assisted suicide and died two days later at the age of 79. The California End of Life Option Act stipulates that death certificates should list the underlying terminal illness as the cause of death, rather than the use of life-ending medications. His cause of death was given as metastatic lung cancer.

== Filmography ==
=== Live-action ===


=== Animation ===


=== Video games ===
== &quot;Deep Space Nine&quot; directorial credits ==

== Book narrations ==
Auberjonois&#x27; voice talents also included book narrations.

=== The &quot;Pendergast&quot; novels ===
* &quot;The Cabinet of Curiosities&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Still Life with Crows&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Diogenes Trilogy&quot;
** &quot;Brimstone&quot; (2004)
** &quot;Dance of Death&quot; (2005)
** &quot;The Book of the Dead&quot; (2006)
* &quot;The Wheel of Darkness&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Cemetery Dance&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Helen Trilogy&quot;
** &quot;Fever Dream&quot; (2010)
** &quot;Cold Vengeance&quot; (2011)
** &quot;Two Graves&quot; (2012)
* &quot;White Fire&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Blue Labyrinth&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Crimson Shore&quot; (2015)
* &quot;The Obsidian Chamber&quot; (2016)
* &quot;City of Endless Night&quot; (2018)
* &quot;Verses for the Dead&quot; (2018)

=== Other books ===
== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q348445" start="0" end="28" title="René Auberjonois" label="René Marie Murat Auberjonois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195486" start="112" end="115" title="Odo (Star Trek)" label="Odo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="125" end="151" title="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine" label="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q818181" start="204" end="210" title="Benson (TV series)" label="Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q674165" start="284" end="331" title="Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Musical" label="Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q56016" start="385" end="402" title="Katharine Hepburn" label="Katharine Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q155712" start="410" end="422" title="André Previn" label="André Previn"/>
<link wikidata="Q961893" start="423" end="438" title="Alan Jay Lerner" label="Alan Jay Lerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981318" start="453" end="457" title="Coco (musical)" label="Coco"/>
<link wikidata="Q315808" start="532" end="542" title="Neil Simon" label="Neil Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737205" start="556" end="571" title="The Good Doctor (play)" label="The Good Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q712359" start="586" end="598" title="Roger Miller" label="Roger Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906210" start="612" end="621" title="Big River (musical)" label="Big River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146861" start="640" end="650" title="Cy Coleman" label="Cy Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821261" start="664" end="678" title="City of Angels (musical)" label="City of Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="702" end="718" title="Drama Desk Award" label="Drama Desk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q818181" start="945" end="951" title="Benson (TV series)" label="Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="991" end="1001" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1015" end="1028" title="List of Boston Legal characters#Paul Lewiston" label="Paul Lewiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q308984" start="1038" end="1050" title="Boston Legal" label="Boston Legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="1112" end="1125" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1147" end="1166" title="List of M*A*S*H characters#Father John Mulcahy" label="Father John Mulcahy"/>
<link wikidata="Q494085" start="1196" end="1203" title="M*A*S*H (film)" label="M*A*S*H"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142862" start="1263" end="1272" title="King Kong (1976 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q190135" start="1307" end="1325" title="The Little Mermaid (1989 film)" label="The Little Mermaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529877" start="1363" end="1375" title="Les Poissons" label="Les Poissons"/>
<link wikidata="Q646633" start="1412" end="1423" title="The Patriot (2000 film)" label="The Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q930134" start="1489" end="1510" title="Cats Don&amp;#x27;t Dance" label="Cats Don&amp;#x27;t Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="1735" end="1744" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069046" start="1784" end="1803" title="Fernand Auberjonois" label="Fernand Auberjonois"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1811" end="1819" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="1850" end="1864" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q151173" start="2000" end="2013" title="Joachim Murat" label="Joachim Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2022" end="2030" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q437767" start="2038" end="2046" title="Marshal of the Empire" label="marshals"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="2051" end="2065" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="King of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="2077" end="2096" title="First French Empire" label="First French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152782" start="2144" end="2162" title="Caroline Bonaparte" label="Caroline Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685165" start="2361" end="2368" title="Armourer" label="armorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q683105" start="2413" end="2429" title="René Auberjonois (painter)" label="René Auberjonois"/>
<link wikidata="Q166713" start="2443" end="2461" title="Post-Impressionism" label="post-Impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="2543" end="2553" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q712889" start="2758" end="2794" title="Lucien Murat" label="Prince Napoleon Lucien Charles Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="2825" end="2851" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2900" end="2912" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568002" start="3001" end="3020" title="South Mountain Road" label="South Mountain Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q111098" start="3045" end="3070" title="Rockland County, New York" label="Rockland County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q343633" start="3097" end="3113" title="Burgess Meredith" label="Burgess Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q315734" start="3115" end="3128" title="John Houseman" label="John Houseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q93604" start="3134" end="3145" title="Lotte Lenya" label="Lotte Lenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="3349" end="3375" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q503246" start="3517" end="3533" title="Juilliard School" label="Juilliard School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788912" start="3752" end="3763" title="Arena Stage" label="Arena Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q463781" start="3967" end="3996" title="American Conservatory Theater" label="American Conservatory Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q205875" start="4050" end="4058" title="Tartuffe" label="Tartuffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q181598" start="4075" end="4084" title="King Lear" label="King Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900454" start="4155" end="4171" title="Mark Taper Forum" label="Mark Taper Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q72912" start="4196" end="4221" title="Brooklyn Academy of Music" label="Brooklyn Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162953" start="4281" end="4298" title="Peninsula Players" label="Peninsula Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="4385" end="4393" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q348351" start="4447" end="4458" title="Lee J. Cobb" label="Lee J. Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q181598" start="4472" end="4481" title="King Lear" label="King Lear"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4570" end="4586" title="Gene Frankel#Life and career" label="A Cry of Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q310944" start="4646" end="4660" title="Frank Langella" label="Frank Langella"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="4717" end="4727" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q56016" start="4776" end="4793" title="Katharine Hepburn" label="Katharine Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981318" start="4803" end="4807" title="Coco (musical)" label="Coco"/>
<link wikidata="Q315808" start="4862" end="4872" title="Neil Simon" label="Neil Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737205" start="4886" end="4901" title="The Good Doctor (play)" label="The Good Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q190523" start="4924" end="4943" title="Christopher Plummer" label="Christopher Plummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906210" start="4966" end="4975" title="Big River (musical)" label="Big River"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="5000" end="5016" title="Drama Desk Award" label="Drama Desk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821261" start="5075" end="5089" title="City of Angels (musical)" label="City of Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806065" start="5115" end="5128" title="Larry Gelbart" label="Larry Gelbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146861" start="5133" end="5143" title="Cy Coleman" label="Cy Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="5170" end="5178" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q221211" start="5218" end="5231" title="Twelfth Night" label="Twelfth Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q184222" start="5302" end="5315" title="The Metamorphosis" label="Metamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074321" start="5359" end="5380" title="Dance of the Vampires (musical)" label="Dance of the Vampires"/>
<link wikidata="Q281908" start="5420" end="5432" title="Jim Steinman" label="Jim Steinman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110191" start="5519" end="5526" title="Sly Fox" label="Sly Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111970" start="5613" end="5639" title="Outer Critics Circle Award" label="Outer Critics Circle Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900454" start="5681" end="5697" title="Mark Taper Forum" label="Mark Taper Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844047" start="5710" end="5718" title="Malvolio" label="Malvolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q49484" start="5755" end="5767" title="Konstantin Stanislavski" label="Stanislavski"/>
<link wikidata="Q154421" start="5857" end="5865" title="Ed Asner" label="Ed Asner"/>
<link wikidata="Q217573" start="5867" end="5879" title="Dianne Wiest" label="Dianne Wiest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346123" start="5885" end="5897" title="Harris Yulin" label="Harris Yulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q294773" start="5918" end="5930" title="Tom Stoppard" label="Tom Stoppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q155712" start="5935" end="5947" title="André Previn" label="André Previn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631981" start="6004" end="6050" title="John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts" label="John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583424" start="6080" end="6098" title="Metropolitan Opera" label="Metropolitan Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451437" start="6210" end="6222" title="Twelve Angry Men (play)" label="12 Angry Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q216569" start="6280" end="6292" title="Roy Scheider" label="Roy Scheider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312282" start="6319" end="6332" title="Robert Prosky" label="Robert Prosky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462820" start="6381" end="6408" title="Shakespeare Theatre Company" label="Shakespeare Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q687" start="6466" end="6473" title="Molière" label="Molière"/>
<link wikidata="Q588161" start="6487" end="6508" title="The Imaginary Invalid" label="The Imaginary Invalid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157937" start="6549" end="6560" title="Sci-Fest LA" label="Sci-Fest LA"/>
<link wikidata="Q467050" start="6692" end="6721" title="American Theater Hall of Fame" label="American Theater Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q494085" start="6810" end="6817" title="M*A*S*H (film)" label="M*A*S*H"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6887" end="6927" title="Police Academy 5: Assignment Miami Beach" label="Police Academy 5: Assignment Miami Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q646633" start="6971" end="6982" title="The Patriot (2000 film)" label="The Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="7005" end="7021" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="7094" end="7104" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q221345" start="7115" end="7129" title="Batman Forever" label="Batman Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="7202" end="7215" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924761" start="7239" end="7255" title="Brewster McCloud" label="Brewster McCloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="7323" end="7332" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7350" end="7388" title="Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country" label="Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423362" start="7496" end="7520" title="McCabe &amp;amp; Mrs. Miller" label="McCabe &amp;amp; Mrs. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259762" start="7541" end="7547" title="Images (film)" label="Images"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376986" start="7568" end="7593" title="Pete &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Tillie" label="Pete &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Tillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q646234" start="7614" end="7628" title="The Hindenburg (film)" label="The Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142862" start="7649" end="7658" title="King Kong (1976 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218613" start="7679" end="7690" title="The Big Bus" label="The Big Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q925429" start="7711" end="7729" title="Eyes of Laura Mars" label="Eyes of Laura Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q552560" start="7750" end="7772" title="Where the Buffalo Roam" label="Where the Buffalo Roam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786299" start="7793" end="7799" title="Walker (film)" label="Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067373" start="7820" end="7847" title="My Best Friend Is a Vampire" label="My Best Friend Is a Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535654" start="7897" end="7913" title="Inspector Gadget (film)" label="Inspector Gadget"/>
<link wikidata="Q596891" start="7938" end="7944" title="Eulogy (film)" label="Eulogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q465449" start="8030" end="8037" title="Miramax" label="Miramax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784664" start="8049" end="8072" title="The Ballad of Little Jo" label="The Ballad of Little Jo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8116" end="8154" title="Little Nemo: Adventures in Slumberland" label="Little Nemo: Adventures in Slumberland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8162" end="8176" title="List of The Little Mermaid characters#Chef Louis" label="Louis the Chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q190135" start="8184" end="8187" title="The Little Mermaid (1989 film)" label="1st"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8192" end="8195" title="The Little Mermaid II: Return to the Sea" label="2nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q930134" start="8248" end="8269" title="Cats Don&amp;#x27;t Dance" label="Cats Don&amp;#x27;t Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q83726462" start="8388" end="8404" title="Raising Buchanan" label="Raising Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="8429" end="8443" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q818181" start="8542" end="8548" title="Benson (TV series)" label="Benson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8582" end="8608" title="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine" label="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q308984" start="8645" end="8657" title="Boston Legal" label="Boston Legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q643873" start="8667" end="8672" title="legal drama" label="legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="8673" end="8685" title="comedy drama" label="comedy drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551002" start="8758" end="8770" title="Nash Bridges" label="Nash Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q586362" start="8784" end="8796" title="Ellery Queen" label="Ellery Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277124" start="8810" end="8816" title="Family (1976 TV series)" label="Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q438406" start="8830" end="8849" title="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy" label="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q283660" start="8863" end="8881" title="The Rockford Files" label="The Rockford Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q617274" start="8895" end="8916" title="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels" label="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q196226" start="8930" end="8949" title="Starsky &amp;amp; Hutch" label="Starsky &amp;amp; Hutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247495" start="8963" end="8975" title="Wonder Woman (TV series)" label="Wonder Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565793" start="8989" end="8996" title="Harry O" label="Harry O"/>
<link wikidata="Q153227" start="9010" end="9024" title="The Jeffersons" label="The Jeffersons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621450" start="9038" end="9054" title="The Outer Limits (1995 TV series)" label="The Outer Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q639433" start="9068" end="9081" title="Night Gallery" label="Night Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541739" start="9095" end="9107" title="Hart to Hart" label="Hart to Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031383" start="9121" end="9128" title="Matlock (1986 TV series)" label="Matlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q833322" start="9142" end="9159" title="Murder, She Wrote" label="Murder, She Wrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216258" start="9173" end="9189" title="The Bionic Woman" label="The Bionic Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q209282" start="9203" end="9210" title="Frasier" label="Frasier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247192" start="9224" end="9235" title="Judging Amy" label="Judging Amy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071958" start="9249" end="9261" title="Chicago Hope" label="Chicago Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248785" start="9275" end="9295" title="The Bob Newhart Show" label="The Bob Newhart Show"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9309" end="9330" title="Star Trek: Enterprise" label="Star Trek: Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q187462" start="9344" end="9357" title="Stargate SG-1" label="Stargate SG-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q595889" start="9371" end="9383" title="Warehouse 13" label="Warehouse 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q632670" start="9397" end="9403" title="Archer (2009 TV series)" label="Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247212" start="9417" end="9425" title="L.A. Law" label="L.A. Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132439" start="9439" end="9451" title="The Practice" label="The Practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q515155" start="9623" end="9635" title="Saving Grace (American TV series)" label="Saving Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q23670" start="9649" end="9687" title="It&amp;#x27;s Always Sunny in Philadelphia" label="It&amp;#x27;s Always Sunny in Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202141" start="9701" end="9715" title="Criminal Minds" label="Criminal Minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4525" start="9729" end="9733" title="NCIS (TV series)" label="NCIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q19570" start="9747" end="9760" title="The Good Wife" label="The Good Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q18608417" start="9774" end="9788" title="The Librarians (2014 TV series)" label="The Librarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16875508" start="9806" end="9821" title="Madam Secretary (TV series)" label="Madam Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760606" start="9872" end="9894" title="The Rhinemann Exchange" label="The Rhinemann Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728996" start="9908" end="9939" title="The Dark Secret of Harvest Home" label="The Dark Secret of Harvest Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760834" start="9967" end="9975" title="Geppetto (film)" label="Geppetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q167821" start="9983" end="9993" title="Gore Vidal" label="Gore Vidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130590" start="10205" end="10214" title="The Cask of Amontillado" label="Fortunato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842976" start="10238" end="10254" title="American Masters" label="American Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="10270" end="10317" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="&amp;quot;Edgar Allan Poe: Terror of the Soul&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4525" start="10532" end="10536" title="NCIS (TV series)" label="NCIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130063" start="10609" end="10615" title="Snorks" label="Snorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q888245" start="10662" end="10675" title="Pound Puppies (2010 TV series)" label="Pound Puppies"/>
<link wikidata="Q720473" start="10747" end="10763" title="Xiaolin Showdown" label="Xiaolin Showdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q847124" start="10796" end="10812" title="Maurice LaMarche" label="Maurice LaMarche"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10831" end="10848" title="Ben 10: Omniverse" label="Ben 10: Omniverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009343" start="10879" end="10899" title="The Legend of Tarzan (TV series)" label="The Legend of Tarzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669712" start="10913" end="10937" title="Justice League Unlimited" label="Justice League Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q9030747" start="10951" end="10960" title="Max Steel (2000 TV series)" label="Max Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q635750" start="10974" end="10987" title="Fantastic Max" label="Fantastic Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985330" start="11001" end="11024" title="Challenge of the GoBots" label="Challenge of the GoBots"/>
<link wikidata="Q632670" start="11082" end="11088" title="Archer (2009 TV series)" label="Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q785430" start="11102" end="11115" title="Young Justice (TV series)" label="Young Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711109" start="11129" end="11145" title="Random! Cartoons" label="Random! Cartoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896442" start="11163" end="11180" title="Avengers Assemble (TV series)" label="Avengers Assemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842919" start="11265" end="11284" title="American Experience" label="American Experience"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11407" end="11451" title="Kingdom of David: The Saga of the Israelites" label="Kingdom of David: The Saga of the Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4000854" start="11515" end="11531" title="Marblehead Manor" label="Marblehead Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="11714" end="11735" title="NPR" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116341" start="11842" end="11845" title="Public Radio International" label="PRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447701" start="11887" end="11902" title="Selected Shorts" label="Selected Shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q190135" start="11988" end="12006" title="The Little Mermaid (1989 film)" label="The Little Mermaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q176198" start="12132" end="12148" title="The Last Unicorn (film)" label="The Last Unicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q304971" start="12294" end="12308" title="Buddah Records" label="Buddah Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="12309" end="12319" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q176198" start="12474" end="12490" title="The Last Unicorn (film)" label="The Last Unicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627300" start="12786" end="12792" title="DeSaad" label="DeSaad"/>
<link wikidata="Q430698" start="12825" end="12833" title="Darkseid" label="Darkseid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707472" start="12863" end="12876" title="Super Friends" label="Super Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221205" start="12950" end="12958" title="Wildfire (1986 TV series)" label="Wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13022" end="13060" title="Little Nemo: Adventures in Slumberland" label="Little Nemo: Adventures in Slumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q289129" start="13141" end="13155" title="Legacy of Kain" label="Legacy of Kain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018741" start="13197" end="13210" title="Soul Reaver 2" label="Soul Reaver 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q539018" start="13224" end="13236" title="Blood Omen 2" label="Blood Omen 2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13254" end="13278" title="Legacy of Kain: Defiance" label="Legacy of Kain: Defiance"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13331" end="13376" title="Pirates of the Caribbean: At World&amp;#x27;s End (video game)" label="Pirates of the Caribbean: At World&amp;#x27;s End"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260732" start="13411" end="13422" title="General Zod" label="General Zod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614803" start="13430" end="13456" title="Ruby-Spears" label="Joseph Ruby-Kenneth Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549361" start="13472" end="13480" title="Superman (TV series)" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q250036" start="13588" end="13602" title="Justice League (TV series)" label="Justice League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451257" start="13673" end="13682" title="Kanjar Ro" label="Kanjar Ro"/>
<link wikidata="Q32884" start="13687" end="13700" title="Green Lantern" label="Green Lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q55400" start="13807" end="13821" title="Hayao Miyazaki" label="Hayao Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q842292" start="13833" end="13853" title="Whisper of the Heart" label="Whisper of the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q51543" start="13867" end="13882" title="The Cat Returns" label="The Cat Returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195486" start="13939" end="13942" title="Odo (Star Trek)" label="Odo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13954" end="13980" title="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine" label="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="14014" end="14024" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14039" end="14071" title="Stewie Griffin: The Untold Story" label="Stewie Griffin: The Untold Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473641" start="14167" end="14172" title="Quark (Star Trek)" label="Quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549749" start="14259" end="14271" title="Blockbuster (DC Comics)" label="Mark Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="14275" end="14290" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q785430" start="14304" end="14317" title="Young Justice (TV series)" label="Young Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q888245" start="14379" end="14392" title="Pound Puppies (2010 TV series)" label="Pound Puppies"/>
<link wikidata="Q614094" start="14407" end="14418" title="Pepé Le Pew" label="Pepé Le Pew"/>
<link wikidata="Q684096" start="14436" end="14457" title="The Looney Tunes Show" label="The Looney Tunes Show"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14481" end="14498" title="Ben 10: Omniverse" label="Ben 10: Omniverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896442" start="14529" end="14546" title="Avengers Assemble (TV series)" label="Avengers Assemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018741" start="14686" end="14699" title="Soul Reaver 2" label="Soul Reaver 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q289129" start="14779" end="14793" title="Legacy of Kain" label="Legacy of Kain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15137" end="15149" title="List of Uncharted characters#Karl Schäfer" label="Karl Schäfer"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15205" end="15231" title="Uncharted 2: Among Thieves" label="Uncharted 2: Among Thieves"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15371" end="15402" title="Command &amp;amp; Conquer: Renegade" label="Command &amp;amp; Conquer: Renegade"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15456" end="15494" title="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine: The Fallen" label="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine: The Fallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="15550" end="15596" title="massively multiplayer online role-playing game" label="massively multiplayer online role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143426" start="15603" end="15619" title="Star Trek Online" label="Star Trek Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312253" start="15793" end="15801" title="Remy Auberjonois" label="Rèmy-Luc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156126" start="15864" end="15888" title="Compassion &amp;amp; Choices" label="Compassion &amp;amp; Choices"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280328" start="16083" end="16113" title="Radiation induced cognitive decline" label="serious cognitive side effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339506" start="16151" end="16172" title="Whole brain radiotherapy" label="whole-brain radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809082" start="16277" end="16297" title="Assisted suicide in the United States" label="medical aid in dying"/>
<link wikidata="Q40890572" start="16308" end="16341" title="California End of Life Option Act" label="California End of Life Option Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="16802" end="16812" title="metastasis" label="metastatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3824384" start="17098" end="17124" title="The Cabinet of Curiosities" label="The Cabinet of Curiosities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873323" start="17146" end="17167" title="Still Life with Crows" label="Still Life with Crows"/>
<link wikidata="Q847505" start="17221" end="17230" title="Brimstone (Preston and Child novel)" label="Brimstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822031" start="17253" end="17267" title="Dance of Death (novel)" label="Dance of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q543341" start="17290" end="17310" title="The Book of the Dead (novel)" label="The Book of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823974" start="17332" end="17353" title="The Wheel of Darkness" label="The Wheel of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795933" start="17375" end="17389" title="Cemetery Dance (novel)" label="Cemetery Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446071" start="17440" end="17451" title="Fever Dream (Preston and Child novel)" label="Fever Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070898" start="17474" end="17488" title="Cold Vengeance (novel)" label="Cold Vengeance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070938" start="17511" end="17521" title="Two Graves" label="Two Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064823" start="17543" end="17553" title="White Fire (novel)" label="White Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163952" start="17575" end="17589" title="Blue Labyrinth (2014 novel)" label="Blue Labyrinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720604" start="17611" end="17624" title="Crimson Shore" label="Crimson Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q24514628" start="17646" end="17666" title="The Obsidian Chamber" label="The Obsidian Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q58275876" start="17688" end="17709" title="City of Endless Night" label="City of Endless Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q60770410" start="17731" end="17750" title="Verses for the Dead" label="Verses for the Dead"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424299" wikidata="Q4116599" url="?curid=424299" title="Georgian Bluffs">
<text>Georgian Bluffs is a township in southwestern Ontario, Canada, in Grey County located between Colpoy&#x27;s Bay and Owen Sound on Georgian Bay.

The township was incorporated on January 1, 2001, by amalgamating the former townships of Derby, Keppel, and Sarawak, and the former village of Shallow Lake.

==History==

The now-former township of Derby was surveyed by the prolific Crown land surveyor Charles Rankin in 1846.

==Communities==
The township comprises the communities of Alvanley, Balmy Beach, Benallen, Big Bay, Clavering, Copperkettle, Cruickshank, East Linton, Hogg, Inglis Falls, Jackson, Keady, Kemble, Kilsyth, Lake Charles, Lindenwood, Oxenden, Shallow Lake, Shouldice, Springmount, Squire, Wolseley and Zion.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Georgian Bluffs had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.


==See also==
*List of townships in Ontario

==References==
==External links==
*Township of Georgian Bluffs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4116599" start="0" end="15" title="Georgian Bluffs" label="Georgian Bluffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936646" start="21" end="29" title="township (Canada)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="46" end="53" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546177" start="66" end="77" title="Grey County" label="Grey County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492590" start="94" end="111" title="Colpoy&amp;#x27;s Bay, Ontario" label="Colpoy&amp;#x27;s Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017735" start="116" end="126" title="Owen Sound" label="Owen Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267413" start="130" end="142" title="Georgian Bay" label="Georgian Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q115134670" start="289" end="301" title="Shallow Lake, Ontario" label="Shallow Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081930" start="399" end="413" title="Charles Rankin" label="Charles Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408212" start="619" end="626" title="Kilsyth, Ontario" label="Kilsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="755" end="780" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="794" end="811" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643835" start="1011" end="1039" title="List of townships in Ontario" label="List of townships in Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424301" wikidata="Q851504" url="?curid=424301" title="Battle of Vouillé">
<text>The Battle of Vouillé (from Latin &quot;Campus Vogladensis&quot;) was fought in the northern marches of Visigothic territory, at Vouillé, near Poitiers (Gaul), around Spring 507 between the Franks, commanded by Clovis, and the Visigoths, commanded by Alaric II. The Franks&#x27; victory resulted in their conquest of Gallia Aquitania and the death of Alaric II.
== Background ==
After Clovis&#x27;s victories over the Alemanni east of the Rhine and over the Burgundians in the Rhone Valley, the Franks&#x27; growing power posed a threat to Alaric II&#x27;s territory in Aquitaine and Hispania. Despite Theodoric the Great&#x27;s attempts to broker a peace between the factions, Clovis began a campaign to seize Aquitaine and Alaric&#x27;s center of power in Toulouse. Alaric, his army, and a force of Auvergnants militia commanded by Apollinaris of Clermont marched north and met the Frankish army in Gaul.

==Battle==
Clovis&#x27;s army was slowed by a rain-swollen Vienne River, yet his forces were able to engage the Visigoths south of Vouillé. With his missile troops stationed at the rear of his army, Clovis sent the rest of the army forward to fight hand-to-hand with the Visigoths. Despite being in a superior army in size and equipment, Alaric&#x27;s soldiers wavered as all of the Auvergnat commanders except Apollinaris were killed. During the melée Clovis allegedly killed the Visigothic king Alaric, whereupon the Visigothic army broke and fled. Clovis&#x27;s army proceeded south and plundered Alaric&#x27;s treasure at Toulouse.

==Aftermath==
After Clovis&#x27;s success in this battle, Byzantine Emperor Anastasius made him an honorary consul and patrician. The battle forced the Visigoths to retreat to Septimania, which they continued to hold, and the Franks&#x27; success at Vouillé allowed them to control the southwestern part of France and to capture Toulouse. Alaric&#x27;s illegitimate son Gesalec tried to organise a counterstrike at Narbonne, but he was deposed and ultimately killed when Narbonne was taken by Burgundian allies of the Franks. Clovis eventually drove the Goths out of Angoulême and his son, Theuderic I, defeated the Goths in Hispania.

==Notes==
==References==
* Bernard S. Bachrach, &quot;Merovingian Military Organization, 481-751&quot;, University of Minnesota Press, 1972.
* &quot;Encyclopedia of Barbarian Europe: Society in Transformation&quot;, ed.Michael Frassetto, ABC-CLIO, 2003.

==Literature==
* Eugen Ewig: &quot;Die Merowinger und das Frankenreich&quot;, Stuttgart u.a. 1993.
* Herwig Wolfram: &quot;Die Goten&quot;, München 2001.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q851504" start="4" end="21" title="Battle of Vouillé" label="Battle of Vouillé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695" start="93" end="100" title="marches" label="marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q751249" start="129" end="136" title="Vouillé, Vienne" label="Vouillé"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616" start="143" end="151" title="Poitiers" label="Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="153" end="157" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="190" end="196" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q82339" start="211" end="217" title="Clovis I" label="Clovis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="227" end="236" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q110884" start="251" end="260" title="Alaric II" label="Alaric II"/>
<link wikidata="Q715376" start="317" end="333" title="Gallia Aquitania" label="Gallia Aquitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="418" end="426" title="Alemanni" label="Alemanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="439" end="444" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q150412" start="458" end="469" title="Burgundians" label="Burgundians"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="477" end="489" title="Rhone Valley" label="Rhone Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179" start="570" end="579" title="Aquitaine" label="Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="584" end="592" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="602" end="621" title="Theodoric the Great" label="Theodoric the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="758" end="766" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152" start="801" end="812" title="Auvergne" label="Auvergnants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780242" start="834" end="857" title="Apollinaris of Clermont" label="Apollinaris of Clermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="901" end="905" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q659546" start="967" end="979" title="Vienne river" label="Vienne River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1603" end="1612" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173470" start="1621" end="1631" title="Anastasius I (emperor)" label="Anastasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q723580" start="1721" end="1731" title="Septimania" label="Septimania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="1874" end="1882" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q313192" start="1915" end="1922" title="Gesalec" label="Gesalec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555" start="1960" end="1968" title="Narbonne" label="Narbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q134346" start="2112" end="2121" title="Angoulême" label="Angoulême"/>
<link wikidata="Q233461" start="2135" end="2146" title="Theuderic I" label="Theuderic I"/>
<link wikidata="Q97552" start="2453" end="2463" title="Eugen Ewig" label="Eugen Ewig"/>
<link wikidata="Q78997" start="2537" end="2551" title="Herwig Wolfram" label="Herwig Wolfram"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424302" wikidata="Q199602" url="?curid=424302" title="Itch">
<text>An itch (also known as pruritus) is a that causes a strong desire or reflex to scratch. Itches have resisted many attempts to be classified as any one type of sensory experience. Itches have many similarities to pain, and while both are unpleasant sensory experiences, their behavioral response patterns are different. Pain creates a withdrawal reflex, whereas itches leads to a scratch reflex.

Unmyelinated nerve fibers for itches and pain both originate in the skin. Information for them is conveyed centrally in two distinct systems that both use the same nerve bundle and spinothalamic tract.

== Classification ==
Most commonly, an itch is felt in one place. If it is felt all over the body, then it is called &quot;generalized itch&quot; or &quot;generalized pruritus&quot;. Generalized itch is infrequently a symptom of a serious underlying condition, such as cholestatic liver disease.

If the sensation of itching persists for six weeks or longer, then it is called &quot;chronic itch&quot; or &quot;chronic pruritus&quot;. &quot;Chronic idiopathic pruritus&quot; or &quot;Chronic Pruritus of Unknown Origin&quot; is a form of itch that persists for longer than six weeks, and for which no clear cause can be identified.

== Signs and symptoms ==
Pain and itch have very different behavioral response patterns. Pain elicits a withdrawal reflex, which leads to retraction and therefore a reaction trying to protect an endangered part of the body. Itch in contrast creates a scratch reflex, which draws one to the affected skin site. Itch generates stimulus of a foreign object underneath or upon the skin and also the urge to remove it. For example, responding to a local itch sensation is an effective way to remove insects from one&#x27;s skin.

Scratching has traditionally been regarded as a way to relieve oneself by reducing the annoying itch sensation. However, there are hedonic aspects to scratching, as one would find noxious scratching highly pleasurable. This can be problematic with chronic itch patients, such as ones with atopic dermatitis, who may scratch affected spots until they no longer produce a pleasant or painful sensation, instead of when the itch sensation disappears. It has been hypothesized that motivational aspects of scratching include the frontal brain areas of reward and decision making. These aspects might therefore contribute to the compulsive nature of itch and scratching.

=== Contagious itch ===
Events of &quot;contagious itch&quot; are very common occurrences. Even a discussion on the topic of itch can give one the desire to scratch. Itch is likely to be more than a localized phenomenon in the place one scratches. Results from a study showed that itching and scratching were induced purely by visual stimuli in a public lecture on itching. The sensation of pain can also be induced in a similar fashion, often by listening to a description of an injury, or viewing an injury itself.

There is little detailed data on central activation for contagious itching, but it is hypothesized that a human mirror neuron system exists in which one imitates certain motor actions when they view others performing the same action. A similar hypothesis has been used to explain the cause of contagious yawning.
=== Itch inhibition due to pain ===
Studies done in the last decade have shown that itch can be inhibited by many other forms of painful stimuli, such as noxious heat, physical rubbing/scratching, noxious chemicals, and electric shock.

== Causes ==


=== Infectious ===
*Body louse, found in substandard living conditions
*Cutaneous larva migrans, a skin disease caused by hookworm infection
*Head lice, if limited to the neck and scalp
*Herpes, a viral disease
*Insect bites, such as those from mosquitos or chiggers
*Pubic lice, if limited to the genital area
*Scabies, especially when several other persons in close contact also itch
*Shaving, which may irritate the skin
*Swimmer&#x27;s itch, a short-term immune reaction
*Varicella – i.e. chickenpox, prevalent among young children and highly contagious
*Tungiasis, ectoparasite of skin

=== Environmental and allergic ===
*Allergic reaction to contact with specific chemicals, such as urushiol, derived from poison ivy or poison oak, or Balsam of Peru, found in many foods and fragrances. Certain allergens may be diagnosed in a patch test.
*Foreign objects on the skin are the most common cause of non-pathological itching. 
*Photodermatitis – sunlight reacts with chemicals in the skin, leading to the formation of irritant metabolites.
*Urticaria (also called hives) usually causes itching.

=== Dermatologic ===
* Dandruff, an unusually large amount of flaking is associated with this sensation.
* Punctate palmoplantar keratoderma, a group of disorders characterized by abnormal thickening of the palms and soles.
* Skin conditions (such as psoriasis, eczema, seborrhoeic dermatitis, sunburn, athlete&#x27;s foot, and hidradenitis suppurativa). Most are of an inflammatory nature.
* Scab healing, scar growth, and the development or emergence of moles, pimples, and ingrown hairs from below the epidermis.
* Xerosis, dry skin, frequently seen in the winter and also associated with older age, frequent bathing in hot showers or baths, and high-temperature and low-humidity environments.

=== Other diseases ===
* Diabetes mellitus, a group of metabolic diseases in which a person has high blood sugar
* Hyperparathyroidism, overactivity of the parathyroid glands resulting in excess production of parathyroid hormone (PTH)
* Iron deficiency anemia, a common anemia (low red blood cell or hemoglobin levels)
* Cholestasis, where bile acids leaking into the serum activate peripheral opioid receptors, resulting in the characteristic generalized, severe itching
* Malignancy or internal cancer, such as lymphoma or Hodgkin&#x27;s disease
* Polycythemia, which can cause generalized itching due to increased histamines
* Psychiatric disease (&quot;psychogenic itch&quot;, as may be seen in delusional parasitosis)
* Thyroid illness
* Uraemia – the itching sensation this causes is known as uremic pruritus

=== Medication ===
* Drugs (such as opioids) that activate histamine (H1) receptors or trigger histamine release
* Chloroquine, a drug used in the treatment and prevention of malaria
* Bile acid congeners such as obeticholic acid

=== Related to pregnancy ===
* Gestational pemphigoid, a dermatosis of pregnancy
* Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, a medical condition in which cholestasis occurs
* Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (PUPPP), a chronic hives-like rash

=== Other ===
* Menopause, or changes in hormonal balances associated with aging
*Terminal illness

== Mechanism ==
Itch can originate in the peripheral nervous system (dermal or neuropathic) or in the central nervous system (neuropathic, neurogenic, or psychogenic).

=== Pruritoceptive ===
Itch originating in the skin is known as &quot;pruritoceptive&quot;, and can be induced by a variety of stimuli, including mechanical, chemical, thermal, and electrical stimulation, or infection. The primary afferent neurons responsible for histamine-induced itch are unmyelinated C-fibres.

Nociceptors. Two major classes of human C-fibre nociceptors exist: mechano-responsive nociceptors and mechano-insensitive nociceptors. Mechano-responsive nociceptors have been shown in studies to respond to mostly pain, and mechano-insensitive receptors respond mostly to itch induced by histamine. However, it does not explain mechanically induced itch or itch produced without a flare reaction that involves no histamine. Therefore, it is possible that pruritoceptive nerve fibres have different classes of fibres, which is unclear in current research.

Histology and skin layers. Studies have been done to show that itch receptors are found only on the top two skin layers, the epidermis and the epidermal/dermal transition layers. Shelley and Arthur verified the depth by injecting individual itch powder (&quot;Mucuna pruriens&quot;) s and noting that maximal sensitivity occurred at the basal cell layer or the innermost layer of the epidermis. Surgical removal of those skin layers removed the ability for a patient to perceive itch. Itch is never felt in muscle or joints, which strongly suggests that deep tissue probably does not contain itch signaling apparatuses.

Sensitivity to pruritic stimuli is evenly distributed across the skin and has a clear spot distribution with similar density to that of pain. The different substances that elicit itch upon intracutaneous injection (injection within the skin) elicit only pain when injected subcutaneously (beneath the skin).

=== Molecular basis ===
Itch is often classified as that which is histamine mediated (histaminergic) and nonhistaminergic.

Itch is readily abolished in skin areas treated with nociceptor excitotoxin capsaicin but remains unchanged in skin areas rendered touch insensitive by pretreatment with anti-inflammatory saponins. Although experimentally induced itch can still be perceived under a complete A-fiber conduction block, it is significantly diminished. Overall, itch sensation is mediated by A-delta and C nociceptors located in the uppermost layer of the skin.

Gene expression. Using single-cell mRNA sequencing, clusters of genes expressed in itch-related tissues were identified, e.g. NP1-3, transmitting itch information; where NP3 expresses neuropeptides &quot;Nppb&quot; and &quot;Sst&quot; as well as genes involved in inflammatory itch (&quot;Il31ra&quot;, &quot;Osmr and&quot; &quot;Crystrl2&quot;). The histamine receptor gene &quot;Hrh1&quot; was found in NP2 and NP3, suggesting that histaminergic itch is transmitted by both these pruriceptive sub clusters.

Infection. &quot;Staphylococcus aureus&quot;, a bacterial pathogen associated with itchy skin diseases, directly activates pruriceptor sensory neurons to drive itch. Skin exposure to &quot;S. aureus&quot; causes robust itch and scratch-induced damage. This reaction is mediated by &quot;S. aureus&quot; serine protease V8 which cleaves proteinase-activated receptor 1 (PAR1) on mouse and human sensory neurons. Targeting PAR1 through genetic deficiency, small interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown, or pharmacological blockade decreases itch and skin damage caused by V8 and &quot;S. aureus&quot; exposure.

=== Spinal itch pathway ===
After the pruriceptive primary afferent has been activated, the signal is transmitted from the skin into the spinal dorsal horn. In this area, a number of interneurons will either be inhibited or activated to promote activation of projection neurons, mediating the pruriceptive signal to the brain. The GRP-GRPR interneuron system has been found to be important for mediating both histaminergic and non-histaminergic itch, where the GRP neurons activate GRPR neurons to promote itch 

=== Neuropathic ===
Neuropathic itch can originate at any point along the afferent pathway as a result of damage of the nervous system. They could include diseases or disorders in the central nervous system or peripheral nervous system. Examples of neuropathic itch in origin are notalgia paresthetica, brachioradial pruritus, brain tumors, multiple sclerosis, peripheral neuropathy, and nerve irritation.

=== Neurogenic ===
Neurogenic itch, which is itch induced centrally but with no neural damage, is mostly associated with increased accumulation of exogenous opioids and possibly synthetic opioids.

=== Psychogenic ===
Itch is also associated with some symptoms of psychiatric disorders such as tactile hallucinations, delusions of parasitosis, or obsessive-compulsive disorders (as in OCD-related neurotic scratching).

=== Peripheral sensitization ===
Inflammatory mediators—such as bradykinin, serotonin (5-HT) and prostaglandins—released during a painful or pruritic inflammatory condition not only activate pruriceptors but also cause acute sensitization of the nociceptors. In addition, expression of neuro growth factors (NGF) can cause structural changes in nociceptors, such as sprouting. NGF is high in injured or inflamed tissue. Increased NGF is also found in atopic dermatitis, a hereditary and non-contagious skin disease with chronic inflammation. NGF is known to up-regulate neuropeptides, especially substance P. Substance P has been found to have an important role in inducing pain; however, there is no confirmation that substance P directly causes acute sensitization. Instead, substance P may contribute to itch by increasing neuronal sensitization and may affect release of mast cells, which contain many granules rich in histamine, during long-term interaction.

=== Central sensitization ===
Noxious input to the spinal cord is known to produce central sensitization, which consists of allodynia, exaggeration of pain, and punctuate hyperalgesia, extreme sensitivity to pain. Two types of mechanical hyperalgesia can occur: 1) touch that is normally painless in the uninjured surroundings of a cut or tear can trigger painful sensations (touch-evoked hyperalgesia), and 2) a slightly painful pin prick stimulation is perceived as more painful around a focused area of inflammation (punctuate hyperalgesia). Touch-evoked hyperalgesia requires continuous firing of primary afferent nociceptors, and punctuate hyperalgesia does not require continuous firing which means it can persist for hours after a trauma and can be stronger than normally experienced. In addition, it was found that patients with neuropathic pain, histamine ionophoresis resulted in a sensation of burning pain rather than itch, which would be induced in normal healthy patients. This shows that there is spinal hypersensitivity to C-fiber input in chronic pain.

== Treatment ==

A variety of over-the-counter and prescription anti-itch drugs are available. Some plant products have been found to be effective anti-pruritics, others not. Non-chemical remedies include cooling, warming, soft stimulation.

Topical antipruritics in the form of creams and sprays are often available over-the-counter. Oral anti-itch drugs also exist and are usually prescription drugs. The active ingredients usually belong to the following classes:

* Antihistamines, such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl)
* Corticosteroids, such as hydrocortisone topical cream 
* Counterirritants, such as mint oil, menthol, or camphor
* Crotamiton (trade name Eurax) is an antipruritic agent available as a cream or lotion, often used to treat scabies. Its mechanism of action remains unknown.
* JAK inhibitors, such as ruxolitinib topical cream; &quot;see&quot; topical JAK inhibitor
* Local anesthetics, such as benzocaine topical cream (Lanacane)

Phototherapy is helpful for severe itching, especially if caused by chronic kidney disease. The common type of light used is UVB.

Sometimes scratching relieves isolated itches, hence the existence of devices such as the back scratcher. Often, however, scratching only offers temporary relief and can intensify itching, even causing further damage to the skin, dubbed the &quot;itch-scratch cycle&quot;.

The mainstay of therapy for dry skin is maintaining adequate skin moisture and topical emollients.

No studies have been conducted to investigate the effectiveness of emollient creams, cooling lotions, topical corticosteroids, topical antidepressants, systemic antihistamines, systemic antidepressants, systemic anticonvulsants, and phototherapy on chronic pruritus of unknown origin. However, there are clinical trials currently underway with dupilumab which is thought to alleviate itch by acting on the IL-4 receptor on sensory neurons. The effectiveness of therapeutic options for people who are terminally ill with malignant cancer is not known.

== Epidemiology ==
Approximately 280 million people globally, 4% of the population, have difficulty with itchiness. This is comparable to the 2–3% of the population who have psoriasis.

== History ==
In 1660, German physician Samuel Hafenreffer introduced the definition of pruritus (itch).

== See also ==
* Feeling, a perceptual state of conscious experience.
* Formication, a sensation that resembles that of small insects crawling on or under the skin
* Pruritus ani (also known as anusitis), irritation of skin at the exit of the rectum (anus), causing the desire to scratch
* Referred itch, a phenomenon in which a stimulus applied in one region of the body is felt as an itch or irritation in a different part of the body
* Itching powder, a powder or powder-like substance that induces itching when applied onto human skin.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q199602" start="3" end="7" title="Itch" label="itch"/>
<link wikidata="Q199602" start="23" end="31" title="Itch" label="pruritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088331" start="69" end="86" title="reflex to scratch" label="reflex to scratch"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="159" end="166" title="sense" label="sensory"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="212" end="216" title="pain" label="pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454731" start="334" end="351" title="withdrawal reflex" label="withdrawal reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088331" start="379" end="393" title="scratch reflex" label="scratch reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9620" start="409" end="421" title="nerve fibers" label="nerve fibers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="464" end="468" title="skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9620" start="560" end="565" title="nerve" label="nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700458" start="577" end="596" title="spinothalamic tract" label="spinothalamic tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q594841" start="1197" end="1229" title="idiopathic disease" label="no clear cause can be identified"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088331" start="1483" end="1497" title="scratch reflex" label="scratch reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064" start="1888" end="1895" title="hedonic" label="hedonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q383126" start="2005" end="2012" title="chronic (medicine)" label="chronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q268667" start="2046" end="2063" title="atopic dermatitis" label="atopic dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995419" start="2464" end="2474" title="Contagious disease" label="contagious"/>
<link wikidata="Q859031" start="2758" end="2765" title="Stimulus (physiology)" label="stimuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q309082" start="3054" end="3067" title="mirror neuron" label="mirror neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q182180" start="3246" end="3253" title="yawning" label="yawning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067309" start="3409" end="3416" title="Noxious stimulus" label="noxious"/>
<link wikidata="Q244404" start="3475" end="3489" title="electric shock" label="electric shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q549378" start="3527" end="3537" title="Body louse" label="Body louse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597571" start="3579" end="3602" title="Cutaneous larva migrans" label="Cutaneous larva migrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12212063" start="3629" end="3637" title="hookworm" label="hookworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q27358" start="3649" end="3658" title="Head lice" label="Head lice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473911" start="3694" end="3700" title="Herpes" label="Herpes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470772" start="3719" end="3730" title="Insect bite" label="Insect bite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367" start="3752" end="3761" title="mosquitos" label="mosquitos"/>
<link wikidata="Q14830884" start="3765" end="3773" title="chiggers" label="chiggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381802" start="3775" end="3785" title="Pubic lice" label="Pubic lice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="3805" end="3817" title="genital area" label="genital area"/>
<link wikidata="Q167178" start="3819" end="3826" title="Scabies" label="Scabies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3894" end="3901" title="Shaving#Razor burn" label="Shaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q191672" start="3932" end="3951" title="Swimmer&amp;#x27;s itch" label="Swimmer&amp;#x27;s itch"/>
<link wikidata="Q44727" start="3983" end="3992" title="Chickenpox" label="Varicella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028074" start="4066" end="4075" title="Tungiasis" label="Tungiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="4135" end="4152" title="Allergic reaction" label="Allergic reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q19944476" start="4197" end="4205" title="urushiol" label="urushiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q102346183" start="4220" end="4230" title="poison ivy" label="poison ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55644327" start="4234" end="4244" title="poison oak" label="poison oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q120424" start="4249" end="4263" title="Balsam of Peru" label="Balsam of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347105" start="4341" end="4351" title="patch test" label="patch test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455142" start="4354" end="4368" title="Foreign body" label="Foreign object"/>
<link wikidata="Q608085" start="4439" end="4454" title="Photodermatitis" label="Photodermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="4457" end="4465" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q187440" start="4552" end="4561" title="Urticaria" label="Urticaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q187440" start="4575" end="4580" title="hives" label="hives"/>
<link wikidata="Q117484" start="4630" end="4638" title="Dandruff" label="Dandruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128426" start="4714" end="4747" title="Punctate palmoplantar keratoderma" label="Punctate palmoplantar keratoderma"/>
<link wikidata="Q949302" start="4833" end="4847" title="Skin condition" label="Skin condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q179945" start="4858" end="4867" title="psoriasis" label="psoriasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q229256" start="4869" end="4875" title="eczema" label="eczema"/>
<link wikidata="Q448310" start="4877" end="4899" title="seborrhoeic dermatitis" label="seborrhoeic dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q649717" start="4901" end="4908" title="sunburn" label="sunburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609817" start="4910" end="4929" title="athlete&amp;#x27;s foot" label="athlete&amp;#x27;s foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q341999" start="4935" end="4959" title="hidradenitis suppurativa" label="hidradenitis suppurativa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509074" start="5000" end="5004" title="Wound healing" label="Scab"/>
<link wikidata="Q206060" start="5014" end="5018" title="scar" label="scar"/>
<link wikidata="Q377568" start="5063" end="5068" title="Melanocytic nevus" label="moles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172159" start="5070" end="5076" title="pimple" label="pimple"/>
<link wikidata="Q860945" start="5083" end="5095" title="ingrown hair" label="ingrown hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929023" start="5125" end="5132" title="Xerosis" label="Xerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="5330" end="5347" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="Diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344835" start="5420" end="5439" title="Hyperparathyroidism" label="Hyperparathyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q954674" start="5542" end="5564" title="Iron deficiency anemia" label="Iron deficiency anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075923" start="5626" end="5637" title="Cholestasis" label="Cholestasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483951" start="5779" end="5789" title="Malignancy" label="Malignancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="5818" end="5826" title="lymphoma" label="lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q209369" start="5830" end="5852" title="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q933716" start="5855" end="5867" title="Polycythemia" label="Polycythemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="5935" end="5946" title="Psychiatric" label="Psychiatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471453" start="5962" end="5978" title="psychogenic disease" label="psychogenic itch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200256" start="6004" end="6026" title="delusional parasitosis" label="delusional parasitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16399" start="6030" end="6037" title="Thyroid" label="Thyroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365776" start="6048" end="6055" title="Uraemia" label="Uraemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900395" start="6104" end="6119" title="uremic pruritus" label="uremic pruritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q427523" start="6157" end="6164" title="opioids" label="opioids"/>
<link wikidata="Q422438" start="6236" end="6247" title="Chloroquine" label="Chloroquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="6296" end="6303" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q413288" start="6306" end="6315" title="Bile acid" label="Bile acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8280" start="6383" end="6405" title="Gestational pemphigoid" label="Gestational pemphigoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195073" start="6435" end="6472" title="Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy" label="Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140452" start="6524" end="6576" title="Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy" label="Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q177708" start="6629" end="6638" title="Menopause" label="Menopause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364787" start="6695" end="6711" title="Terminal illness" label="Terminal illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q169953" start="6755" end="6780" title="peripheral nervous system" label="peripheral nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q505531" start="6782" end="6788" title="dermal" label="dermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="6792" end="6803" title="neuropathic" label="neuropathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="6815" end="6837" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="6852" end="6862" title="neurogenic" label="neurogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q695954" start="6867" end="6878" title="psychogenic pain" label="psychogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142126" start="7113" end="7128" title="afferent neuron" label="afferent neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q61233" start="7146" end="7155" title="histamine" label="histamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105790271" start="7173" end="7185" title="unmyelinated" label="unmyelinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611131" start="7186" end="7194" title="group C nerve fiber" label="C-fibres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611131" start="7237" end="7244" title="Group C nerve fiber" label="C-fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q412542" start="7245" end="7256" title="nociceptors" label="nociceptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q412542" start="7283" end="7294" title="nociceptors" label="nociceptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q628261" start="7578" end="7583" title="flare" label="flare"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="7667" end="7678" title="nerve fibre" label="nerve fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="7861" end="7865" title="skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212743" start="7878" end="7887" title="Epidermis (skin)" label="epidermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q505531" start="7906" end="7912" title="dermal" label="dermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q953611" start="8013" end="8028" title="Mucuna pruriens" label="Mucuna pruriens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254965" start="8090" end="8106" title="basal cell layer" label="basal cell layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="8260" end="8266" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164665" start="8647" end="8661" title="subcutaneously" label="subcutaneously"/>
<link wikidata="Q901117" start="8871" end="8882" title="Excitotoxicity" label="excitotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q273169" start="8883" end="8892" title="capsaicin" label="capsaicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q581996" start="8977" end="8994" title="anti-inflammatory" label="anti-inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q207653" start="8995" end="9002" title="saponin" label="saponin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379667" start="9090" end="9106" title="nerve block" label="conduction block"/>
<link wikidata="Q188121" start="9777" end="9798" title="Staphylococcus aureus" label="Staphylococcus aureus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18051407" start="10129" end="10133" title="PAR1 (gene)" label="PAR1"/>
<link wikidata="Q203221" start="10237" end="10242" title="Small interfering RNA" label="siRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="10997" end="11011" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="11061" end="11083" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q169953" start="11087" end="11112" title="peripheral nervous system" label="peripheral nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953340" start="11180" end="11202" title="brachioradial pruritus" label="brachioradial pruritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="11204" end="11216" title="brain tumors" label="brain tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="11218" end="11236" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="11238" end="11259" title="peripheral neuropathy" label="peripheral neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945973" start="11265" end="11281" title="nerve injury" label="nerve irritation"/>
<link wikidata="Q427523" start="11441" end="11448" title="opioids" label="opioids"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11462" end="11471" title="Organic compound#Synthetic compounds" label="synthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="11548" end="11559" title="psychiatric" label="psychiatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="11586" end="11600" title="hallucinations" label="hallucinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q189643" start="11602" end="11611" title="delusions" label="delusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601794" start="11615" end="11626" title="parasitosis" label="parasitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q178190" start="11631" end="11660" title="obsessive-compulsive disorder" label="obsessive-compulsive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q178190" start="11669" end="11672" title="Obsessive–compulsive disorder" label="OCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q181032" start="11681" end="11689" title="neurosis" label="neurotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="11737" end="11749" title="Inflammation" label="Inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q24745328" start="11768" end="11778" title="bradykinin" label="bradykinin"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="11780" end="11789" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209717" start="11801" end="11815" title="prostaglandins" label="prostaglandins"/>
<link wikidata="Q557429" start="11923" end="11928" title="Acute (medicine)" label="acute"/>
<link wikidata="Q412542" start="12049" end="12060" title="nociceptors" label="nociceptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q268667" start="12155" end="12172" title="atopic dermatitis" label="atopic dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="12176" end="12186" title="hereditary" label="hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q383126" start="12224" end="12231" title="chronic (medicine)" label="chronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="12232" end="12244" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q411041" start="12300" end="12311" title="substance P" label="substance P"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="12530" end="12538" title="neuronal" label="neuronal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191989" start="12579" end="12589" title="mast cells" label="mast cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="12720" end="12731" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888634" start="12793" end="12802" title="allodynia" label="allodynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633866" start="12840" end="12852" title="hyperalgesia" label="hyperalgesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633866" start="13314" end="13326" title="hyperalgesia" label="hyperalgesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12421818" start="13407" end="13413" title="Physical trauma" label="trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="13506" end="13517" title="neuropathic" label="neuropathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185098" start="13534" end="13546" title="ionophoresis" label="ionophoresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611131" start="13708" end="13715" title="C-fiber" label="C-fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q383126" start="13725" end="13732" title="chronic (medicine)" label="chronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q420054" start="13982" end="13989" title="Topical" label="Topical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363153" start="14019" end="14024" title="cream (pharmaceutical)" label="cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424833" start="14030" end="14035" title="spray (liquid drop)" label="spray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154971" start="14057" end="14073" title="Over-the-counter drugs" label="over-the-counter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14075" end="14079" title="Mouth" label="Oral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643563" start="14123" end="14140" title="prescription drug" label="prescription drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q912807" start="14147" end="14164" title="active ingredient" label="active ingredient"/>
<link wikidata="Q324089" start="14210" end="14223" title="Antihistamine" label="Antihistamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q413486" start="14234" end="14249" title="diphenhydramine" label="diphenhydramine"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="14263" end="14277" title="Corticosteroid" label="Corticosteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q26981430" start="14288" end="14302" title="hydrocortisone" label="hydrocortisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458430" start="14320" end="14335" title="Counterirritant" label="Counterirritant"/>
<link wikidata="Q47859" start="14346" end="14354" title="Mentha" label="mint oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q407418" start="14356" end="14363" title="menthol" label="menthol"/>
<link wikidata="Q181559" start="14368" end="14375" title="camphor" label="camphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q60062768" start="14378" end="14388" title="Crotamiton" label="Crotamiton"/>
<link wikidata="Q167178" start="14485" end="14492" title="scabies" label="scabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149812" start="14537" end="14550" title="JAK inhibitor" label="JAK inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383611" start="14561" end="14572" title="ruxolitinib" label="ruxolitinib"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14604" end="14625" title="topical JAK inhibitor" label="topical JAK inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868462" start="14628" end="14644" title="Local anesthetic" label="Local anesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q422745" start="14655" end="14665" title="benzocaine" label="benzocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q243570" start="14692" end="14704" title="Phototherapy" label="Phototherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q736715" start="14760" end="14782" title="chronic kidney disease" label="chronic kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="14817" end="14820" title="UVB" label="UVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315940" start="14913" end="14927" title="back scratcher" label="back scratcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006091" start="15184" end="15193" title="emollient" label="emollient"/>
<link wikidata="Q179945" start="15923" end="15932" title="psoriasis" label="psoriasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411598" start="15975" end="15993" title="Samuel Hafenreffer" label="Samuel Hafenreffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q205555" start="16058" end="16065" title="Feeling" label="Feeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470185" start="16113" end="16124" title="Formication" label="Formication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633590" start="16207" end="16219" title="Pruritus ani" label="Pruritus ani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307181" start="16331" end="16344" title="Referred itch" label="Referred itch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280343" start="16480" end="16494" title="Itching powder" label="Itching powder"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424303" wikidata="Q2103238" url="?curid=424303" title="The Tabard">
<text>The Tabard was an inn in Southwark established in 1307, which stood on the east side of Borough High Street, at the road&#x27;s intersection with the ancient thoroughfare to Canterbury and Dover. It was built for the Abbot of Hyde in Winchester, who purchased the land to construct a place for himself and his ecclesiastical brethren to stay when on business in London.

The Tabard was famous for accommodating people who made the pilgrimage to the Shrine of Thomas Becket in Canterbury Cathedral, and it is mentioned in the 14th-century literary work &quot;The Canterbury Tales&quot; by Geoffrey Chaucer.

==Early history==


The inn was located on the south bank of the Thames, just north of where the two Roman roads of Stane Street and Watling Street merged. It stood near the Manor of Southwark, controlled by the Bishops of Winchester. Also known as the Liberty of Winchester, the manor lay outside the jurisdiction of the City of London. Activities that were forbidden within the City of London and the county of Surrey, including prostitution and animal baiting, were permitted within Southwark, which thus became medieval London&#x27;s entertainment district. In those times, the Tabard would have been filled with pilgrims, drunks, travellers, criminals, and prostitutes (colloquially known as the &quot;Winchester Geese&quot;).

Chaucer wrote that the Tabard was the location where the pilgrims first met on their journey to Canterbury in the 1380s. The inn&#x27;s proprietor was a man named Harry Bailey:
Bifel that in that season on a day,In Southwerk at the Tabard as I layRedy to wenden on my pilgrymageTo Caunterbury with ful devout corage,At nyght was come into that hostelryeWel nyne and twenty in a compaignyeOf sondry folk, by aventure yfalleIn felaweshipe, and pilgrimes were they alle,That toward Caunterbury wolden ryde;The chambres and the stables weren wyde,And well we weren esed atte beste;

The antiquary John Stow wrote in his &quot;Survey&quot; that by the 16th century it was among several inns at this location in Southwark: &quot;many fair inns, for receipt of travellers, by these signs: the Spurre, Christopher, Bull, Queen&#x27;s Head, Tabard, George, Hart, King&#x27;s Head&quot; &amp;c. 

Following the Dissolution of the Monasteries in the mid-16th century, &quot;the Tabard of the Monastery of Hyde, and the Abbot&#x27;s Place, with the stable and gardens thereunto belonging&quot; were sold to John and Thomas Master. The goldsmith John Mabbe (died 1578) acquired the inn. His son Robert Mabbe pledged a share of the inn to the goldsmith Affabel Partridge for a loan.

The layout of the Tabard Inn was described in a lease in 1540, and in a legal dispute, Partridge &quot;v&quot;. Mabbe, in 1601. Named rooms in 1601 included a parlour, the dark parlour, a hall, the chamber called the &quot;flower de luce&quot;, a kitchen, the cook&#x27;s lofts, and oven house.

==Destruction and replacement==
On 26 May 1676, ten years after the Great Fire of London, a great blaze started in Southwark. The Tabard was among many buildings that were either burned down or pulled down to create fire breaks. The blaze, which took 17 hours to contain, destroyed most of medieval Southwark. King Charles II and his brother the Duke of York were both involved in the firefighting effort. Although the medieval building was destroyed, the site was immediately rebuilt and renamed The Talbot.

==Closure==
In the early 18th century, the new inn was profiting from the growth in stagecoach traffic between London and the channel ports because of the growth in turnpikes. By the early 19th century, the Talbot remained a well-renowned coaching inn. However, with the advent of the railways, it eventually closed. The building was then converted into stores. It was demolished in 1873.

==See also==
* The George Inn, Southwark, a surviving nearby coaching inn
* White Hart, Southwark, a demolished nearby coaching inn

== Notes ==
== External links ==

* The Tabard Inn in Southwark, another nineteenth-century engraving</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2103238" start="0" end="10" title="The Tabard" label="The Tabard"/>
<link wikidata="Q256020" start="18" end="21" title="inn" label="inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273898" start="25" end="34" title="Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946315" start="88" end="107" title="Borough High Street" label="Borough High Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q888603" start="150" end="170" title="A2 road (England)" label="ancient thoroughfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="174" end="184" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q179224" start="189" end="194" title="Dover" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953503" start="217" end="230" title="Hyde Abbey" label="Abbot of Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="234" end="244" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="362" end="368" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="431" end="441" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="459" end="472" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265" start="476" end="496" title="Canterbury Cathedral" label="Canterbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q191663" start="558" end="578" title="The Canterbury Tales" label="The Canterbury Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="588" end="604" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="672" end="678" title="River Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179671" start="708" end="719" title="Roman roads in Britain" label="Roman roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q205511" start="723" end="735" title="Stane Street (Chichester)" label="Stane Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434239" start="740" end="754" title="Watling Street" label="Watling Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542201" start="781" end="799" title="Liberty of the Clink" label="Manor of Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271558" start="819" end="840" title="Bishop of Winchester" label="Bishops of Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="929" end="943" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="1010" end="1026" title="Surrey" label="county of Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="1038" end="1050" title="prostitution" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q30323964" start="1055" end="1069" title="animal baiting" label="animal baiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697103" start="1923" end="1932" title="antiquary" label="antiquary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230454" start="1933" end="1942" title="John Stow" label="John Stow"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="2241" end="2271" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="Dissolution of the Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q18527248" start="2473" end="2483" title="John Mabbe" label="John Mabbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q108179180" start="2579" end="2596" title="Affabel Partridge" label="Affabel Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="2974" end="2994" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="3216" end="3231" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="3252" end="3264" title="James II of England" label="Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q339249" start="3500" end="3510" title="stagecoach" label="stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072439" start="3542" end="3554" title="channel port" label="channel port"/>
<link wikidata="Q406633" start="3581" end="3590" title="Turnpike trusts" label="turnpikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q966002" start="3655" end="3667" title="coaching inn" label="coaching inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="3701" end="3709" title="Rail transport" label="railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q12058464" start="3821" end="3846" title="The George Inn, Southwark" label="The George Inn, Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q124528125" start="3882" end="3903" title="White Hart, Southwark" label="White Hart, Southwark"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424304" wikidata="Q314172" url="?curid=424304" title="Pierre Duhem">
<text>Pierre Maurice Marie Duhem (; 9 June 1861 – 14 September 1916) was a French theoretical physicist who made significant contributions to thermodynamics, hydrodynamics, and the theory of elasticity. Duhem was also a prolific historian of science, noted especially for his pioneering work on the European Middle Ages. As a philosopher of science, Duhem is credited with the &quot;Duhem–Quine thesis&quot; on the indeterminacy of experimental criteria. Duhem&#x27;s opposition to positivism was partly informed by his traditionalist Catholicism, an outlook that put him at odds with the dominant academic currents in France during his lifetime.

==Early life and education==

Pierre Duhem was born in Paris on 10 June 1861. He was the son of Pierre-Joseph Duhem, who was of Flemish origins, and Marie Alexandrine &quot;née&quot; Fabre, whose family hailed from Languedoc. Pierre-Joseph worked as a sales representative in the textile industry and the family lived in a modest neighborhood on the Rue des Jeûneurs, just south of Monmartre. The family was devoutly Catholic and its conservative outlook was influenced by having lived through the Paris Commune of 1871, which the Duhems saw as a manifestation of the anarchy that must follow from the rejection of religion.

The young Pierre completed his secondary studies at the Collège Stanislas, where his interest in the physical sciences was encouraged by his teacher Jules Moutier, who was a theoretical physicist and the author of influential textbooks on thermodynamics. Pierre was admitted as the first-ranked of his cohort at the prestigious École normale supérieure (ENS) in 1882. At the ENS, he completed licentiates in mathematics and physics in 1884. He then earned his &quot;agrégation&quot; in physical sciences in 1885.

Duhem prepared a doctoral thesis on the use of the thermodynamic potential in the theory of electrochemical cells. In his thesis, Duhem explicitly attacked the &quot;principle of maximum work&quot; as framed by Marcellin Berthelot. The jury rejected that thesis and Duhem&#x27;s academic career appears to have been hampered ever after by his differences with Barthelot. In addition to their scientific disagreements, Duhem was a conservative Catholic and royalist, whereas the politically powerful Barthelot was an anti-clerical republican. In 1888 Duhem finally received his doctorate with a new thesis on the theory of magnetization dynamics.

Despite his accomplishments as a theoretical physicist, and later as a historian and philosopher of science, Duhem never obtained the academic position in Paris that he sought. He found work first at the University of Lille (1887–1893), then briefly at the University of Rennes (1893–1894), and finally as a professor of theoretical physics at the University of Bordeaux, where he was based for the rest of his career.

==Theoretical physics==
Among scientists, Duhem is best known today for his work on chemical thermodynamics, and in particular for the Gibbs–Duhem and Duhem–Margules equations. His approach was strongly influenced by the early works of Josiah Willard Gibbs, which Duhem effectively explained and promoted among French scientists. In continuum mechanics, he is also remembered for his contribution to what is now called the Clausius–Duhem inequality.
Duhem was a supporter of energetics and was convinced that all physical phenomena, including mechanics, electromagnetism, and chemistry, could be derived from the principles of thermodynamics. Influenced by William Rankine&#x27;s &quot;Outlines of the Science of Energetics&quot;, Duhem carried out this intellectual project in his &quot;Traité de l&#x27;Énergétique&quot; (1911), but was ultimately unable to reduce electromagnetic phenomena to thermodynamic first principles.

Duhem shared Ernst Mach&#x27;s skepticism about the physical reality and usefulness of the concept of atoms. He therefore did not follow the statistical mechanics of James Clerk Maxwell, Ludwig Boltzmann, and Gibbs, who explained the laws of thermodynamics in terms of the statistical properties of mechanical systems composed of many atoms.

Duhem was an opponent of Albert Einstein&#x27;s theory of relativity. In 1914, Duhem commented that Einstein&#x27;s relativity theory &quot;has turned physics into a real chaos where logic loses its way and common-sense runs away frightened&quot;. In his 1915 book &quot;La Science Allemande&quot;, he argued strongly against relativity. Duhem stated that the theory of relativity &quot;overthrow[s] all the doctrines in which one has spoken of space, of time, of movement, all the theories of mechanics and of physics&quot;.

==History of science==
Duhem is well known for his work on the history of science, which resulted in the ten volume &quot;Le système du monde: histoire des doctrines cosmologiques de Platon à Copernic&quot; (&quot;The System of World: A History of Cosmological Doctrines from Plato to Copernicus&quot;). Unlike many former historians (e.g. Voltaire and Condorcet), who denigrated the Middle Ages, he endeavored to show that the Roman Catholic Church had helped foster Western science in one of its most fruitful periods. His work in this field was originally prompted by his research into the origins of statics, where he encountered the works of medieval mathematicians and philosophers such as John Buridan, Nicole Oresme and Roger Bacon, whose sophistication surprised him. He consequently came to regard them as the founders of modern science, having in his view anticipated many of the discoveries of Galileo Galilei and later thinkers. Duhem concluded that &quot;the mechanics and physics of which modern times are justifiably proud to proceed, by an uninterrupted series of scarcely perceptible improvements, from doctrines professed in the heart of the medieval schools.&quot;

Duhem popularized the concept of &quot;saving the phenomena.&quot; In addition to the Copernican Revolution debate of &quot;saving the phenomena&quot; (Greek σῴζειν τὰ φαινόμενα, &quot;sozein ta phainomena&quot;) versus offering explanations that inspired Duhem was Thomas Aquinas, who wrote, regarding eccentrics and epicycles, thatReason may be employed in two ways to establish a point: firstly, for the purpose of furnishing sufficient proof of some principle. [...] Reason is employed in another way, not as furnishing a sufficient proof of a principle, but as confirming an already established principle, by showing the congruity of its results, as in astronomy the theory of eccentrics and epicycles is considered as established, because thereby the sensible appearances of the heavenly movements can be explained; not, however, as if this proof were sufficient, forasmuch as some other theory might explain them. [...]

==Philosophy of science==
In the philosophy of science, Duhem is best known for arguing that hypotheses are not straightforwardly refuted by experiment and that there are no crucial experiments in science. Duhem’s formulation of his thesis is that “if the predicted phenomenon is not produced, not only is the questioned proposition put into doubt, but also the whole theoretical scaffolding used by the physicist”. Duhem&#x27;s views on the philosophy of science are explained in his 1906 work &quot;The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory&quot;. In this work, he opposed Newton&#x27;s statement that the &quot;Principia&#x27;s&quot; law of universal mutual gravitation was deduced from &#x27;phenomena&#x27;, including Kepler&#x27;s second and third laws. Newton&#x27;s claims in this regard had already been attacked by critical proof-analyses of the German logician Leibniz and then most famously by Immanuel Kant, following Hume&#x27;s logical critique of induction. But the novelty of Duhem&#x27;s work was his proposal that Newton&#x27;s theory of universal mutual gravity flatly &quot;contradicted&quot; Kepler&#x27;s Laws of planetary motion because the interplanetary mutual gravitational perturbations caused deviations from Keplerian orbits. Since no contingent proposition can be validly logically deduced from any it contradicts, according to Duhem, Newton must not have logically deduced his law of gravitation directly from Kepler&#x27;s Laws. 

===Opposition to the English inductivist tradition===
Duhem argues that physics is subject to certain methodological limitations that do not affect other sciences. In his &quot;The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory&quot; (1906), Duhem critiqued the Baconian notion of &quot;crucial experiments&quot;. According to this critique, an experiment in physics is not simply an observation, but rather an interpretation of observations by means of a theoretical framework. Furthermore, no matter how well one constructs one&#x27;s experiment, it is impossible to subject an isolated single hypothesis to an experimental test. Instead, it is a whole interlocking group of hypotheses, background assumptions, and theories that is tested. This thesis has come to be known as confirmation holism. This inevitable holism, according to Duhem, renders crucial experiments impossible. More generally, Duhem was critical of Newton&#x27;s description of the method of physics as a straightforward &quot;deduction&quot; from facts and observations.

===Duhem&#x27;s philosophy of science and faith===
In the appendix to &quot;The Aim and Structure&quot;, entitled &quot;Physics of a Believer,&quot; Duhem draws out the implications that he sees his philosophy of science as having for those who argue that there is a conflict between physics and religion. He writes, &quot;metaphysical and religious doctrines are judgments touching on objective reality, whereas the principles of physical theory are propositions relative to certain mathematical signs stripped of all objective existence. Since they do not have any common term, these two sorts of judgments can neither contradict nor agree with each other&quot; (p. 285). Nonetheless, Duhem argues that it is important for the theologian or metaphysician to have detailed knowledge of physical theory in order not to make illegitimate use of it in speculations. Duhem&#x27;s philosophy of science was criticized by one of his contemporaries, Abel Rey, in part because of what Rey perceived as influence on the part of Duhem&#x27;s Catholic faith. Although Duhem was indeed a believer, a sincere and fervent Catholic, he was eager to point out that his works in physics and chemistry should be considered on their own merits, independent of his religion. They were not examples of &quot;Catholic science,&quot; nor even colored by his Catholic faith.

== Honors and death ==
Duhem received an honorary doctorate from the Jagiellonian University, in Kraków, Poland, in 1900. On that same year he was elected as a corresponding member of the French Academy of Sciences. He was promoted to titular non-resident member in 1913. Towards the end of his life, Duhem was recommended as a candidate for the chair of History of Science at the prestigious Collège de France, in Paris. Duhem, however, refused to be considered for the position, explaining in a letter to his daughter that &quot;I am a theoretical physicist. Either I will teach theoretical physics at Paris or else I will not go there.&quot; He died suddenly in 1916, at the relatively early age of 55, after suffering from a acute attack of angina while staying in a home that had belonged to his maternal grandfather in the small commune of Cabrespine, near the city of Carcassonne, in the southern department of the Aude.

==Works==
Books

* (1886). &quot;Le Potentiel Thermodynamique et ses Applications à la Mécanique Chimique et à l&#x27;Étude des Phénomènes Électriques&quot;. Paris: A. Hermann.
* (1888). &quot;De l&#x27;Aimantation par Influence. Suivi de Propositions Données par la Faculté&quot;. Paris, Gauthier-Villars et Fils.
* (1891). &quot;Cours de Physique Mathématique et de Cristallographie de la Faculté des Sciences de Lille&quot;. Paris: A. Hermann.
* (1891–1892). &quot;Leçons sur l&#x27;Électricité et le Magnétisme&quot;. Paris: Gauthier-Villars et Fils, tome I (English EPUB), tome II (English EPUB), tome III (English EPUB).
* (1893). &quot;Introduction à la Mécanique Chimique&quot;. Paris: G. Carré.
* (1894). &quot;Sur les Déformations Permanentes et l&#x27;Hysteresis&quot;. Bruxelles: Impr. de Hayez.
* (1895). &quot;Les Théories de la Chaleur&quot;.
* (1896). &quot;Théorie Thermodynamique de la Viscosité, du Frottement et des faux Équilibres Chimiques&quot;. Paris: A. Hermann.
* (1897–1898). &quot;Traité Élémentaire de Mécanique Chimique Fondée sur la Thermodynamique&quot;. Paris: A. Hermann.
** (1897). &quot;Les Mélanges Doubles: Statique Chimique Générale des Systèmes Hétérogènes&quot;. 
** (1898). &quot;Faux Équilibres et Explosions&quot;.
* (1902). &quot;Le Mixte et la Combinaison Chimique. Essai sur l&#x27;Évolution d&#x27;une Idée&quot;. Paris: C. Naud.
* (1902). &quot;Les Théories Électriques de J. Clerk Maxwell: Étude Historique et Critique&quot;. Paris: A. Hermann.
* (1902). &quot;Thermodynamique et Chimie: Leçons Élémentaires à l&#x27;Usage des Chimistes.&quot; Paris: A. Hermann.
* (1903). &quot;Recherches sur l&#x27;Hydrodynamique&quot;. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.
* (1905–6). &quot;Les Origines de la Statique&quot;. Paris: A. Herman, tome I, tome II.
* (1905). &quot;L&#x27;Évolution de la Mécanique&quot;. Paris, A. Hermann.
* (1906). &quot;La Théorie Physique. Son Objet, sa Structure&quot;. Paris: Chevalier &amp; Riviére (Vrin, 2007).
* (1906). &quot;Recherches sur l&#x27;Élasticité&quot;. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.
* (1906–13). &quot;Études sur Léonard de Vinci, ceux qu&#x27;il a lus et ceux qui l&#x27;ont lu&quot;, 3 vol., Paris: A. Hermann.
** Première série : &quot;Ceux qu&#x27;il a lus et ceux qui l&#x27;ont lu&quot;, 1906.
** Deuxième série : &quot;Ceux qu&#x27;il a lus et ceux qui l&#x27;ont lu&quot;, 1909.
** Troisième série : &quot;Les précurseurs parisiens de Galilée&quot;, 1913.
* (1908). &quot;Josiah-Willard Gibbs, à propos de la Publication de ses Mémoires Scientifiques&quot;. Paris: A. Hermann.
* (1908). &quot;Sauver les Phénomènes. Essai sur la Notion de Théorie Physique de Platon à Galilée&quot;. Paris: A. Hermann (Vrin, 2005).
* (1909). &quot;Le Mouvement Absolu et le Mouvement Relatif&quot;. Paris: Impr. Librairie de Montligeon. English EPUB
* (1911). &quot;Traité d&#x27;Énergétique&quot;. Paris: Gauthier-Villars, tome I (English EPUB), tome II (English EPUB).
* (1913–1959). &quot;Le Système du Monde. Histoire des Doctrines Cosmologiques de Platon à Copernic&quot;: tome I, tome II, tome III, tome IV, tome V, tome VI, tome VII, tome VIII, tome IX, tome X.
* (1915) &quot;La Science Allemande&quot;. Paris: A. Hermann.

Articles
* (1908). &quot;La Valeur de la Théorie Physique,&quot; &quot;Journal de Mathémathiques Pures et Appliquées&quot;, Vol. XIX, pp. 7–19.
* (1908). &quot;Ce que l&#x27;on Disait des Indes Occidentales avant Christophe Colomb,&quot; &quot;Journal de Mathémathiques Pures et Appliquées&quot;, Vol. XIX, pp. 402–406.
* (1909). &quot;Note: Thierry de Chartres et Nicholas de Cues,&quot; &quot;Revues des Sciences Philosophiques et Théologiques&quot;, Troisième Année, pp. 525–531.
* (1911). &quot;Sur les Petites Oscillations d&#x27;un Corps Flottant,&quot; &quot;Journal de Mathémathiques Pures et Appliquées&quot;, Vol. VII, Sixiéme Série, pp. 1–84.
* (1911). &quot;Le Temps selon les Philosophes Hellénes,&quot; Part II, &quot;Revue de Philosophie&quot;, Vol. XIX, pp. 5–24, 128–145.
* (1914). &quot;Roger Bacon et l&#x27;Horreur du Vide,&quot; in A.G. Little (ed.), &quot;Roger Bacon Essays&quot;. Oxford, at the Clarendon Press.
* (1915). &quot;Quelques Réflexions sur la Science Allemande,&quot; &quot;Revue des Deux Mondes&quot;, Vol. XXV, pp. 657–686.
* (1916). &quot;L&#x27;Optique de Malebranche,&quot; &quot;Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale&quot;, Vol. XXIII, No. 1, pp. 37–91.
Duhem&#x27;s mathematics papers from NUMDAM

===Works in English translation===
* Excerpts: excerpt 1, &amp; excerpt 2 &quot;Heavenly bodies: Theory, physics and philosophy&quot;
* &quot;Physical Theory and Experiment,&quot; in Herbert Feigl &amp; May Brodbeck (ed.), &quot;Readings in the Philosophy of Science&quot;. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc., 1953, pp. 235–252.
* (excerpt)
* (excerpt: &quot;The 12th century birth of the notion of mass which advised modern mechanics ... and void and movement in the void&quot;)
* Duhem, Pierre (1988). &quot;The Physicist as Artist: The Landscapes of Pierre Duhem&quot;. Edinburgh: Scottish Academic Press. 
* Duhem, Pierre (1990). &quot;Logical Examination of Physical Theory,&quot; &quot;Synthese&quot;, Vol. 83, No. 2, pp. 183–188.
* Duhem, Pierre (1990). &quot;Research on the History of Physical Theories,&quot; &quot;Synthese&quot;, Vol. 83, No. 2, pp. 189–200.
* Duhem, Pierre (1991). &quot;German Science&quot;. La Salle, Ill.: Open Court. 
*
*
* (EPUB)

Articles
*&quot;Physics &amp; Metaphysics&quot; (1893)
*&quot;Physics of a Believer&quot;

Articles contributed to the 1912 &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;
*History of Physics
*Pierre de Maricourt
*Jordanus de Nemore
*Nicole Oresme
*Albert of Saxony
*Thierry of Freburg
*Jean de Sax

:The above bibliography is not exhaustive. See his complete primary sources and secondary sources at the Duhem entry of the &quot;Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;.

==See also==
* Theory-ladenness

==References==
==Sources==

*Dijksterhuis, E.J. (1959). &quot;The Origins of Classical Mechanics from Aristotle to Newton&quot;, in M. Clagett (ed). &quot;Critical Problems in the History of Science&quot;, pp. 163–184. University of Wisconsin Press.
*Hentschel, Klaus (1988). &quot;Die Korrespondenz Duhem-Mach: Zur &#x27;Modellbeladenheit&#x27; von Wissenschaftsgeschichte&quot;, &quot;Annals of Science&quot;, 73–91.
*
* 
*
*Moody, Ernest A. (1966). &quot;Galileo and his Precursors&quot;, in C.L. Gollino, ed., &quot;Galileo Reappraised&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press, 23–43.
*
*Picard, Émile (1922). &quot;La Vie et l&#x27;Oeuvre de Pierre Duhem,&quot; in &quot;Discours et Mélanges&quot;. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.
*


==Further reading==
* Alexander, Peter (1964). &quot;The Philosophy of Science, 1850–1910,&quot; in D.J. O&#x27;Connor, ed., &quot;A Critical History of Western Philosophy&quot;. New York: The Free Press, pp. 402–425.
*Ariew, Roger (2011) Pierre Duhem, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, January 20, 2011.
* 
* Dawson, Christopher (1959). &quot;The Scientific Development of Medieval Culture,&quot; in &quot;Medieval Essays&quot;. New York: Image Books, pp. 122–147.
* (EPUB)
* Deltete, Robert J. (2008). &quot;Man of Science, Man of Faith: Pierre Duhem&#x27;s &#x27;Physique de Croyant&#x27;,&quot; &quot;Zygon&quot; 43 (3), pp. 627–637.
* Jaki, Stanley L. (1985–86). &quot;Science and Censorship: Hélène Duhem and the Publication of the &#x27;Système du Monde&#x27;,&quot; &quot;The Intercollegiate Review&quot; 21 (2), pp. 41–49 [Rep., in &quot;The Absolute Beneath the Relative and Other Essays&quot;. University Press of America, 1988]. [WARNING: Link leads to phishing website.]
* Jaki, Stanley L. (1992). &quot;Reluctant Heroine, The Life and Work of Helene Duhem&quot;. Scottish Academic Press.
* Jaki, Stanley L. (1993). &quot;Medieval Christianity: Its Inventiveness in Technology and Science,&quot; in &quot;Technology in the Western Political Tradition&quot;. Ed. M.R. Zinman. Cornell University Press, pp. 46–68.
* Kahler, Erich (1943). &quot;Reason and Science,&quot; in &quot;Man: The Measure&quot;. New York: Pantheon Books, Inc.
* Quinn, Philip L. (1974). &quot;What Duhem Really Meant,&quot; in Robert S. Cohen &amp; Marx W. Wartofsky, eds., &quot;Methodological and Historical Essays in the Natural and Social Sciences&quot;. Dordrecht: Reidel Publishing Company. 
* Schaffers, V. (1922). &quot;Pierre Duhem et la Théorie Physique,&quot; &quot;Revue des Questions Scientifiques&quot;, pp. 42–73.

==External links==

*Obituary, at &quot;Science&quot;
*Works by Pierre Duhem, at Numdam
*MacTutor Biography
*Pierre Duhem, by Louis de Launay
*The Duhem–Quine Thesis in Economics: A Reinterpretation
*Pierre Duhem &amp; Thomas Kuhn
*Duhem&#x27;s Bull</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q314172" start="0" end="26" title="Pierre Duhem" label="Pierre Maurice Marie Duhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="88" end="97" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="136" end="150" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="152" end="165" title="hydrodynamics" label="hydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q62932" start="185" end="195" title="Elasticity (physics)" label="elasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q201486" start="223" end="243" title="history of science" label="historian of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="302" end="313" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q59115" start="320" end="342" title="philosophy of science" label="philosopher of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q374959" start="377" end="395" title="Duhem–Quine thesis" label="Duhem–Quine thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="476" end="486" title="positivism" label="positivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="529" end="540" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q242485" start="770" end="777" title="Flemish people" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q206221" start="857" end="866" title="Languedoc" label="Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q186115" start="1024" end="1033" title="Monmartre" label="Monmartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1059" end="1067" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133132" start="1140" end="1153" title="Paris Commune" label="Paris Commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983698" start="1324" end="1341" title="Collège Stanislas de Paris" label="Collège Stanislas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="1507" end="1521" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q135436" start="1596" end="1620" title="École normale supérieure" label="École normale supérieure"/>
<link wikidata="Q749020" start="1661" end="1672" title="Licentiate (degree)" label="licentiates"/>
<link wikidata="Q397610" start="1734" end="1744" title="agrégation" label="agrégation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420179" start="1833" end="1856" title="thermodynamic potential" label="thermodynamic potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q80097" start="1874" end="1894" title="electrochemical cell" label="electrochemical cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245163" start="1948" end="1973" title="principle of maximum work" label="principle of maximum work"/>
<link wikidata="Q18425" start="1993" end="2012" title="Marcellin Berthelot" label="Marcellin Berthelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320144" start="2238" end="2246" title="Monarchism in France" label="royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="2298" end="2311" title="Anti-clericalism" label="anti-clerical"/>
<link wikidata="Q166079" start="2312" end="2322" title="Republican Union (France)" label="republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731632" start="2404" end="2426" title="magnetization dynamics" label="magnetization dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551621" start="2633" end="2652" title="University of Lille" label="University of Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987282" start="2686" end="2706" title="University of Rennes" label="University of Rennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13344" start="2777" end="2799" title="University of Bordeaux" label="University of Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q739016" start="2933" end="2956" title="chemical thermodynamics" label="chemical thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q899155" start="2984" end="2995" title="Gibbs–Duhem equation" label="Gibbs–Duhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q373151" start="3000" end="3023" title="Duhem–Margules equation" label="Duhem–Margules equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q153243" start="3085" end="3105" title="Josiah Willard Gibbs" label="Josiah Willard Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q193463" start="3182" end="3201" title="continuum mechanics" label="continuum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129547" start="3272" end="3297" title="Clausius–Duhem inequality" label="Clausius–Duhem inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376837" start="3324" end="3334" title="Energeticism" label="energetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q232149" start="3506" end="3521" title="William Rankine" label="William Rankine"/>
<link wikidata="Q93996" start="3791" end="3801" title="Ernst Mach" label="Ernst Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="3880" end="3884" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="3919" end="3940" title="statistical mechanics" label="statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="3944" end="3963" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q84296" start="3965" end="3981" title="Ludwig Boltzmann" label="Ludwig Boltzmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="4146" end="4161" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="4169" end="4189" title="theory of relativity" label="theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q201486" start="4711" end="4729" title="history of science" label="history of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="4988" end="4996" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q201477" start="5001" end="5010" title="Condorcet" label="Condorcet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="5032" end="5043" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="5076" end="5097" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q169019" start="5252" end="5259" title="statics" label="statics"/>
<link wikidata="Q275500" start="5344" end="5356" title="John Buridan" label="John Buridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q310777" start="5358" end="5371" title="Nicole Oresme" label="Nicole Oresme"/>
<link wikidata="Q171677" start="5376" end="5387" title="Roger Bacon" label="Roger Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="5554" end="5569" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433802" start="5873" end="5893" title="saving the phenomena" label="saving the phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191320" start="5920" end="5941" title="Copernican Revolution" label="Copernican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433802" start="5958" end="5978" title="saving the phenomena" label="saving the phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="5986" end="5991" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="6100" end="6114" title="St. Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q961202" start="6137" end="6161" title="Deferent and epicycle" label="eccentrics and epicycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q961202" start="6516" end="6540" title="Deferent and epicycle" label="eccentrics and epicycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384471" start="6936" end="6955" title="Experimentum crucis" label="crucial experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="7336" end="7342" title="Isaac Newton" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q205921" start="7375" end="7384" title="Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica" label="Principia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="7398" end="7433" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s Law of Gravity" label="law of universal mutual gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q484284" start="7438" end="7445" title="Deductive reasoning" label="deduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q483247" start="7457" end="7466" title="phenomena" label="phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="7484" end="7490" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="7633" end="7640" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="7667" end="7680" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="7692" end="7696" title="David Hume" label="Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="7724" end="7733" title="inductive reasoning" label="induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q803623" start="7962" end="7974" title="Perturbation (astronomy)" label="perturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="8009" end="8014" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q108163" start="8037" end="8048" title="proposition" label="proposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047000" start="8056" end="8063" title="Validity (logic)" label="validly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247456" start="8477" end="8485" title="Baconian method" label="Baconian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252816" start="8993" end="9012" title="confirmation holism" label="confirmation holism"/>
<link wikidata="Q956710" start="9527" end="9564" title="conflict thesis" label="conflict between physics and religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821533" start="10204" end="10212" title="Abel Rey" label="Abel Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="10654" end="10672" title="Honorary degree" label="honorary doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189441" start="10682" end="10705" title="Jagiellonian University" label="Jagiellonian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="10710" end="10724" title="Kraków, Poland" label="Kraków, Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="10801" end="10827" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="French Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q202660" start="11006" end="11023" title="Collège de France" label="Collège de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q180762" start="11358" end="11364" title="angina" label="angina"/>
<link wikidata="Q472962" start="11459" end="11469" title="Cabrespine" label="Cabrespine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="11488" end="11499" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207" start="11535" end="11539" title="Aude" label="Aude"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="17075" end="17096" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="17361" end="17396" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782462" start="17420" end="17436" title="Theory-ladenness" label="Theory-ladenness"/>
<link wikidata="Q726217" start="17467" end="17485" title="E. J. Dijksterhuis" label="Dijksterhuis, E.J."/>
<link wikidata="Q93996" start="17744" end="17748" title="Ernst Mach" label="Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q286375" start="18037" end="18050" title="Émile Picard" label="Picard, Émile"/>
<link wikidata="Q93238527" start="18397" end="18409" title="Roger Ariew" label="Ariew, Roger"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="18431" end="18466" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424305" wikidata="Q2354215" url="?curid=424305" title="Central London">
<text>Central London is the innermost part of London, in England, spanning the City of London and several boroughs. Over time, a number of definitions have been used to define the scope of Central London for statistics, urban planning and local government. Its characteristics are understood to include a high-density built environment, high land values, an elevated daytime population and a concentration of regionally, nationally and internationally significant organisations and facilities.

Road distances to London are traditionally measured from a central point at Charing Cross (in the City of Westminster), which is marked by the statue of King Charles I at the junction of the Strand, Whitehall and Cockspur Street, just south of Trafalgar Square.

==Characteristics==
The central area is distinguished, according to the Royal Commission, by the inclusion within its boundaries of Parliament and the Royal Palaces, the headquarters of Government, the Law Courts, the head offices of a very large number of commercial and industrial firms, as well as institutions of great influence in the intellectual life of the nation such as the British Museum, the National Gallery, the Tate Gallery, the University of London, the headquarters of the national ballet and opera, together with the headquarters of many national associations, the great professions, the trade unions, the trade associations and social service societies, as well as the Liberal Democrat Headquarters, Labour Party Headquarters and Conservative Campaign Headquarters, shopping centres and centres of entertainment which attract people from the whole of Greater London and farther afield.

In many other respects the central area differs from areas farther out in London. The rateable value of the central area is exceptionally high. Its day population is very much larger than its night population. Its traffic problems reach an intensity not encountered anywhere else in the Metropolis or in any provincial city, and the enormous office developments which have taken place recently constitute a totally new phenomenon. || 300 | |Eric Lubbock }}

==Definitions==
===London Plan===
Starting in 2004, the London Plan defined a &#x27;Central Activities Zone&#x27; policy area, which as of 2008 comprised the City of London, most of Westminster and the inner parts of Camden, Islington, Hackney, Tower Hamlets, Southwark, Lambeth, Kensington &amp; Chelsea and Wandsworth. It is described as &quot;a unique cluster of vitally important activities including central government offices, headquarters and embassies, the largest concentration of London&#x27;s financial and business services sector and the offices of trade, professional bodies, institutions, associations, communications, publishing, advertising and the media&quot;.

For strategic planning, since 2011 there has been a Central London sub-region comprising the boroughs of Camden, Islington, Kensington and Chelsea, Lambeth, Southwark, Westminster and the City of London. From 2004 to 2008, the London Plan included a sub-region called Central London comprising Camden, Islington, Kensington and Chelsea, Lambeth, Southwark, Wandsworth and Westminster. It had a 2001 population of 1,525,000. The sub-region was replaced in 2008 with a new structure which amalgamated inner and outer boroughs together. This was altered in 2011 when a new Central London sub-region was created, now including the City of London and excluding Wandsworth.

===1901 Census===
The 1901 Census defined Central London as the City of London and the metropolitan boroughs (subdivisions that existed from 1900 to 1965) of Bermondsey, Bethnal Green, Finsbury, Holborn, Shoreditch, Southwark, Stepney, St Marylebone and Westminster.

===1959–1963 proposals for a central London borough===
During the Herbert Commission and the subsequent passage of the London Government Bill, three unsuccessful attempts were made to define an area that would form a central London borough. The first two were detailed in the 1959 Memorandum of Evidence of the Greater London Group of the London School of Economics.

&quot;Scheme A&quot; envisaged a central London borough, one of 25, consisting of the City of London, Westminster, Holborn, Finsbury and the inner parts of St Marylebone, St Pancras, Chelsea, Southwark and Lambeth. The boundary deviated from existing lines to include all central London railway stations, the Tower of London and the museums, such that it included small parts of Kensington, Shoreditch, Stepney and Bermondsey. It had an estimated population of 350,000 and occupied .

&quot;Scheme B&quot; delineated central London, as one of 7 boroughs, including most of the City of London, the whole of Finsbury and Holborn, most of Westminster and Southwark, parts of St Pancras, St Marylebone, Paddington and a small part of Kensington. The area had an estimated population of 400,000 and occupied .

During the passage of the London Government Bill an amendment was put forward to create a central borough corresponding to the definition used at the 1961 census. It consisted of the City of London, all of Westminster, Holborn and Finsbury; and the inner parts of Shoreditch, Stepney, Bermondsey, Southwark, Lambeth, Chelsea, Kensington, Paddington, St Marylebone and St Pancras. The population was estimated to be 270,000.

== See also ==

* Inner London
* Outer London

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="0" end="14" title="Central London" label="Central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="40" end="46" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="51" end="58" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="73" end="87" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q211690" start="100" end="108" title="London borough" label="boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="214" end="228" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q216185" start="565" end="578" title="Charing Cross" label="Charing Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="587" end="606" title="City of Westminster" label="City of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604492" start="632" end="656" title="Equestrian statue of Charles I, Charing Cross" label="statue of King Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q756819" start="680" end="686" title="Strand, London" label="Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="688" end="697" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139684" start="702" end="717" title="Cockspur Street" label="Cockspur Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q129143" start="733" end="749" title="Trafalgar Square" label="Trafalgar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374020" start="824" end="840" title="Royal Commission on Local Government in Greater London" label="Royal Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="884" end="894" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q609835" start="954" end="964" title="Royal Courts of Justice" label="Law Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="1136" end="1150" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q180788" start="1156" end="1172" title="National Gallery (London)" label="National Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q430682" start="1178" end="1190" title="Tate Gallery" label="Tate Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="1196" end="1216" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q124459001" start="1440" end="1469" title="Liberal Democrat Headquarters (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q124435109" start="1471" end="1496" title="Labour Party Headquarters (UK)" label="Labour Party Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163028" start="1501" end="1535" title="Conservative Campaign Headquarters" label="Conservative Campaign Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q23306" start="1622" end="1636" title="Greater London" label="Greater London"/>
<link wikidata="Q849837" start="1744" end="1758" title="rates (tax)" label="rateable value"/>
<link wikidata="Q337106" start="2099" end="2111" title="Eric Lubbock, 4th Baron Avebury" label="Eric Lubbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571368" start="2172" end="2183" title="London Plan" label="London Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="2298" end="2309" title="London Borough of Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q17024412" start="2863" end="2873" title="List of sub-regions used in the London Plan" label="sub-region"/>
<link wikidata="Q202088" start="2901" end="2907" title="London Borough of Camden" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q205817" start="2909" end="2918" title="London Borough of Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q188801" start="2920" end="2942" title="Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea" label="Kensington and Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q202059" start="2944" end="2951" title="London Borough of Lambeth" label="Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q730706" start="2953" end="2962" title="London Borough of Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="2964" end="2975" title="City of Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="2984" end="2998" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q210563" start="3153" end="3163" title="London Borough of Wandsworth" label="Wandsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="3529" end="3543" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q9046617" start="3552" end="3573" title="Metropolitan boroughs of the County of London" label="metropolitan boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749030" start="3623" end="3633" title="Metropolitan Borough of Bermondsey" label="Bermondsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559946" start="3635" end="3648" title="Metropolitan Borough of Bethnal Green" label="Bethnal Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240488" start="3650" end="3658" title="Metropolitan Borough of Finsbury" label="Finsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q429834" start="3660" end="3667" title="Metropolitan Borough of Holborn" label="Holborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925828" start="3669" end="3679" title="Metropolitan Borough of Shoreditch" label="Shoreditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q522139" start="3681" end="3690" title="Metropolitan Borough of Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925834" start="3692" end="3699" title="Metropolitan Borough of Stepney" label="Stepney"/>
<link wikidata="Q180652" start="3701" end="3714" title="Metropolitan Borough of St Marylebone" label="St Marylebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669574" start="3719" end="3730" title="Metropolitan Borough of Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374020" start="3799" end="3817" title="Royal Commission on Local Government in Greater London" label="Herbert Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670449" start="3852" end="3874" title="London Government Act 1963" label="London Government Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q211690" start="3958" end="3972" title="London borough" label="London borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117576" start="4044" end="4064" title="Greater London Group" label="Greater London Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="4072" end="4098" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311711" start="4373" end="4404" title="London station group" label="central London railway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="4410" end="4425" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q859427" start="5350" end="5362" title="Inner London" label="Inner London"/>
<link wikidata="Q144298" start="5365" end="5377" title="Outer London" label="Outer London"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424308" wikidata="Q1427782" url="?curid=424308" title="Viru Viru International Airport">
<text>Viru Viru International Airport in Santa Cruz de la Sierra is Bolivia&#x27;s largest international airport. Viru Viru handles domestic, regional, and international flights from Bolivia, North America, South America and Europe and serves as a focus city for Bolivia&#x27;s biggest airline Boliviana de Aviación. The airport is able to handle widebody aircraft including the Boeing 747-400.

== History ==
The idea of having an airport in the city of Santa Cruz de la Sierra was conceived in 1965 by General René Barrientos, former president of Bolivia, with the intention of creating an intercontinental airport. Shortly thereafter, construction of the airport began until it was completed and inaugurated in 1983, to replace the obsolete El Trompillo Airport. Upon its inauguration, Viru Viru became a main gateway for international flights. Lloyd Aéreo Boliviano used Viru Viru as a hub before ceasing operations in 2008. 

On 1 March 1997, the government of Bolivia entered into a 25-year contract with Airport Group International to operate the three largest airports in Bolivia — El Alto International Airport in La Paz, Jorge Wilstermann International Airport in Cochabamba and Viru Viru International Airport. Servicios de Aeropuertos Bolivianos Sociedad Anonima (SABSA) was created to operate the concession. In 1999, Airport Group International was purchased by TBI plc. 

In 2004, Spain&#x27;s Abertis/AENA purchased TBI. SABSA has been substituted in March of 2022 by the newly established government agency Navegación Aérea y Aeropuertos Bolivianos (NAABOL). This state-owned agency now manages the airports in Bolivia. 

=== Name ===
The name &quot;Viru Viru&quot; originates from the indigenous Guarani language spoken in the area. Most likely, &quot;Viru Viru&quot; refers to a toponym or a distinctive geographical feature after which the airport was named.There is some ambiguity about the meaning of it based on sources in the internet. Different meanings have been proposed:
* Some say it means &quot;round object&quot; or &quot;round place&quot;, referring to a nearby hill that has a circular shape, resembling a round object.
* Others say it refers to a river that has now disappeared and was located 13 kilometres from the city. The tributary was in the same pampa where the airport was built.
*Lastly, it could mean &quot;pampa, plain&quot;, which was the name of the whole geographical area of the place where the airport was built.

Today, some researchers claim that the correct spelling of the term would be &quot;Birubiru&quot;.

== Airlines and destinations ==

===Passenger===

The following airlines operate regular scheduled and charter flights at Viru Viru International Airport:
===Cargo===
==Statistics==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1427782" start="0" end="31" title="Viru Viru International Airport" label="Viru Viru International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q170688" start="35" end="58" title="Santa Cruz de la Sierra" label="Santa Cruz de la Sierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="62" end="69" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="85" end="106" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811588" start="242" end="252" title="focus city" label="focus city"/>
<link wikidata="Q891372" start="288" end="309" title="Boliviana de Aviación" label="Boliviana de Aviación"/>
<link wikidata="Q309078" start="341" end="358" title="widebody aircraft" label="widebody aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q906937" start="373" end="387" title="Boeing 747-400" label="Boeing 747-400"/>
<link wikidata="Q332074" start="506" end="521" title="René Barrientos" label="René Barrientos"/>
<link wikidata="Q20679960" start="523" end="550" title="List of presidents of Bolivia" label="former president of Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875728" start="738" end="758" title="El Trompillo Airport" label="El Trompillo Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q749332" start="842" end="863" title="Lloyd Aéreo Boliviano" label="Lloyd Aéreo Boliviano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142225" start="1084" end="1113" title="El Alto International Airport" label="El Alto International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671345" start="1125" end="1164" title="Jorge Wilstermann International Airport" label="Jorge Wilstermann International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q183124" start="1168" end="1178" title="Cochabamba" label="Cochabamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q10689331" start="1370" end="1377" title="TBI plc" label="TBI plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q319730" start="1403" end="1410" title="Abertis" label="Abertis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35876" start="1708" end="1724" title="Guarani language" label="Guarani language"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="1792" end="1799" title="Toponymy" label="toponym"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424310" wikidata="Q444443" url="?curid=424310" title="Robert Lee">
<text>Robert Lee may refer to:

==Politicians==
* Robert atte Lee (1379–1386), MP for Reading, England

* Robert Lee, 4th Earl of Lichfield (1706–1776), British peer and politician
* Robert Lee (Canadian politician) (1862–1925), mayor of Edmonton, Alberta
* Robert Emmett Lee (1868–1916), Democratic member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Pennsylvania
* Robert Quincy Lee (1869–1930), U.S. representative from Texas
* Robert Lee (Lord Mayor) (died 1605), English merchant who was Lord Mayor of London in 1602
* Robert Lee Wai-wang, Hong Kong Legislative Council member

==Military==
* Robert C. Lee (1888–1971), US Navy officer
* Robert E. Lee (1807–1870), American Civil War Confederate general
* Robert E. Lee Jr. (1843–1914), soldier during the American Civil War, later a planter, businessman, and author
* Robert Merrill Lee (1909–2003), United States Air Force general

==Writers and academics==
* Robert N. Lee (1890–1964), American screenwriter
* Robert E. Lee (playwright) (1918–1994), playwright
* Robert Lee (obstetrician) (1793–1877), Regius Professor of Midwifery, University of Glasgow
* Robert G. Lee, professor of American studies at Brown University
* Robert Lee (historian) (1959–2010), English historian
* Robert Warden Lee (1868–1958), British professor of law

==Sportsmen==
* Robert Lee (golfer) (born 1961), English golfer
* Robert Lee (canoeist) (born 1956), member of the Australian sprint canoe team at the 1980 Summer Olympics
* Rob Lee (born 1966), English footballer
* Robert Lee (basketball) (born 1968), head coach of the Louisiana-Lafayette Ragin&#x27; Cajuns men&#x27;s basketball team
* Robbie Lee (diver) (born 2005), British athlete
* Robert Lee (rowing) (1952–2018), British coxswain

==Actors==
* Robert Lee (voice actor) (born 1957), narrator of &quot;MythBusters&quot;
* Robert Lee (British actor) (1913–1986), Chinese British film and television actor
* Robert Isaac Lee (1956–2004), Chinese American film and television actor
* Bobby Lee (Robert Young Lee Jr.), American actor and comedian.

==Religion==
* Robert Lee (minister) (1804–1868), Church of Scotland minister
* Robert V. Lee (born 1951), humanitarian and Episcopal priest
* Robert G. Lee (minister), U.S. 20th-century Southern Baptist minister
* Robert W. Lee IV (born 1992), American minister and newspaper columnist

==Other people==
* Robert Lee, Lord Lee (1830–1890) Scottish lawyer and Senator of the College of Justice
* Robert Lee (dentist) (1920–2010), American dentist who emigrated to Ghana
* Robert Lee Jun-fai (born 1948), Hong Kong musician and the brother of Bruce Lee
* Robbie Lee (musician), American composer and multi-instrumentalist
* Robert Lee (teacher) (1837–1922), New Zealand teacher, school inspector, and educationalist
* Robert C. T. Lee (1923–2016), Chinese-American veterinarian and educator
* Robert H. Lee (1933–2020), Canadian businessman and philanthropist
* Robert James Lee (1841–1924), British physician
* Robert Lee (sports announcer) (born 1976/1977), American sports announcer, currently works for ESPN
* Robert E. A. Lee (1921–2009), Lutheran film producer
* Robert E. Lee (FCC) (1912–1993), American government official
* Robert E. Lee (architect) (1870–1925), architect in Hattiesburg, Mississippi. 

==Other uses==
* Robert Lee, Texas, a US city named after the general
* SS Robert E. Lee, a steam passenger ship

==See also==
* Bob Lee (disambiguation)
* Bobby Lee (disambiguation)
* Robert E. Lee (disambiguation)
* Robert Leigh (disambiguation)
* Bert Lee (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q444443" start="0" end="10" title="Robert Lee" label="Robert Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351375" start="44" end="59" title="Robert atte Lee" label="Robert atte Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346787" start="100" end="133" title="Robert Lee, 4th Earl of Lichfield" label="Robert Lee, 4th Earl of Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346789" start="177" end="209" title="Robert Lee (Canadian politician)" label="Robert Lee (Canadian politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344078" start="252" end="269" title="Robert Emmett Lee" label="Robert Emmett Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158544" start="358" end="375" title="Robert Quincy Lee" label="Robert Quincy Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346790" start="422" end="445" title="Robert Lee (Lord Mayor)" label="Robert Lee (Lord Mayor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110653366" start="515" end="534" title="Robert Lee Wai-wang" label="Robert Lee Wai-wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342624" start="589" end="602" title="Robert C. Lee" label="Robert C. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="634" end="647" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343828" start="702" end="719" title="Robert E. Lee Jr." label="Robert E. Lee Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7347637" start="815" end="833" title="Robert Merrill Lee" label="Robert Merrill Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762306" start="908" end="921" title="Robert N. Lee" label="Robert N. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343994" start="959" end="985" title="Robert E. Lee (playwright)" label="Robert E. Lee (playwright)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346796" start="1012" end="1037" title="Robert Lee (obstetrician)" label="Robert Lee (obstetrician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932375" start="1106" end="1119" title="Robert G. Lee" label="Robert G. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q60694143" start="1173" end="1195" title="Robert Lee (historian)" label="Robert Lee (historian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18911657" start="1229" end="1246" title="Robert Warden Lee" label="Robert Warden Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q524003" start="1302" end="1321" title="Robert Lee (golfer)" label="Robert Lee (golfer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346794" start="1352" end="1373" title="Robert Lee (canoeist)" label="Robert Lee (canoeist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q465004" start="1460" end="1467" title="Rob Lee" label="Rob Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346791" start="1502" end="1525" title="Robert Lee (basketball)" label="Robert Lee (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q120189220" start="1625" end="1643" title="Robbie Lee (diver)" label="Robbie Lee (diver)"/>
<link wikidata="Q61748175" start="1675" end="1694" title="Robert Lee (rowing)" label="Robert Lee (rowing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065488" start="1739" end="1763" title="Robert Lee (voice actor)" label="Robert Lee (voice actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346792" start="1815" end="1841" title="Robert Lee (British actor)" label="Robert Lee (British actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345819" start="1899" end="1915" title="Robert Isaac Lee" label="Robert Isaac Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064120" start="1974" end="1983" title="Bobby Lee" label="Bobby Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q18672206" start="2053" end="2074" title="Robert Lee (minister)" label="Robert Lee (minister)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350549" start="2118" end="2131" title="Robert V. Lee" label="Robert V. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2181" end="2205" title="Bellevue Baptist Church#Dr. Robert G. Lee .281927.E2.80.931960.29" label="Robert G. Lee (minister)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96361601" start="2253" end="2269" title="Robert W. Lee IV" label="Robert W. Lee IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q29053967" start="2345" end="2365" title="Robert Lee, Lord Lee" label="Robert Lee, Lord Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346795" start="2434" end="2454" title="Robert Lee (dentist)" label="Robert Lee (dentist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346798" start="2510" end="2528" title="Robert Lee Jun-fai" label="Robert Lee Jun-fai"/>
<link wikidata="Q56277289" start="2592" end="2613" title="Robbie Lee (musician)" label="Robbie Lee (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346797" start="2661" end="2681" title="Robert Lee (teacher)" label="Robert Lee (teacher)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6580885" start="2755" end="2771" title="Robert C. T. Lee" label="Robert C. T. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345071" start="2830" end="2843" title="Robert H. Lee" label="Robert H. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q98834187" start="2899" end="2915" title="Robert James Lee" label="Robert James Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q39074158" start="2949" end="2978" title="Robert Lee (sports announcer)" label="Robert Lee (sports announcer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343726" start="3051" end="3067" title="Robert E. A. Lee" label="Robert E. A. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343829" start="3106" end="3125" title="Robert E. Lee (FCC)" label="Robert E. Lee (FCC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30606383" start="3170" end="3195" title="Robert E. Lee (architect)" label="Robert E. Lee (architect)"/>
<link wikidata="Q972986" start="3267" end="3284" title="Robert Lee, Texas" label="Robert Lee, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q85798884" start="3322" end="3338" title="SS Robert E. Lee" label="SS Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933140" start="3379" end="3403" title="Bob Lee (disambiguation)" label="Bob Lee (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935277" start="3406" end="3432" title="Bobby Lee (disambiguation)" label="Bobby Lee (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565702" start="3435" end="3465" title="Robert E. Lee (disambiguation)" label="Robert E. Lee (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346835" start="3468" end="3497" title="Robert Leigh (disambiguation)" label="Robert Leigh (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16229790" start="3500" end="3525" title="Bert Lee (disambiguation)" label="Bert Lee (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424312" wikidata="Q1339396" url="?curid=424312" title="Emporia State University">
<text>Emporia State University (Emporia State or ESU) is a public university in Emporia, Kansas, United States. Established in March 1863 as the Kansas State Normal School, Emporia State is the third-oldest public university in the state of Kansas. Emporia State is one of six public universities governed by the Kansas Board of Regents.

The university offers degrees through seven schools, one college, and one institute: the School of Business and Technology, School of Humanities and Social Sciences, School of Library and Information Management, School of Science and Mathematics, School of Visual and Performing Arts, School of Applied Health Sciences, The Teachers College, and the Institute of Interdisciplinary Studies. Prior to the 2023–24 school year, Emporia State only had two schools and colleges.

== History ==
=== Early history ===


The origins of the university date back to 1861, when Kansas became a state. The Kansas Constitution provided for a state university, and from 1861 to 1863 the question of where the university would be locatedLawrence, Manhattan or Emporiawas debated. In February 1863, Manhattan was selected as the site for the state&#x27;s land-grant college, authorized by the 1862 Morrill Land-Grant Act–what evolved into Kansas State University. Lawrence and Emporia were therefore left as the only candidates for a state university. The fact that Amos Adams Lawrence had donated $10,000 (plus interest), as well as 40 acres (160,000 m2) to the city of Lawrence had great weight with the Kansas Legislature, and Lawrence was selected by one vote over Emporia as the location of the University of Kansas. On March 7, 1863, the Kansas Legislature passed the enabling act to establish the Kansas State Normal School, which would one day become Emporia State University; it did not open until February 15, 1865. The first class graduated two and a half years later; it consisted of two women, Mary Jane Watson and Ellen Plumb. Ellen was the sister of US Senator Preston B. Plumb.

In 1876, the Kansas Legislature passed the &quot;Miscellaneous appropriations bill of 1876&quot;. As a result, Leavenworth Normal and Concordia Normal were closed so the state funding for normal schools could be directed to Emporia. Then, in the early 20th century, KSN branched out with satellited campuses in Pittsburg and Hays. The Hays campus opened June 3, 1902 as KSN&#x27;s &quot;Western Branch.&quot; It became an autonomous college in 1914 as Fort Hays Kansas State Normal School, and has since developed into Fort Hays State University. The Pittsburg branch was opened as the Manual Training Auxiliary School in 1904; it became a four-year school named Kansas State Teachers College of Pittsburg in 1913. Today it is Pittsburg State University.

In February 1923, the name of the school was changed to the Kansas State Teachers College. In July 1974, the name was changed to Emporia Kansas State College. On April 21, 1977, the college became Emporia State University.

=== Present university ===
In June 2022, Ken Hush became the 18th president of Emporia State. Hush. He was previously President and Executive Officer at Koch Minerals and Carbon, an affiliate of Koch Industries. He was selected by a search committee consisting of students, faculty, staff, alumni, and other accomplished professionals representing a broad range of interests.

As with other universities, changes in student demand for majors and programs have not occurred uniformly across the various entities at ESU. In September 2022, the Kansas Board of Regents approved a plan by the Hush administration to downsize 7% of ESU&#x27;s employees, including tenured professors for &quot;current or future market considerations&quot;.

Following the downsizing, in 2024 the university obtained Regents&#x27; approval for a &quot;net decrease in tuition and fees&quot;. Programmatic and other changes announced in 2024 include the following: (1) groundbreaking for a new building for Nursing and Student wellness, which is expected to open in fall 2025; (2) a &quot;Jump Start/Concurrent Enrollment&quot; program for high school students in nearby counties; (3) articulation agreements with 19 Kansas community colleges that will provide &quot;seamless transfer of courses in nursing, education, criminology and the sciences&quot;; (4) an &quot;articulation agreement in which undergraduates at ESU can shorten the time to complete their bachelor&#x27;s and law degrees by taking law classes at Washburn University&#x27;s Law School during their senior year&quot;; and (5) a partnership with Pittsburg State University providing &quot;course sharing opportunities.&quot;

One of the faculty cut oversaw ESU&#x27;s debate team, competing on behalf of the university since 1874, predating the university&#x27;s football team. Despite the small size of ESU, the debate team has competed–and won–against several schools, including the Ivy Leagues. In the 2012–2013 academic year, alumni Elijah Smith and Ryan Wash helped ESU make debate history as the first university to &quot;unite the crowns&quot; and win the CEDA and National Debate Tournament championships in the same year. The debate program ended in May 2023.

The American Association of University Professors published an investigative report in May 2023 concerning the termination of thirty tenured and tenure-track faculty appointments at the university and placed it on its list of censured institutions. The investigating committee found that, in carrying out the terminations, the ESU administration and the Kansas Board of Regents disregarded AAUP-recommended principles and procedural standards concerning tenure and academic freedom. It also found that the board’s reactivation in May 2022 of a temporary COVID-19-related policy allowed system institutions to abrogate existing university regulations that did comport in most essential respects with AAUP-supported standards. The temporary policy suspended existing university regulations and gave the ESU administration the authority to &quot;suspend, dismiss, or terminate&quot; any professor, tenured or untenured, without involving faculty governance bodies and without affording academic due process to the affected faculty members. Although the board of regents offered the policy to all system institutions, only Emporia State&#x27;s administration adopted it–in September 2022, just three months before it was set to expire.

In August 2023, Emporia State became the only Kansas public university without campus child care when it closes the child care center. Wichita State University, University of Kansas, Kansas State University, Pittsburg State University, and Fort Hays State all have existing programs. ESU closed doors on its Center for Early Childhood Education in the midst of a national child care crisis. In Lyon County, there are between 21-30 children per opening at a child care facility as of 2021, according to Child Care Aware of Kansas.

Enrollment dropped at ESU in September 2023, most notably in the College of Education. Previously, the College of Education had a reputation for quality. A comprehensive evaluation of schools or colleges of education by Arthur Levine (Emeritus President of Columbia University&#x27;s Teacher College) reported Emporia State as having &quot;an exemplary teacher education program.&quot;

==Academic organization==
By enrollment, Emporia State is the seventh-largest university in Kansas. In the fall 2014 semester, it set a record enrollment with 6,114 students.

Emporia State University comprises seven schools, one college, and one institute: the School of Business and Technology, School of Humanities and Social Sciences, School of Library and Information Management, School of Science and Mathematics, School of Visual and Performing Arts, School of Applied Health Sciences, The Teachers College, and the Institute of Interdisciplinary Studies. Prior to the 2023–24 school year, Emporia State only had two schools and colleges.

Emporia State is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission. The university offers degrees in more than 80 courses of study. Emporia State has a satellite campus in Kansas City, which is mostly online classes, but some classes are held in the building.

===School of Business and Technology===
Founded in 1868, the School of Business is located on the main campus. It has more than 30 faculty members and approximately 300 students.

The School is accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB International). The programs have been thoroughly reviewed and found to be of the highest quality. This distinction is found with less than 5% of business schools worldwide.

The School was renamed to the School of Business and Technology in 2023, after a university-wide restructure.

====Koch Center for Leadership and Ethics====
The School of Business opened the Koch Center for Leadership and Ethics, which is a center made up of classes that focuses on entrepreneurial management. The center was funded through grants of $750,000 from the Fred Koch Foundation, as well as Koch Industries. The university has since disbanded this center.

===School of Library and Information Management and Archives===
The School of Library and Information Management (SLIM), which was founded in 1902, is the &quot;oldest school of library and information studies in the western half of the United States&quot; and has branches in six different states. SLIM is the only accredited American Library Association program in Kansas, and the School Library Media Licensure program is also accredited by the National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE). The School of Library and Information Management also offers Emporia State University&#x27;s only PhD: a doctorate in Library and Information Management.

As part of a university-wide restructure in 2023, SLIM added instructional design &amp; technology to its school, joining the University Libraries and Archives that merged with the school in 2021.

===School of Humanities and Social Sciences===
As part of a university-wide restructure in 2023, the School of Humanities and Social Sciences was created from some departments in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences: English and modern languages, communication, social sciences, sociology and criminology and the Intensive English Program.

===School of Science and Mathematics===
As part of a university-wide restructure in 2023, the School of Science and Mathematics was created from departments in College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, and includes biological sciences, mathematics, physics, Earth science, chemistry and forensic science.

===School of Visual and Performing Arts===
As part of a university-wide restructure in 2023, the School of Visual and Performing Arts was created from departments in College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, and includes music, theatre and art.

===School of Applied Health Sciences===
As part of a university-wide restructure in 2023, the School of Applied Health Sciences was created from departments in College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, and includes psychology, counseling, nursing, and health, physical education, and recreation.

===Institute of Interdisciplinary Studies===
As part of a university-wide restructure in 2023, the Institute of Interdisciplinary Studies was created from the department of interdisciplinary studies in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, and includes interdisciplinary studies and ethnic, gender and identity studies.

===The Teachers College===


The Teachers College at Emporia State University is an &quot;Exemplary Model Teacher Education&quot; program as named by Arthur Levine in 2006. In 2011, The Teachers College was featured in a video produced by the U.S. Department of Education highlighting the use of professional development schools.

====Jones Institute for Educational Excellence====
The Jones Institute for Educational Excellence is a non-profit organization provided by the Jones Trust in Lyon County. In August 1982, the office was established as part of the Teachers College for research to better education in the state of Kansas.

====National Teachers Hall of Fame====
The National Teachers Hall of Fame (NTHF) is a non-profit organization that honors exceptional school teachers and was established in 1989 by Emporia State University, the City of Emporia, the local school district, and the Chamber of Commerce. The NTHF has a museum on Emporia State&#x27;s campus that honors the inducted teachers. It also has a teacher resource center and a program which recognizes five of the nation&#x27;s best educators each June.

The Hall of Fame annually honors five teachers who have demonstrated commitment and dedication to teaching children. The first induction was held in June 1992, and, 115 teachers have since been inducted into the Hall of Fame. Inductees cover more than three-quarters of the United States and Washington D.C.
=====Memorial for Fallen Educators=====
On June 13, 2013, the NTHF executive director, along with former university officials, U.S. Sen. Jerry Moran&#x27;s staff, and local government leaders broke ground by the one-room schoolhouse located on the campus to build a memorial for teachers who have fallen in the &quot;line of duty&quot;. The Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting was the main inspiration for the memorial. On June 6, 2014, the granite memorial markers were placed along with granite benches. The official dedication was held on June 12, 2014.

On September 21, 2015, United States Senator Moran of Kansas introduced a bill to the United States Congress to designate the memorial as the &quot;National Memorial to Fallen Educators&quot;. Should the bill pass by both the U.S. House of Representatives and Senate, the memorial would then need to be signed by the President of the United States. The memorial would not become a part of the National Park Service, nor would it receive Federal funding.

===Kansas City campus===
Emporia State University–Kansas City is the branch campus of Emporia State, located in Overland Park. The campus offers both undergraduate and graduate degrees.

===Honors College===
On August 29, 2014, Emporia State announced that it had received $1 million additional funding from the Governor&#x27;s office for the school&#x27;s first-ever Honors College.

==Campus==
===Academic buildings===
Most academic buildings at Emporia State University are dedicated to someone or are an important part of the school&#x27;s history.

Beach Music Hall, named in honor of former professor Frank A. Beach, houses the Music Department. It was built in 1926, and contains classrooms, a recital hall, and practice studios.

Within the science building, Bruekelman Science Hall houses the Biological Sciences department and mathematics and economics departments, while Cram Science Hall houses the Physical Sciences department and classrooms for chemistry, physics, and earth science. Inside the science building are two museums – Johnston Geology Museum and the Richard H. Schmidt Museum of Natural History, along with the Peterson Planetarium.

Cremer Hall contains the School of Business and technology. The building opened in 1964 and is also home to the Kansas Business Hall of Fame.

The HPER Building, officially known as the Health, Physical Education and Recreation building, is home to the Athletics and physical education department. Inside the building are five gyms, locker rooms, classrooms, administrative offices, and a swimming pool.

Inside John E. King Hall, named after the 11th president of ESU, are the Theatre Department, and the Arts and Communication Departments. Also inside is the Karl C. Bruder Theatre.
Plumb Hall serves as the administration building, and houses President&#x27;s office, Academic Affairs, Fiscal Affairs, Financial Aid services, Human Resources, some classrooms, Social Sciences and English departments, and the Graduate School. The building is named after Senator Preston B. Plumb. Also inside is Albert Taylor Hall, an auditorium named after the 5th president of ESU.

Roosevelt Hall, previously a high school in Emporia, once served as the home of the College of Liberal Arts &amp; Sciences dean&#x27;s office. Inside are classrooms primarily for English, Modern Languages, and Journalism classes, as well as a theatre.

John E. Visser Hall, named after ESU&#x27;s 12th president, is home to the Teachers College. It also houses the Teachers Hall of Fame.

The William Allen White Library is home to the School of Library and Information Management and Archives. Inside are a computer lab, the University Archives, and the Academic Center for Excellence and Success.

===Other buildings===
The Emporia State University Memorial Union is the student activity center. It opened on Founder&#x27;s Day in 1925 as a memorial to the KSN students who died in World War I. It was the first student union west of the Mississippi River. Inside the Union are the bookstore, admissions office, Sodexo dining services, and student life offices, and the office for the vice president of enrollment management and success.

The Sauder Alumni Center houses the Emporia State University Foundation and Alumni Association. Cora Miller Hall houses the School of Nursing, and is located next to Newman Regional Hospital.

==Student life==
===Housing===
At ESU, all incoming freshmen students must live in the Towers Complex (North &amp; South Towers, Singular, and Trusler), unless they already live within a radius of the campus. Upperclassmen have the choice to live in Abigail Morse Hall, the original dormitory on campus.

South Morse Hall, which used to house students, is now used for office purposes such as the TRIO Program and Student Wellness Center are located in South.

The Towers Complex is made up into four residence halls: North and South Towers, and Singular and Trusler Towers. Trusler went under renovation in the fall of 2013, with Singular going under renovation in the spring of 2014.

In November 2017, construction started on a new residence hall, Schallenkamp Hall, which was named after Emporia State&#x27;s 14th president, Kay Schallenkamp. It opened in 2020 and is the first new building on campus since 2000.

===Fraternity and sorority life===
ESU has eight fraternities and six sororities.

===Student newspaper===
The school newspaper of Emporia State University is &quot;ESU Bulletin&quot;, established in 1901. It is published once a week on Thursdays, and is distributed free of charge in all campus buildings. Supported by student fees and advertising, &quot;The Bulletin&quot; is written and operated by student staff members.

===Student yearbook===
&quot;Sunflower&quot;, the university&#x27;s yearbook, is published each spring as a chronicle of the year&#x27;s events and activities. It is funded by student fees and distributed during finals week of the spring semester. Students who choose to be included in the yearbook are photographed at no charge during the fall semester.

==Athletics==


The Emporia State athletic teams are called the Hornets (with women&#x27;s basketball and softball being called the Lady Hornets). The university is a member of the NCAA Division II ranks, primarily competing in the Mid-America Intercollegiate Athletics Association (The MIAA) since the 1991–92 academic year. The Hornets previously competed as an NCAA D-II Independent from 1989–90 to 1990–91; in the Central States Intercollegiate Conference (CSIC) of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA) from 1976–77 to 1988–89; in the Great Plains Athletic Conference (GPAC) from 1972–73 to 1975–76; in the Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference (RMAC) from 1968–69 to 1971–72; in the Central Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (CIC) from 1923–24 to 1967–68; and in the Kansas Collegiate Athletic Conference (KCAC) from 1902–03 to 1922–23.

Emporia State competes in 16 intercollegiate varsity sports: Men&#x27;s sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, disc golf, football, tennis and track &amp; field (indoor and outdoor); while women&#x27;s sports include basketball, cross country, disc golf, soccer, softball, tennis, track &amp; field (indoor and outdoor) and volleyball.

===Basketball===
Of its varsity sports, only Emporia States&#x27; women&#x27;s basketball team has claimed a national title for the school. The Lady Hornets, led by former head coach Brandon Schneider, won the 2010 NCAA Division II Women&#x27;s Basketball Championship, defeating the Fort Lewis College Skyhawks. They are coached by Brian Ostermann. The men&#x27;s basketball team is coached by Craig Doty, a three-time national championship coach.

===Football===

The Hornets football team is currently coached by former Hornets quarterback Garin Higgins. Since joining the MIAA in 1991, the Hornets have gone 123–118 in conference play. The Hornets have also participated in five post-season bowls, winning three.

===Baseball===
The Hornets baseball team played its first game in 1949. The team has four conference championships, three conference tournament champions, and two College World Series appearances, with a 2009 runner-up coached by ESU alum, Bob Fornelli. The team also made five appearances in the NAIA World Series, winning the 1978 World Series. Currently the team is coached by former Hornet, Brad Hill.

===Softball===
The Hornets softball team played its first game by 1971, seven years before the baseball team. The team is currently coached by April Rosales, who took over the program on October 19, 2015. The softball team appeared in three Women&#x27;s College World Series, in 1971, 1972, and 1979, and also won the first AIAW Division II national championship in 1980. Emporia State also played for the national championship in 2006 and 2008.

===Facilities===
Since 1940, home basketball games have been played at William L. White Auditorium, a 5,000-seat arena named after William Lindsay White, son of William Allen White. In addition to serving as home to the men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s basketball teams, the arena is used by the Lady Hornets volleyball team. In 2008, the auditorium received an upgrade throughout the entire building.

Francis G. Welch Stadium serves as home to the Hornets football team. The stadium, named after long-time Emporia State football coach and athletic director Fran Welch, opened in 1947 and has since undergone a few renovations. In 1994, the east and west side concession areas, restroom facilities, and entrances were renovated, a new scoreboard was hoisted into place at the south end of the stadium, and a new landscaped fence was erected. The Hutchinson Family Pavilion, a three-tiered facility which has enclosed theatre seating on the first floor, a president&#x27;s box and four sky-boxes on the second floor, and a game-day management and media center on the third floor, was built in 1997. The current seating capacity is 7,000. In 2005, an artificial football field was placed down, with that one being replaced in 2016, as well as a new track.

Trusler Sports Complex is home to the baseball and softball teams. The baseball team competes on Glennen Field, named after Robert E. Glennen, 13th president of Emporia State. In 2009, the field was renovated with a new artificial turf that replaced the infield. The Lady Hornets compete on Turnbull Field named after J. Michael Turnbull, a trustee of the Trusler Foundation.
===School colors===
Emporia State&#x27;s official school colors are black and gold. These have been the colors since the school was founded in 1863. Until recently, the gold was &quot;old gold&quot;.

===Mascot===


In 1923, the teams were known as the &quot;Yaps&quot;, but it was not a popular name. Men&#x27;s basketball coach Vic Trusler recommended to a reporter of the &quot;Emporia Gazette&quot; that the name should be changed to &quot;Yellow Jackets&quot;. Due to the lack of newspaper space, the reporter changed it to &quot;Hornets&quot;.

In 1933, the Teachers College held a contest in which students and staff could design a mascot for the college. Sophomore Paul Edwards, who graduated in 1937, designed Corky. Although hundreds of drawings were submitted, Edwards&#x27; Corky, a &quot;human-like&quot; hornet, was selected and published in &quot;The Bulletin&quot;, the student newspaper for Emporia State University.

==Foundation==
Established in 1952, the Emporia State University Foundation is an independent, nonprofit corporation that helps support Emporia State by fundraising.

===Campaign===
In February 2013, when the university turned 150, it announced a campaign to raise $45 million in five to seven years. The campaign&#x27;s slogan is &quot;Silent no more.&quot; After the announcement of a donation, big or small, the university rings a bell called Silent Joe. The bell, which is located just south of Francis G. Welch Stadium, was originally rung only after a football team won at home. The campaign ended in February 2017, having raised $58.03 million, the largest in the university&#x27;s history.

==Police and Safety==
ESU Police and Safety is the campus police department. Besides enforcing the law, the department also provides other assistance for the students and faculty/staff members such as escorts and vehicle problems. The department has ten full-time commissioned officers (one chief, one lieutenant, three sergeants, two corporals, and three officers), one full-time dispatcher, and several student dispatchers. The Kansas Highway Patrol also has an office in the building.

==Notable alumni and faculty==


==See also==
* College of Emporia, a defunct private college in Emporia from 1882 to 1974

==References==
==External links==
* Emporia State Athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1339396" start="0" end="24" title="Emporia State University" label="Emporia State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339396" start="26" end="39" title="Emporia State University" label="Emporia State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339396" start="43" end="46" title="Emporia State University" label="ESU"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="53" end="70" title="public university" label="public university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583523" start="74" end="89" title="Emporia, Kansas" label="Emporia, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q627006" start="152" end="165" title="Normal School" label="Normal School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364589" start="307" end="330" title="Kansas Board of Regents" label="Kansas Board of Regents"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891060" start="422" end="455" title="Emporia State University School of Business" label="School of Business and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891055" start="653" end="673" title="Emporia State University Teachers College" label="The Teachers College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039461" start="926" end="945" title="Wyandotte Constitution" label="Kansas Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q493840" start="1054" end="1062" title="Lawrence, Kansas" label="Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q856841" start="1064" end="1073" title="Manhattan, Kansas" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="1171" end="1189" title="Land-grant university" label="land-grant college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066087" start="1209" end="1236" title="Morrill Land-Grant Acts" label="1862 Morrill Land-Grant Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q31249" start="1255" end="1278" title="Kansas State University" label="Kansas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q474219" start="1382" end="1401" title="Amos Adams Lawrence" label="Amos Adams Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270271" start="1522" end="1540" title="Kansas Legislature" label="Kansas Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="1616" end="1636" title="University of Kansas" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109039" start="1992" end="2008" title="Preston B. Plumb" label="Preston B. Plumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510665" start="2122" end="2140" title="Leavenworth Normal School" label="Leavenworth Normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158978" start="2145" end="2161" title="Concordia Normal School" label="Concordia Normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913953" start="2322" end="2331" title="Pittsburg, Kansas" label="Pittsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057071" start="2336" end="2340" title="Hays, Kansas" label="Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q591426" start="2530" end="2556" title="Fort Hays State University" label="Fort Hays State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097334" start="2738" end="2764" title="Pittsburg State University" label="Pittsburg State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496384" start="3186" end="3201" title="Koch Industries" label="Koch Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743104" start="5210" end="5255" title="American Association of University Professors" label="American Association of University Professors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314" start="7464" end="7468" title="Autumn" label="fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269240" start="7474" end="7482" title="academic term" label="semester"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891060" start="7619" end="7652" title="Emporia State University School of Business" label="School of Business and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891055" start="7850" end="7870" title="Emporia State University Teachers College" label="The Teachers College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739633" start="8039" end="8065" title="Higher Learning Commission" label="Higher Learning Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q500481" start="8171" end="8182" title="Overland Park, Kansas" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q744144" start="8472" end="8525" title="Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business" label="Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q338986" start="9077" end="9097" title="Fred C. Koch" label="Fred Koch Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496384" start="9110" end="9125" title="Koch Industries" label="Koch Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q465584" start="9503" end="9531" title="American Library Association" label="American Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971874" start="9624" end="9679" title="National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education" label="National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="11792" end="11820" title="U.S. Department of Education" label="U.S. Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="12270" end="12293" title="non-profit organization" label="non-profit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992526" start="12416" end="12437" title="Emporia USD 253" label="local school district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365787" start="13123" end="13134" title="Jerry Moran" label="Jerry Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q906933" start="13327" end="13364" title="Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting" label="Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146771" start="13632" end="13654" title="114th United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="13772" end="13801" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="13806" end="13812" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="13863" end="13893" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="13939" end="13960" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q500481" start="14113" end="14126" title="Overland Park, Kansas" label="Overland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q878628" start="14313" end="14335" title="Governor of Kansas" label="Governor&amp;#x27;s office"/>
<link wikidata="Q123981108" start="15273" end="15301" title="Kansas Business Hall of Fame" label="Kansas Business Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374404" start="15414" end="15423" title="Emporia State Hornets" label="Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665420" start="15573" end="15585" title="John E. King" label="John E. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q16171156" start="15608" end="15629" title="President of Emporia Kansas State College" label="11th president of ESU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109039" start="16026" end="16042" title="Preston B. Plumb" label="Preston B. Plumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q19975307" start="16059" end="16072" title="Albert R. Taylor" label="Albert Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q20675558" start="16385" end="16399" title="John E. Visser" label="John E. Visser"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891055" start="16456" end="16476" title="Emporia State University Teachers College" label="the Teachers College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16497" end="16518" title="#National Teachers Hall of Fame" label="Teachers Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577838" start="16525" end="16544" title="William Allen White" label="William Allen White"/>
<link wikidata="Q15216623" start="16758" end="16797" title="Emporia State University Memorial Union" label="Emporia State University Memorial Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627808" start="16805" end="16828" title="student activity center" label="student activity center"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="16916" end="16927" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475554" start="17046" end="17052" title="Sodexo" label="Sodexo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20675682" start="18195" end="18211" title="Kay Schallenkamp" label="Kay Schallenkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="19247" end="19263" title="NCAA Division II" label="NCAA Division II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840590" start="19298" end="19347" title="Mid-America Intercollegiate Athletics Association" label="Mid-America Intercollegiate Athletics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952924" start="19430" end="19451" title="NCAA Division II independent schools" label="NCAA D-II Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q20807151" start="19484" end="19525" title="Central States Intercollegiate Conference" label="Central States Intercollegiate Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="19540" end="19589" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972682" start="19629" end="19661" title="Great Plains Athletic Conference (1972–1976)" label="Great Plains Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355873" start="19701" end="19735" title="Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference" label="Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061270" start="19775" end="19818" title="Central Intercollegiate Conference" label="Central Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364939" start="19861" end="19898" title="Kansas Collegiate Athletic Conference" label="Kansas Collegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q48890" start="20361" end="20371" title="college basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971966" start="20426" end="20438" title="Emporia State Lady Hornets basketball" label="Lady Hornets"/>
<link wikidata="Q20195168" start="20465" end="20482" title="Brandon Schneider" label="Brandon Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154448" start="20492" end="20550" title="NCAA Women&amp;#x27;s Division II Basketball Championship" label="2010 NCAA Division II Women&amp;#x27;s Basketball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438597" start="20566" end="20584" title="Fort Lewis College" label="Fort Lewis College"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863886" start="20647" end="20662" title="Emporia State Hornets basketball" label="basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q53870780" start="20677" end="20687" title="Craig Doty" label="Craig Doty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374405" start="20752" end="20768" title="Emporia State Hornets football" label="Hornets football"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="20813" end="20824" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523340" start="20825" end="20838" title="Garin Higgins" label="Garin Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q20807453" start="21019" end="21035" title="Emporia State Hornets baseball" label="Hornets baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971706" start="21163" end="21183" title="NCAA Division II Baseball Championship" label="College World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q24565258" start="21240" end="21252" title="Bob Fornelli" label="Bob Fornelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952227" start="21297" end="21314" title="NAIA World Series" label="NAIA World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953998" start="21395" end="21404" title="Brad Hill (baseball coach)" label="Brad Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030864" start="21648" end="21681" title="Women&amp;#x27;s College World Series" label="Women&amp;#x27;s College World Series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21736" end="21769" title="AIAW Champions#Fastpitch Softball" label="Division II national championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994444" start="21925" end="21952" title="William L. White Auditorium" label="William L. White Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014586" start="21985" end="22006" title="William Lindsay White" label="William Lindsay White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577838" start="22015" end="22034" title="William Allen White" label="William Allen White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980561" start="22252" end="22276" title="Francis G. Welch Stadium" label="Francis G. Welch Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478202" start="22408" end="22418" title="Fran Welch" label="Fran Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25007176" start="23105" end="23127" title="Trusler Sports Complex" label="Trusler Sports Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866641" start="23229" end="23246" title="Robert E. Glennen" label="Robert E. Glennen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16171156" start="23248" end="23262" title="President of Emporia Kansas State College" label="13th president"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374401" start="23862" end="23877" title="Emporia Gazette" label="Emporia Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971525" start="24200" end="24205" title="Corky the Hornet" label="Corky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24862" end="24872" title="Emporia State Hornets football#Tradition" label="Silent Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980561" start="24915" end="24939" title="Francis G. Welch Stadium" label="Francis G. Welch Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364990" start="25545" end="25566" title="Kansas Highway Patrol" label="Kansas Highway Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146687" start="25652" end="25670" title="College of Emporia" label="College of Emporia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424321" wikidata="Q45200" url="?curid=424321" title="Saint-Marcel-lès-Annonay">
<text>Saint-Marcel-lès-Annonay (; ) is a commune in the Ardèche department in southern France.

The village was founded in 972. The Deûme passes through Saint-Marcel and flows into the Cance with Annonay. Water from these rivers come from the granitic areas and is very pure. Their patent rights have been recognized for several centuries with the rise of paper mills. The paper mills of Annonay by Montgolfier-Canson formed only two groups in the 18th century from Vidalon and Faya-Largeau.

In 1805, Jean-Baptiste de Montgolfier was detached from Vidalon to create a factory in Saint-Marcel. Paper production was a large contributor to the rise of the commune and was the main industry for a long period of time. The employees of paper mills were called &quot;les usines&quot;, French for factory and formed the integral part of their culture and life.

The small commune formed only industrial and is residential today, the magnificent buildings mixed with modern buildings.

==See also==
*Communes of the Ardèche department

==References==
==External links==

* Official Web site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q45200" start="0" end="24" title="Saint-Marcel-lès-Annonay" label="Saint-Marcel-lès-Annonay"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="35" end="42" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148" start="50" end="57" title="Ardèche" label="Ardèche"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="58" end="68" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="81" end="87" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="126" end="131" title="Deûme" label="Deûme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="179" end="184" title="Cance" label="Cance"/>
<link wikidata="Q238366" start="190" end="197" title="Annonay" label="Annonay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="393" end="411" title="Montgolfier-Canson" label="Montgolfier-Canson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="460" end="467" title="Vidalon" label="Vidalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q516769" start="472" end="484" title="Faya-Largeau" label="Faya-Largeau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="496" end="524" title="Jean-Baptiste de Montgolfier" label="Jean-Baptiste de Montgolfier"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="774" end="780" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="785" end="792" title="factory" label="factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q271078" start="987" end="1021" title="Communes of the Ardèche department" label="Communes of the Ardèche department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424325" wikidata="Q334936" url="?curid=424325" title="Talencieux">
<text>Talencieux (; ) is a commune in the Ardèche department in southern France.

==See also==
*Communes of the Ardèche department

==References==
==External links==

* Official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334936" start="0" end="10" title="Talencieux" label="Talencieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="21" end="28" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148" start="36" end="43" title="Ardèche" label="Ardèche"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="44" end="54" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="67" end="73" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q271078" start="90" end="124" title="Communes of the Ardèche department" label="Communes of the Ardèche department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424335" wikidata="Q211014" url="?curid=424335" title="Vostok Station">
<text>Vostok Station (, , ) is a Russian research station in inland Princess Elizabeth Land, Antarctica. Founded by the Soviet Union in 1957, the station lies at the southern Pole of Cold, with the lowest reliably measured natural temperature on Earth of . Research includes ice core drilling and magnetometry. Vostok was named after &quot;Vostok&quot;, the lead ship of the First Russian Antarctic Expedition captained by Fabian von Bellingshausen. The Bellingshausen Station was named after this captain (the second ship, &quot;Mirny&quot;, captained by Mikhail Lazarev, became the namesake for Mirny Station).

==Description==
Vostok Research Station is around from the Geographic South Pole, at the middle of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet.

Vostok is located near the southern pole of inaccessibility and the south geomagnetic pole, making it one of the optimal places to observe changes in the Earth&#x27;s magnetosphere. Other studies include actinometry, geophysics, medicine and climatology.

The station is at above sea level and is one of the most isolated established research stations on the Antarctic continent. The station was supplied from Mirny Station on the Antarctic coast. The station normally hosts 30 scientists and engineers in the summer. In winter, their number drops to 15.

The only permanent research station located farther south is the Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station, operated by the United States at the geographic South Pole. The Chinese Kunlun Station is farther south than Vostok but is occupied only during summers.

Some of the challenges faced by those living on the station were described in Vladimir Sanin&#x27;s books such as &quot;Newbie in the Antarctic&quot; (1973), &quot;72 Degrees Below Zero&quot; (1975) and others.

== History ==

Vostok Station was established on 16 December 1957 (during the International Geophysical Year) by the 2nd Soviet Antarctic Expedition and was operated year-round for more than 72 years. The station was temporarily closed from January 1962 to January 1963, from February to November 1994, and during the winter of 2003.

In 1959, the Vostok station was the scene of a fight between two scientists over a game of chess. When one of them lost the game, he became so enraged that he attacked the other with an ice axe. According to some sources, it was a murder, though other sources say that the attack was not fatal. Afterwards, chess games were banned at Soviet, and later Russian, Antarctic stations.

In 1974, when British scientists in Antarctica performed an airborne ice-penetrating radar survey and detected strange radar readings at the site, the presence of a liquid, freshwater lake below the ice did not instantly spring to mind. In 1991, Jeff Ridley, a remote-sensing specialist with the Mullard Space Science Laboratory at University College London, directed a European satellite called ERS-1 to turn its high-frequency array toward the center of the Antarctic ice cap. It confirmed the 1974 discovery, but it was not until 1993 that the discovery was published in the &quot;Journal of Glaciology&quot;. Space-based radar revealed that the subglacial body of fresh water was one of the largest lakes in the world—and one of some 140 subglacial lakes in Antarctica. Russian and British scientists delineated the lake in 1996 by integrating a variety of data, including airborne ice-penetrating radar imaging observations and spaceborne radar altimetry. Lake Vostok lies some below the surface of the central Antarctic ice sheet and covers an area of .

In 2019, the Russian government began construction on a new, modern station building to replace the aging facilities. Construction of the new facility was completed in Saint Petersburg to be transported to Vostok Station by ship, but continuing delays have pushed back completion of the new station to no earlier than 2023. 

On January 28, 2024, Russian President Vladimir Putin took part in the ceremony of commissioning the station&#x27;s wintering complex via video link. The ceremony was also attended by President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko.

===Historic monuments===
Vostok Station Tractor: Heavy tractor AT-T 11, which participated in the first traverse to the south geomagnetic pole, along with a plaque to commemorate the opening of the station in 1957, has been designated a Historic Site or Monument (HSM 11) following a proposal by Russia to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

Professor Kudryashov&#x27;s Drilling Complex Building: The drilling complex building stands close to Vostok Station at an elevation of . It was built in the summer season of 1983–1984. Under the leadership of Professor Boris Kudryashov, ancient ice core samples were obtained. The building has been designated a Historic Site or Monument (HSM 88), following a proposal by Russia to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

==Climate==

Vostok Station has an ice cap climate (&quot;EF&quot;), with subzero temperatures year round, typical as with much of Antarctica. Annual precipitation is only (all occurring as snow), making it one of the driest places on Earth. On average, Vostok station receives 26 days of snow per year. It is also one of the sunniest places on Earth, despite having no sunshine at all between May and August; there are more hours of sunshine per year than even the sunniest places in South Africa, Australia and the Arabian Peninsula, where they approach those of the Sahara in Northern Africa. Vostok has the highest sunshine total for any calendar month on Earth, at an average of 708.8 hours of sunshine in December, or 22.9 hours daily. It also has the lowest sunshine for any calendar month, with an absolute maximum of 0 hours of sunshine per month during polar night.
Of official weather stations that are currently in operation, Vostok is the coldest on Earth in terms of mean annual temperature. However, it has been disputed that Vostok Station is the coldest-known location on Earth. The now inactive Plateau Station, located on the central Antarctic plateau, is believed to have recorded an average yearly temperature that was consistently lower than that of Vostok Station during the 37-month period that it was active in the late 1960s, and satellite readings have routinely detected colder temperatures in areas between Dome A and Dome F. The most recent record set was the October record low, set on 1 October 2021.

Vostok is one of the coldest places on Earth. The average temperature of the cold season (from April to September) is about , while the average temperature of the warm season (from October to March) is about .

The lowest reliably measured temperature on Earth of was in Vostok on 21 July 1983 at 05:45 Moscow Time, which was 07:45 for Vostok&#x27;s time zone, and 01:45 UTC (See &quot;List of weather records&quot;). This beat the station&#x27;s former record of on 24 August 1960. Lower temperatures occurred higher up towards the summit of the ice sheet as temperature decreases with height along the surface.

Though unconfirmed, it has been reported that Vostok reached a temperature of on 28 July 1997.

The warmest recorded temperature at Vostok is , which occurred on 5 January 1974.

The coldest month was August 1987 with a mean temperature of and the warmest month was December 1989 with a mean temperature of .

In addition to the extremely cold temperatures, other factors make Vostok one of the most difficult places on Earth for human habitation:
*An almost complete lack of moisture in the air.
*An average windspeed of , sometimes rising to as high as .
*The lack of oxygen in the air because of its high elevation at .
*A higher ionization of the air.
*A polar night that lasts approximately 120 days, from late April to mid-August, including 85 continuous days of civil polar night (i.e. too dark to read, during which the sun is more than 6 degrees below the horizon.)

Acclimatization to such conditions can take from a week to two months and is accompanied by headaches, eye twitches, ear pains, nose bleeds, perceived suffocation, sudden rises in blood pressure, loss of sleep, reduced appetite, vomiting, joint and muscle pain, arthritis, and weight loss of (sometimes as high as ).

== Ice core drilling ==
In the 1970s, the Soviet Union drilled a set of cores deep. These have been used to study the oxygen isotope composition of the ice, which showed that ice of the last glacial period was present below about 400 metres&#x27; depth. Then three more holes were drilled: in 1984, Hole 3G reached a final depth of 2,202 m; in 1990, Hole 4G reached a final depth of 2,546 m; and in 1993 Hole 5G reached a depth of 2,755 m; after a brief closure, drilling continued during the winter of 1995. In 1996 it was stopped at depth 3,623 m, by the request of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research that expressed worries about possible contamination of Lake Vostok. This ice core, drilled collaboratively with the French, produced a record of past environmental conditions stretching back 420,000 years and covering four previous glacial periods. For a long time it was the only core to cover several glacial cycles; but in 2004 it was exceeded by the EPICA core, which, whilst shallower, covers a longer time span. In 2003 drilling was permitted to continue, but was halted at the estimated distance to the lake of only 130 m.

The ancient lake was finally breached on 5 February 2012 when scientists stopped drilling at the depth of 3,770 metres and reached the surface of the subglacial lake.

The brittle zone is approximately between 250 and 750 m and corresponds to the Last Glacial Maximum, with the end of the Holocene climatic optimum at or near the 250-metre depth.

Although the Vostok core reached a depth of 3,623 m the usable climatic information does not extend down this far. The very bottom of the core is ice refrozen from the waters of Lake Vostok and contains no climate information. The usual data sources give proxy information down to a depth of 3,310 m or 414,000 years. Below this there is evidence of ice deformation. It has been suggested that the Vostok record may be extended down to 3,345 m or 436,000 years, to include more of the interesting MIS11 period, by inverting a section of the record. This then produces a record in agreement with the newer, longer EPICA record, although it provides no new information.

== See also ==

* List of Antarctic research stations
* List of Antarctic field camps
* List of airports in Antarctica
* Vostok traverse
* Concordia Station
==References==
==External links==

* Official website Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute 
* Vostok Station page
* Vostok average temperature data
* Vostok current met data
* COMNAP Antarctic Facilities
* COMNAP Antarctic Facilities Map</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211014" start="0" end="14" title="Vostok Station" label="Vostok Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q749622" start="35" end="51" title="Research stations in Antarctica" label="research station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753326" start="62" end="85" title="Princess Elizabeth Land" label="Princess Elizabeth Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="87" end="97" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="114" end="126" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320111" start="169" end="181" title="Pole of Cold" label="Pole of Cold"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="192" end="245" title="List of weather records#Lowest temperatures recorded" label="lowest reliably measured natural temperature on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q258914" start="269" end="277" title="ice core" label="ice core"/>
<link wikidata="Q333921" start="291" end="303" title="Magnetometer" label="magnetometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959497" start="334" end="340" title="Vostok (sloop-of-war)" label="Vostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q76754" start="417" end="442" title="Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen" label="Fabian von Bellingshausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q815995" start="448" end="470" title="Bellingshausen Station" label="Bellingshausen Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295865" start="524" end="529" title="Mirny (sloop-of-war)" label="Mirny"/>
<link wikidata="Q186203" start="550" end="565" title="Mikhail Lazarev" label="Mikhail Lazarev"/>
<link wikidata="Q646492" start="591" end="604" title="Mirny Station" label="Mirny Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="667" end="688" title="Geographic South Pole" label="Geographic South Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q571430" start="716" end="735" title="Antarctic Ice Sheet" label="Antarctic Ice Sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q752003" start="774" end="797" title="pole of inaccessibility" label="pole of inaccessibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q348567" start="806" end="828" title="south geomagnetic pole" label="south geomagnetic pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915" start="905" end="918" title="magnetosphere" label="magnetosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q403898" start="942" end="953" title="Actinometer" label="actinometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="955" end="965" title="geophysics" label="geophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q52139" start="980" end="991" title="climatology" label="climatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="1018" end="1027" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q646492" start="1148" end="1161" title="Mirny Station" label="Mirny Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q243307" start="1359" end="1392" title="Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station" label="Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="1442" end="1452" title="South Pole" label="South Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235369" start="1466" end="1480" title="Kunlun Station" label="Kunlun Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407597" start="1626" end="1640" title="Vladimir Sanin" label="Vladimir Sanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q724505" start="1838" end="1868" title="International Geophysical Year" label="International Geophysical Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q233431" start="1877" end="1908" title="2nd Soviet Antarctic Expedition" label="2nd Soviet Antarctic Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q816762" start="2281" end="2288" title="ice axe" label="ice axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="2562" end="2567" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934158" start="2773" end="2805" title="Mullard Space Science Laboratory" label="Mullard Space Science Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="2809" end="2834" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q63347" start="2873" end="2878" title="ERS-1" label="ERS-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140477" start="3219" end="3234" title="subglacial lake" label="subglacial lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q216197" start="3427" end="3436" title="altimetry" label="altimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q152044" start="3438" end="3449" title="Lake Vostok" label="Lake Vostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="3706" end="3722" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="3903" end="3917" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="4147" end="4154" title="tractor" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q298693" start="4155" end="4159" title="AT-T" label="AT-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q15401496" start="4196" end="4204" title="Traverse (surveying)" label="traverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q348567" start="4212" end="4234" title="south geomagnetic pole" label="south geomagnetic pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q721747" start="4249" end="4255" title="commemorative plaque" label="plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975454" start="4329" end="4354" title="Historic Sites and Monuments in Antarctica" label="Historic Site or Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q182814" start="4402" end="4439" title="Antarctic Treaty System" label="Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q258914" start="4687" end="4695" title="ice core" label="ice core"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985406" start="4903" end="4918" title="ice cap climate" label="ice cap climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="5103" end="5108" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="5353" end="5365" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="5367" end="5376" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="5385" end="5402" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="5437" end="5443" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="5447" end="5462" title="Northern Africa" label="Northern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382060" start="5981" end="5996" title="Plateau Station" label="Plateau Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320111" start="6423" end="6446" title="Pole of Cold" label="coldest places on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q681050" start="6617" end="6653" title="Extremes on Earth" label="lowest reliably measured temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q842320" start="6705" end="6716" title="Moscow Time" label="Moscow Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="6773" end="6776" title="Coordinated Universal Time" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q492018" start="6788" end="6811" title="List of weather records" label="List of weather records"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="7492" end="7500" title="Humidity" label="moisture"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="7586" end="7592" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q624497" start="7619" end="7633" title="altitude sickness" label="high elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190382" start="7649" end="7659" title="ionization" label="ionization"/>
<link wikidata="Q190991" start="7675" end="7686" title="polar night" label="polar night"/>
<link wikidata="Q419763" start="7892" end="7907" title="Acclimatization" label="Acclimatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="7984" end="7992" title="headache" label="headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="8072" end="8086" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q28578" start="8111" end="8119" title="appetite" label="appetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="8121" end="8129" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="8252" end="8264" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510361" start="8782" end="8824" title="Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research" label="Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q152044" start="8880" end="8891" title="Lake Vostok" label="Lake Vostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q258914" start="8898" end="8906" title="ice core" label="ice core"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275655" start="9179" end="9184" title="EPICA" label="EPICA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9528" end="9540" title="Ice core brittle zone" label="brittle zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979625" start="9603" end="9623" title="Last Glacial Maximum" label="Last Glacial Maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511922" start="9645" end="9670" title="Holocene climatic optimum" label="Holocene climatic optimum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10391" end="10426" title="Research stations in Antarctica#List of research stations" label="List of Antarctic research stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771007" start="10429" end="10458" title="Antarctic field camps" label="List of Antarctic field camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247115" start="10461" end="10491" title="List of airports in Antarctica" label="List of airports in Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594254" start="10494" end="10509" title="Vostok traverse" label="Vostok traverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q403127" start="10512" end="10529" title="Concordia Station" label="Concordia Station"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424340" wikidata="Q3805658" url="?curid=424340" title="Jack Spicer">
<text>Jack Spicer (January 30, 1925 – August 17, 1965) was an American poet often identified with the San Francisco Renaissance. In 2009, &quot;My Vocabulary Did This to Me: The Collected Poetry of Jack Spicer&quot; won the American Book Award for poetry. He spent most of his writing life in San Francisco.

==Early life==
Jack was born John Lester Spicer on January 30, 1925 in Los Angeles, the elder child of parents Dorothy Clause and John Lovely Spicer.

He graduated from Fairfax High School in 1942, and attended the University of Redlands from 1943 to 1945. While attending the University of Redlands, he befriended Warren Christopher. After graduation he lived in Los Angeles briefly, and worked as a movie extra and a private investigator.

== Berkeley ==
Spicer ended up in Berkeley, and lived in a boarding house alongside Philip K. Dick. He spent the years 1945 to 1950; and from 1952 to 1955 at the University of California, Berkeley, where he began writing, doing work as a research linguist, and publishing some poetry (though he disdained publishing). In 1950, he refused to sign a &quot;loyalty oath&quot; during a time of McCarthyism.

During this time he searched out fellow poets, but it was through his alliances with Robert Duncan and Robin Blaser that Spicer forged a new kind of poetry, and together they referred to their common work as the Berkeley Renaissance. The three, who were all gay, also educated younger poets in their circle about their &quot;queer genealogy&quot;: Rimbaud, Lorca, and other gay writers. Spicer&#x27;s poetry of this period is collected in &quot;One Night Stand and Other Poems&quot; (1980). His &quot;Imaginary Elegies&quot;, later collected in Donald Allen&#x27;s &quot;The New American Poetry 1945-1960&quot; anthology, were written around this time.

== San Francisco ==
In 1954, he co-founded the Six Gallery in San Francisco, which soon became famous as the scene of the October 1955 Six Gallery reading that launched the West Coast Beat movement. In 1955, Spicer moved to New York City and then to Boston, where he worked for a time in the Rare Book Room of Boston Public Library. Blaser was also in Boston at this time, and the pair made contact with a number of local poets, including John Wieners, Stephen Jonas, and Joe Dunn.

Spicer returned to San Francisco in 1956 and started working on &quot;After Lorca&quot;. This book represented a major change in direction for two reasons. Firstly, he came to the conclusion that stand-alone poems (which Spicer referred to as his &quot;one-night stands&quot;) were unsatisfactory and that henceforth he would compose serial poems. In fact, he wrote to Blaser that &#x27;all my stuff from the past (except the Elegies and Troilus) looks foul to me.&#x27; Secondly, in writing &quot;After Lorca&quot;, he began to practice what he called &quot;poetry as dictation&quot;. His interest in the work of Federico García Lorca, especially as it involved the &quot;cante jondo&quot; ideal, also brought him near the poetics of the deep image group. The Troilus referred to was Spicer&#x27;s then unpublished play of that name. The play finally appeared in print in 2004, edited by Aaron Kunin, in issue 3 of &quot;No – A Journal of the Arts&quot;.

In 1957, Spicer ran a workshop called &quot;Poetry as Magic&quot; at San Francisco State College, which was attended by Duncan, Helen Adam, James Broughton, Joe Dunn, Jack Gilbert, and George Stanley. He also participated in, and sometimes hosted, Blabbermouth Night at a literary bar called &quot;The Place&quot;. This was a kind of contest of improvised poetry and encouraged Spicer&#x27;s view of poetry as being dictated to the poet.

Spicer refused to have his work copyrighted, and after 1960, Spicer refused to publish his work outside of California. He considered City Lights Bookstore a tourist destination, and boycotted selling his work there. He was unable to hold a job and fell into poverty, however, so by 1964 he started selling books at City Lights.

==Death and legacy==
After many years of alcohol abuse, Spicer fell into a hepatic coma, a brain disorder precipitated by liver failure, in the elevator of his apartment building, and later died aged 40 in the poverty ward of San Francisco General Hospital on August 17, 1965.

Spicer&#x27;s view of the role of language in the process of writing poetry was probably the result of his knowledge of modern pre-Chomskyan linguistics and his experience as a research-linguist at Berkeley. In the legendary Vancouver lectures he elucidated his ideas on &quot;transmissions&quot; (dictations) from the Outside, using the comparison of the poet as crystal-set or radio receiving transmissions from outer space, or Martian transmissions. The radio oracle derived from Cocteau&#x27;s film &quot;Orphée,&quot; often cited by Spicer in his lectures. Although seemingly far-fetched, his view of language as &quot;furniture&quot;, through which the transmissions negotiate their way, is grounded in the structuralist linguistics of Zellig Harris and Charles Hockett. (Poems of his final book, &quot;Language,&quot; refer to morphemes and graphemes). Spicer is acknowledged as a precursor for the Language poets.

Since the publication of &quot;The Collected Books of Jack Spicer&quot; (1975, 1st ed.), his reputation has grown. &quot;The Collected Books of Jack Spicer&quot; gathered Spicer&#x27;s works beginning from 1957, and specifically did not include his earlier poetry per Spicer&#x27;s requests. A selection of his earlier work was published in &quot;One Night Stand and Other Poems&quot;, edited by Donald Allen. &quot;My Vocabulary Did This to Me: The Collected Poetry of Jack Spicer&quot; (2008) edited by Peter Gizzi and Kevin Killian, won the American Book Award in 2009.

== Bibliography ==
A select list of publications authored by Spicer, in order by ascending date published.
*
*
*Spicer, Jack (1994). &quot;The Tower of Babel: Jack Spicer&#x27;s Detective Novel&quot; (1994), with afterword by Lew Ellingham &amp; Kevin Killian, Hoboken, NJ: Talisman House.
*Spicer, Jack (2008). &quot;My Vocabulary Did This to Me: The Collected Poetry of Jack Spicer&quot;, edited Peter Gizzi &amp; Kevin Killian, Wesleyan UP.
*Spicer, Jack (2011). &quot;Jack Spicer’s Beowulf, Part 1&quot;, edited by David Hadbawnik &amp; Sean Reynolds, introduction by David Hadbawnik, Lost and Found: The CUNY Poetics Documents Initiative, New York.
*Spicer, Jack (2011). &quot;Jack Spicer’s Beowulf, Part II&quot;, edited by David Hadbawnik &amp; Sean Reynolds, afterword by Sean Reynolds, Lost and Found: The CUNY Poetics Documents Initiative, New York.
*Spicer, Jack (2021). &quot;Be Brave to Things: The Uncollected Poetry and Plays of Jack Spicer&quot;, ed. Daniel Katz, Wesleyan UP.

==References==
==Further reading==
*Davidson, Michael (1977). &quot;Incarnations of Jack Spicer: Heads of the Town up to the Aether&quot;. &quot;Boundary 2,&quot; &quot;6&quot;(1), 103–134. 
*
*
*
*Herndon, James. (1973) &quot;Everything as Expected,&quot; San Francisco, California:
*Katz, Daniel. The Poetry of Jack Spicer. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2013, 
* This is a collection of essays, poetry, and documents celebrating Spicer.
*Tallman, Warren. (1992) &quot;In the Midst&quot;. Vancouver, Canada: Talonbooks
*Vincent, John Emil, eds. (2011) &quot;After Spicer: Critical Essays&quot;. Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press, 

==External links==

*Jack Spicer at the EPC
*Jack Spicer at PennSound
*Guide to the Jack Spicer Papers at The Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley
*Jack Spicer papers, 1938–1973 at Stuart A. Rose Manuscript, Archives, and Rare Book Library, Emory University
*Records of Jack Spicer at Simon Fraser University Library Special Collections and Rare Books
*Vocabulary Lesson by Katherine Montgomery, an essay on Jack Spicer. Winner of 2006 Hopwood Award for creative nonfiction
*Profile of Jack Spicer on Poets.org includes links to further readings, related prose including information on Other San Francisco Renaissance Poets, and some Spicer poems including &quot;A Book Of Music&quot;, &quot;Improvisations On A Sentence By Poe&quot;, &quot;Orfeo&quot;, &quot;Psychoanalysis: An Elegy&quot;,</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3805658" start="0" end="11" title="Jack Spicer" label="Jack Spicer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="65" end="69" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431758" start="96" end="121" title="San Francisco Renaissance" label="San Francisco Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q463606" start="218" end="237" title="American Book Award" label="American Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565243" start="472" end="491" title="Fairfax High School (Los Angeles)" label="Fairfax High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270831" start="518" end="540" title="University of Redlands" label="University of Redlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q294358" start="618" end="636" title="Warren Christopher" label="Warren Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q658371" start="704" end="715" title="Extra (acting)" label="movie extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058617" start="722" end="742" title="private investigator" label="private investigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558858" start="804" end="818" title="boarding house" label="boarding house"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="829" end="843" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="907" end="941" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="1135" end="1146" title="McCarthyism" label="McCarthyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q964391" start="1234" end="1247" title="Robert Duncan (poet)" label="Robert Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115003" start="1252" end="1264" title="Robin Blaser" label="Robin Blaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431758" start="1361" end="1381" title="Berkeley Renaissance" label="Berkeley Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="1407" end="1410" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q493" start="1497" end="1504" title="Arthur Rimbaud" label="Rimbaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q41408" start="1506" end="1511" title="Federico García Lorca" label="Lorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293963" start="1694" end="1706" title="Donald Allen" label="Donald Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753501" start="1720" end="1753" title="The New American Poetry 1945-1960" label="The New American Poetry 1945-1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q465480" start="1938" end="1957" title="Six Gallery reading" label="Six Gallery reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q213457" start="1987" end="1991" title="Beat generation" label="Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q894583" start="2113" end="2134" title="Boston Public Library" label="Boston Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702153" start="2242" end="2254" title="John Wieners" label="John Wieners"/>
<link wikidata="Q41408" start="2900" end="2921" title="Federico García Lorca" label="Federico García Lorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338544" start="2959" end="2970" title="cante jondo" label="cante jondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021141" start="3025" end="3035" title="deep image" label="deep image"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256981" start="3312" end="3339" title="San Francisco State College" label="San Francisco State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q250080" start="3371" end="3381" title="Helen Adam" label="Helen Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402538" start="3383" end="3398" title="James Broughton" label="James Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793945" start="3410" end="3422" title="Jack Gilbert" label="Jack Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544780" start="3428" end="3442" title="George Stanley (poet)" label="George Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="3714" end="3723" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394278" start="3815" end="3836" title="City Lights Bookstore" label="City Lights Bookstore"/>
<link wikidata="Q642548" start="4086" end="4098" title="Hepatic encephalopathy" label="hepatic coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414040" start="4237" end="4267" title="San Francisco General Hospital" label="San Francisco General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="4416" end="4429" title="Noam Chomsky" label="pre-Chomskyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189047" start="5031" end="5044" title="Zellig Harris" label="Zellig Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621452" start="5049" end="5064" title="Charles Hockett" label="Charles Hockett"/>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="5123" end="5131" title="morpheme" label="morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545446" start="5137" end="5145" title="grapheme" label="grapheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992008" start="5195" end="5209" title="Language poets" label="Language poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726656" start="5243" end="5277" title="The Collected Books of Jack Spicer" label="The Collected Books of Jack Spicer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293963" start="5608" end="5620" title="Donald Allen" label="Donald Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396694" start="5733" end="5746" title="Kevin Killian" label="Kevin Killian"/>
<link wikidata="Q463606" start="5756" end="5775" title="American Book Award" label="American Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099532" start="6978" end="6992" title="James Herndon (writer)" label="Herndon, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549790" start="7229" end="7244" title="Warren Tallman" label="Tallman, Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055468" start="7298" end="7308" title="Talonbooks" label="Talonbooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984073" start="7410" end="7435" title="Wesleyan University Press" label="Wesleyan University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854158" start="7545" end="7565" title="The Bancroft Library" label="The Bancroft Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="7567" end="7601" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q58241164" start="7636" end="7694" title="Emory University Libraries" label="Stuart A. Rose Manuscript, Archives, and Rare Book Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q621043" start="7696" end="7712" title="Emory University" label="Emory University"/>
<link wikidata="Q201603" start="7740" end="7763" title="Simon Fraser University" label="Simon Fraser University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="424342" wikidata="Q117876" url="?curid=424342" title="Pepperdine University">
<text>Pepperdine University () is a private Christian research university affiliated with the Churches of Christ with its main campus in Los Angeles County, California, United States. Pepperdine&#x27;s main campus consists of 830 acres (340 ha) overlooking the Pacific Ocean and the Pacific Coast Highway near Malibu, California. Founded by entrepreneur George Pepperdine in South Los Angeles in 1937, the school expanded to Malibu in 1972. Courses are now taught at a main Malibu campus and graduate campuses in the USA, Latin America, and Europe.

The university is composed of an undergraduate liberal arts school (Seaver College) and four graduate schools: the Caruso School of Law, the Graziadio Business School, the Graduate School of Education and Psychology, and the School of Public Policy.

In 2025, Pepperdine University earned the Research 2 (R2): High Research Activity designation from the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education, signifying a significant expansion in the university&#x27;s research output and funding. The designation recognizes institutions that demonstrate high levels of research activity, including an annual research and development expenditure exceeding $5 million and the awarding of at least 20 research doctorates per year.

==History==
===Early years===
In February 1937, against the backdrop of the Great Depression, George Pepperdine founded a liberal arts college in the city of Los Angeles to be affiliated with the Churches of Christ.

Pepperdine had built his fortune largely through the Western Auto Supply Company, which he founded in 1909 with a $5 investment. Pepperdine had a twofold objective for the college: &quot;First, we want to provide first-class, fully accredited academic training in the liberal arts ... Secondly, we are especially dedicated to a greater goal—that of building in the student a Christ-like life, a love for the church, and a passion for the souls of mankind.&quot;

On September 21, 1937, 167 new students from 22 different states and two other countries entered classes on a newly built campus on at West 79th Street and South Vermont Avenue in the Vermont Knolls neighborhood of South Los Angeles, later referred to as the Vermont Avenue campus. The campus was designed in the Streamline Moderne style by John M. Cooper, an art deco architect. By April 5, 1938, George Pepperdine College was fully accredited by the Northwest Association in large part due to the leadership of president Batsell Baxter and dean Hugh M. Tiner.

The student newspaper, the &quot;GraPhiC&quot;, published its first issue in October 1937.

The college expanded significantly in the years following its founding, reaching an enrollment of 1,839 for the 1948–1949 year. The college&#x27;s first graduate program, a master of arts in religion, admitted its first students in 1944, and the school&#x27;s first international program, a year-long program in Heidelberg, Germany, was launched in 1963.

===Racial unrest, murder, and move to Malibu===
By 1957, when M. Norvel Young was named president, the young college faced serious problems, not least of which was the high cost of expansion in South Los Angeles. The area around the Vermont Avenue campus was developing issues including rising crime and urban decay, and racial tensions had arisen that led to the 1965 Watts Riots.

Before the worst of the tensions began, President Young had begun to look for suburban sites to expand the university&#x27;s footprint. In 1966, a committee was formed to look at potential locations, including sites in Westlake Village and Calabasas. Pepperdine favored the Westlake Village location until the Adamson-Rindge family, who owned hundreds of acres near Malibu, offered to donate and to sell 58.7 adjacent acres. Despite concerns over building costs on the mountainous site, the school decided to move forward based on its prime location and potential for raising donations, accepting the land in Malibu in 1968.

In March 1969, Larry Kimmons, a Black teenager from the South LA neighborhood, was killed by Pepperdine campus security officer Charlie Lane following a verbal argument. Protests ensued, with Black students opposing the college&#x27;s administration. Some have attributed the killing to racism.

In December 1970, student activists threatened to burn down the campus, even setting small fires in three buildings. Students later occupied the academic life building, leading to a standoff with the Los Angeles Police Department that was defused by negotiations with Vice President William S. Banowsky.

Construction in Malibu began on April 13, 1971, and the new campus opened in September 1972. The campus and many of its buildings were planned by Los Angeles–based architect William Pereira, who had also designed the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, the University of California, Irvine, and much of the University of Southern California. The construction of the Malibu campus was made possible largely by gifts from Blanche Seaver, the wife of Frank R. Seaver and heir of his oil-drill manufacturing fortune, who donated to Pepperdine more than $160 million over her lifetime. The undergraduate college was officially named after Seaver in 1975.

The university retained and continued to expand its original Vermont Avenue Campus, building a new academic building there in 1970, and redesigning the curriculum to serve its more urban setting. Much of the undergraduate liberal arts program, however, moved to the new Malibu campus. In the decade to come, the Vermont Avenue Campus transitioned away from its residential model, and in 1981 it was sold to Crenshaw Christian Center, whose minister, Frederick K. C. Price, then oversaw construction of the &quot;Faith Dome,&quot; then the largest-domed church in the United States.

===Growth of the university===

In 1969, Pepperdine bought the Orange University College of Law in Santa Ana, California, which became the School of Law and moved to the Malibu campus in 1978. What had been a business division offering graduate and undergraduate degrees became a graduate business school in 1968, which in 1971 was named the School of Business and Management. Also in 1971, the School of Education was formed, which in 1981 became the Graduate School of Education and Psychology. Pepperdine administrators used these expansions as justification to change the institution&#x27;s name to Pepperdine University in 1971.

Pepperdine continued to expand, adding permanent international programs in London and in Florence beginning in 1984 and 1985, respectively. These were followed by similar programs in Buenos Aires, Lausanne, and Shanghai. The School of Business and Management was renamed the Graziadio Business School to honor a gift of $15 million from real estate developer George L. Graziadio Jr., and in 2019 the School of Law was renamed the Caruso School of Law after a gift of $50 million from alumnus Rick J. Caruso. The Malibu campus itself was expanded by the construction of the Drescher Graduate Campus, which was completed in 2003 under the supervision of president Andrew K. Benton.

====Brushfires====

Pepperdine&#x27;s Malibu Campus has often been threatened by brushfires, including in 1985, 1993, 1996, 2007, 2007, 2018, and 2024. The university prepares for the fires by clearing brush 200 feet from all buildings and has developed plans with Los Angeles County Fire Department to shelter faculty, staff, and students in place.

==Campus==


===Malibu campus===
Pepperdine&#x27;s Malibu campus is situated on of the Santa Monica Mountains overlooking the Pacific Ocean and the Pacific Coast Highway. It is its own census-designated place, located in an unincorporated area in Los Angeles County. It is widely considered one of the most beautiful college campuses in the world in terms of scenery and architecture, and has been described as &quot;a place that looks more like a beach resort than a private university.&quot; The campus offers views of the Santa Monica Bay, Catalina Island, the Palos Verdes Peninsula, and much of the westside of Los Angeles. Most buildings are designed in the Mediterranean Revival Style with white stucco walls, red tile roofs, and large tinted windows. The first round of construction on the site was completed in 1973.

The most distinctive feature of the Malibu campus, apart from its location, is the Phillips Theme Tower, a 125-foot obelisk with an embedded cross that stands on the front lawn. The tower was designed by William Pereira in 1972, and construction was completed in 1973. The tower was dedicated in 1974 as a symbol of Pepperdine&#x27;s dedication to its Christian mission. Following disputes with Malibu residents over the lighting of the cross, the tower has not been illuminated since 1980.

Alumni Park is located on the lowest part of the Malibu campus, adjacent to the Pacific Coast Highway. It is a 30-acre expanse of lawns, trails, hills, ponds and coral trees overlooking the Pacific Ocean. Landscape architects Eric Armstrong and S. Lee Scharfman were responsible for the campus green space planning and design. The park was dedicated in 1979, and it now serves as the location for the university&#x27;s commencement exercises and other campus activities that need a large open space. Overlooking Alumni Park is Stauffer Chapel, with its 3,000 square feet of stained-glass windows designed by Robert and Bette Donovan and constructed in 1973.

The main academic plaza for the undergraduate programs of Seaver College lies on a knoll above Alumni Park and includes Tyler Campus Center, Payson Library, and the Weisman Museum of Art. Undergraduate housing and athletic facilities sit to the northwest of the academic complex. The Caruso School of Law is situated on a hill above these areas. Banowsky Boulevard separates Alumni Park from the main academic complex and is named in honor of William S. Banowsky, the fourth president of Pepperdine. Spur roads to the east lead to faculty housing.

The Drescher Graduate Campus is contiguous with and northwest of the central campus. Construction was completed in 2003, and it is now home to the School of Public Policy, the Villa Graziadio Executive Center, and the full-time programs of the Graziadio Business School and the Graduate School of Education and Psychology, as well as housing for students and faculty.

===Graduate campuses===
The Graziadio Business School and the Graduate School of Education and Psychology are headquartered in West Los Angeles at the Howard Hughes Center next to Interstate 405. These two schools also offer programs at campuses in Malibu, Irvine, and Calabasas.

===International campuses===
Pepperdine owns and operates permanent satellite campuses in five countries, with each campus offering semester- and year-long programs for students of Seaver College. The first such program was opened in 1963 in Heidelberg. Programs were then introduced in the South Kensington district of London in 1984 and in Florence in 1985. In 2023, the program in Lausanne was moved to the Chateau d&#x27;Hauteville in Blonay – Saint-Légier, Switzerland.

==Academics==
===Frank R. Seaver College of Letters, Arts, and Sciences===

Seaver College is named for Frank R. Seaver and his wife Blanche, the principal benefactors of Pepperdine&#x27;s Malibu campus. The college offers undergraduates a liberal arts education; each candidate for a bachelor&#x27;s degree must complete a broad program of general education courses. Seaver&#x27;s general education requirements have received an A rating from ACTA&#x27;s annual &quot;What Will They Learn&quot; report for several years running. Seaver students attend classes at the Malibu campus, and most students study abroad either at one of the University&#x27;s permanent international campuses in Buenos Aires, Florence, Heidelberg, Lausanne, and London or at one of several summer programs.

Seaver College offers 46 majors and 47 minors across eight academic divisions: business administration, communication, fine arts, humanities and teacher education, international studies and languages, natural science, religion and philosophy, and social science.

In addition to bachelor&#x27;s degrees, the college offers the following graduate degrees: master of arts (MA) in American studies, master of arts (MA) in religion, master of science (MS) in ministry, master of divinity (MDiv), and master of fine arts (MFA) in screen and television writing. Seaver students can also earn both single-subject and multiple-subject teaching credentials.

The Religion Division offers undergraduate and graduate education in ministry, works with Pepperdine&#x27;s Center for Faith and Learning and Office of Church Relations, and publishes &quot;Leaven: A Journal of Christian Ministry&quot;.

===Graziadio Business School===

Pepperdine University&#x27;s Graziadio Business School enrolls approximately 2,000 students in its full-time and part-time degree programs. The school was founded in 1969, and has since graduated more than 47,000 alumni. In 2016, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranked the online MBA program tied for 15th best in the country, and the part-time MBA program was ranked at 29th nationally. In 2016, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranked Pepperdine overall 65th out of 437 business programs in the United States.

===Caruso School of Law===


The Caruso School of Law is located on the Malibu campus adjacent to Seaver College, and enrolls about 500 students. It is accredited by the American Bar Association, is a member of the Association of American Law Schools, and hosts a chapter of the Order of the Coif. The school&#x27;s Straus Institute of Dispute Resolution is consistently ranked as a leading dispute resolution program, offering master&#x27;s and certificate programs. Other degree programs include the Juris Doctor/Master of Divinity with Seaver College, the JD/MBA, JD/MPP, and JD/MDR. The school offers both a summer session and a fall semester at the university&#x27;s campus in London.

The school is ranked 52nd among the nation&#x27;s 199 American Bar Association–approved law schools by the 2023 &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; rankings. It is known for its entertainment law program.

===Graduate School of Education and Psychology===
The Graduate School of Education and Psychology (GSEP) offers both masters and doctorate programs, including EdD, PsyD, and PhD degrees. Student enrollment is about 1,600. Its programs are accredited by the APA.

===School of Public Policy===

The School of Public Policy enrolls approximately 70 graduate students in its two-year master&#x27;s degree in public policy (MPP).

Joint degree programs include the following:
* MPP/Juris Doctor with the law school.
* MPP/Masters of Dispute Resolution with the law school&#x27;s highly-rated Straus Institute for Dispute Resolution.
* MPP/MBA degree with the Graziadio Business School.

==Student body==

Pepperdine&#x27;s Fall 2023 enrollment was 9,545 students, of whom 3,629 were at the undergraduate and 5,916 at the graduate and professional levels.
In the 2017 academic year, the freshman retention rate was 91%.
Fall freshman profile

===Admissions===
Some 13,721 students applied for admission to the undergraduate class of 2023, and 4,241 were admitted (30%); Among admitted freshmen, the interquartile ranges for SAT composite scores, ACT composite scores, and unweighted GPAs were 1,300–1,450, 28-32, and 3.64–3.97, respectively.

Admission to Pepperdine is rated as &quot;more selective&quot; by &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; and by the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education.

===Yellow Ribbon Program for Veterans===
Pepperdine University is part of the Yellow Ribbon Program for Veterans. Like several other colleges and universities that participate in the program, Pepperdine University offers support for an unlimited number of veteran students as well as an unlimited monetary contribution toward each veteran&#x27;s tuition assistance. As of 2016, 72% of Pepperdine students who are veterans are in the Yellow Ribbon Program which enables Veterans to attend tuition-free.

==Rankings and reputation==
&quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranked Pepperdine tied for the 55th best national university, tied for 26th in undergraduate teaching, and tied for 27th best college for veterans in its rankings for 2022. Pepperdine was ranked number 1 in the Institute of International Education&#x27;s 2015 Open Doors Report, with 86.5 percent of all undergraduate students studying abroad during the 2013–2014 academic year.

The law school placed 45th among the 199 American Bar Association accredited law schools by the 2023 &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; rankings. It is known for its entertainment law and dispute resolution program which is currently ranked No. 2 in the nation. In 2018, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranked Pepperdine&#x27;s business school 65th out of 437 business programs in the United States.

In 2019, the American Council of Trustees and Alumni included Pepperdine in its &quot;What Will They Learn?&quot; study, which is an annual evaluation system of colleges and universities. The report assigns a letter grade to 1,120 universities based on how many of the following seven core subjects are required: composition, literature, foreign language, American history, economics, mathematics and science. Pepperdine was one of 23 schools to receive an &quot;A&quot; grade, which is assigned to schools that include at least six of the seven designated subjects in their core curriculum.

In 2025, Pepperdine University earned the Research 2 (R2): High Research Activity designation from the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education. This classification is awarded to institutions with high levels of research activity, requiring annual research and development expenditures exceeding $5 million and the awarding of at least 20 research doctorates per year.

==Athletics==
Pepperdine University competes in NCAA Division I intercollegiate athletics. Most teams play in the West Coast Conference, but men&#x27;s volleyball plays in the Mountain Pacific Sports Federation and men&#x27;s water polo plays in the Golden Coast Conference. Pepperdine&#x27;s teams are known as the Waves.

Pepperdine University is often ranked by the NACDA Director&#x27;s Cup as having one of the most successful athletic programs for non-football Division I schools, ranking first on three occasions (most recently in 2011–12) and finishing in the top three eight times in the last fifteen years. Pepperdine University sponsors seventeen NCAA Division I intercollegiate athletics teams: baseball, basketball, cross country, golf, tennis, track, volleyball, and water polo teams for men; and basketball, cross country, golf, soccer, swimming and diving, tennis, track, indoor volleyball, and beach volleyball for women. There are also several intercollegiate sports clubs such as women&#x27;s lacrosse, surfing, and men&#x27;s rugby.

NCAA Division I individual titles:
*Robbie Weiss (1988 tennis – singles)
*Carlos Di Laura &amp; Kelly Jones (1985 tennis – doubles)
*Jerome Jones &amp; Kelly Jones (1984 tennis – doubles)

The water polo competitions for the 1984 Summer Olympics were held at Raleigh Runnels Memorial Pool on campus.

==Notable people==

There are currently over 100,000 living alumni worldwide. Notable alumni of Pepperdine University include prominent scientists, musicians, businessmen and businesswomen, engineers, architects, athletes, actors, politicians, and those who have gained both national and international success. The Pepperdine alumni network consists of over 30 alumni groups on four continents.

==Demographics==

The United States Census Bureau has designated the Pepperdine University campus as a separate census-designated place (CDP) for statistical purposes. It first appeared as a CDP in the 2020 Census with a population of 2,747.

The CDP is located within Santa Monica-Malibu Unified School District.

===2020 census===
==See also==
* List of universities and colleges affiliated with the Churches of Christ

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
=== Citations ===
=== General and cited references ===

==External links==
* Pepperdine University Athletics website
* Image of Black students protesting the college&#x27;s decision to not renew the contract of African American public relations writer, Ron Ellerbe, 1970s. &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; Photographic Archive (Collection 1429). UCLA Library Special Collections, Charles E. Young Research Library, University of California, Los Angeles.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q117876" start="0" end="21" title="Pepperdine University" label="Pepperdine University"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="30" end="37" title="private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="38" end="47" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="48" end="67" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272775" start="88" end="106" title="Churches of Christ" label="Churches of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="131" end="161" title="Los Angeles County, California" label="Los Angeles County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q550419" start="277" end="298" title="Pacific Coast Highway (US)" label="Pacific Coast Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q387047" start="304" end="322" title="Malibu, California" label="Malibu, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543318" start="348" end="365" title="George Pepperdine" label="George Pepperdine"/>
<link wikidata="Q587064" start="369" end="386" title="South Los Angeles" label="South Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166399" start="659" end="679" title="Pepperdine University School of Law" label="Caruso School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598471" start="685" end="710" title="Pepperdine Graziadio Business School" label="Graziadio Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166400" start="769" end="792" title="Pepperdine School of Public Policy" label="School of Public Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1356" end="1372" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543318" start="1374" end="1391" title="George Pepperdine" label="George Pepperdine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272775" start="1476" end="1494" title="Churches of Christ" label="Churches of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987596" start="1550" end="1577" title="Western Auto" label="Western Auto Supply Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q587064" start="2175" end="2192" title="South Los Angeles" label="South Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q928960" start="2273" end="2291" title="Streamline Moderne" label="Streamline Moderne"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="2320" end="2328" title="art deco" label="art deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869631" start="2483" end="2497" title="Batsell Baxter" label="Batsell Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q56884111" start="2507" end="2520" title="Hugh M. Tiner" label="Hugh M. Tiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="2927" end="2946" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q49503930" start="3033" end="3048" title="M. Norvel Young" label="M. Norvel Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039238" start="3275" end="3286" title="urban decay" label="urban decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q377682" start="3340" end="3351" title="Watts Riots" label="Watts Riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q474655" start="3573" end="3589" title="Westlake Village, California" label="Westlake Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q629088" start="3594" end="3603" title="Calabasas, California" label="Calabasas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20630546" start="4559" end="4578" title="William S. Banowsky" label="William S. Banowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859204" start="4755" end="4770" title="William Pereira" label="William Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641836" start="4798" end="4830" title="Los Angeles County Museum of Art" label="Los Angeles County Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q868421" start="4836" end="4868" title="University of California, Irvine" label="University of California, Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="4886" end="4919" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q98906466" start="4999" end="5013" title="Blanche Seaver" label="Blanche Seaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q99237473" start="5027" end="5042" title="Frank R. Seaver" label="Frank R. Seaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184165" start="5637" end="5662" title="Crenshaw Christian Center" label="Crenshaw Christian Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498180" start="5680" end="5701" title="Frederick K. C. Price" label="Frederick K. C. Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q49244" start="5912" end="5933" title="Santa Ana, California" label="Santa Ana, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166399" start="5952" end="5965" title="Pepperdine University School of Law" label="School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6523" end="6529" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="6537" end="6545" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="6631" end="6643" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="6645" end="6653" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="6659" end="6667" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598471" start="6723" end="6748" title="Pepperdine Graziadio Business School" label="Graziadio Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q21604558" start="6807" end="6830" title="George L. Graziadio Jr." label="George L. Graziadio Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7166399" start="6878" end="6898" title="Pepperdine University School of Law" label="Caruso School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331476" start="6940" end="6954" title="Rick Caruso" label="Rick J. Caruso"/>
<link wikidata="Q21551334" start="7110" end="7126" title="Andrew K. Benton" label="Andrew K. Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q65946907" start="7253" end="7257" title="Canyon Fire (2007)" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064714" start="7259" end="7263" title="Corral Fire" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q58445227" start="7265" end="7269" title="Woolsey Fire" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q131605973" start="7275" end="7279" title="Franklin Fire" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q5621865" start="7394" end="7428" title="Los Angeles County Fire Department" label="Los Angeles County Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229470" start="7567" end="7589" title="Santa Monica Mountains" label="Santa Monica Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q550419" start="7628" end="7649" title="Pacific Coast Highway (US)" label="Pacific Coast Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="7665" end="7688" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="7704" end="7723" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="7727" end="7745" title="Los Angeles County" label="Los Angeles County"/>
<link wikidata="Q999063" start="8005" end="8021" title="Santa Monica Bay" label="Santa Monica Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q845229" start="8023" end="8038" title="Santa Catalina Island, California" label="Catalina Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q375070" start="8044" end="8066" title="Palos Verdes Peninsula" label="Palos Verdes Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410741" start="8084" end="8107" title="Westside (Los Angeles County)" label="westside of Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937337" start="8144" end="8171" title="Mediterranean Revival Style architecture" label="Mediterranean Revival Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603747" start="8799" end="8810" title="Alumni Park (Pepperdine)" label="Alumni Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955238" start="8961" end="8972" title="Erythrina afra" label="coral trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228231" start="9599" end="9613" title="Pepperdine University Libraries" label="Payson Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q85762037" start="9623" end="9644" title="Frederick R. Weisman Museum of Art, California" label="Weisman Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166399" start="9742" end="9762" title="Pepperdine University School of Law" label="Caruso School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q20630546" start="9901" end="9920" title="William S. Banowsky" label="William S. Banowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166400" start="10154" end="10177" title="Pepperdine University School of Public Policy" label="School of Public Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598471" start="10251" end="10276" title="Pepperdine Graziadio Business School" label="Graziadio Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598471" start="10404" end="10429" title="Pepperdine Graziadio Business School" label="Graziadio Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410741" start="10503" end="10519" title="West Los Angeles (region)" label="West Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q399983" start="10556" end="10570" title="Interstate 405 (California)" label="Interstate 405"/>
<link wikidata="Q387047" start="10625" end="10631" title="Malibu, California" label="Malibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q49219" start="10633" end="10639" title="Irvine, California" label="Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q629088" start="10645" end="10654" title="Calabasas, California" label="Calabasas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="10899" end="10909" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045096" start="10948" end="10964" title="South Kensington" label="South Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="10977" end="10983" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="10999" end="11007" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q99237473" start="11237" end="11252" title="Frank R. Seaver" label="Frank R. Seaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q98906466" start="11266" end="11273" title="Blanche Seaver" label="Blanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q463790" start="11577" end="11588" title="American Council of Trustees and Alumni" label="ACTA&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="11822" end="11834" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="11836" end="11844" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="11846" end="11856" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="11858" end="11866" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="11872" end="11878" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598471" start="12868" end="12893" title="Pepperdine Graziadio Business School" label="Graziadio Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="13075" end="13103" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q463465" start="13539" end="13563" title="American Bar Association" label="American Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809608" start="13584" end="13619" title="Association of American Law Schools" label="Association of American Law Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100653" start="13648" end="13665" title="Order of the Coif" label="Order of the Coif"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13685" end="13723" title="Pepperdine University School of Law#Straus Institute for Dispute Resolution" label="Straus Institute of Dispute Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="14051" end="14057" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="14178" end="14206" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805836" start="14243" end="14260" title="entertainment law" label="entertainment law"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="14528" end="14531" title="American Psychological Association" label="APA"/>
<link wikidata="Q546113" start="14676" end="14689" title="public policy" label="public policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166399" start="14771" end="14781" title="Pepperdine University School of Law" label="law school"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14859" end="14898" title="Pepperdine University School of Law#Straus Institute for Dispute Resolution" label="Straus Institute for Dispute Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="16226" end="16254" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166399" start="16645" end="16655" title="Pepperdine University School of Law" label="law school"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="16748" end="16776" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16835" end="16861" title="Pepperdine University School of Law#Straus Institute for Dispute Resolution" label="dispute resolution program"/>
<link wikidata="Q463790" start="17070" end="17109" title="American Council of Trustees and Alumni" label="American Council of Trustees and Alumni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991436" start="17143" end="17164" title="What Will They Learn?" label="What Will They Learn?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="18087" end="18102" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q204186" start="18153" end="18174" title="West Coast Conference" label="West Coast Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974360" start="18215" end="18249" title="Mountain Pacific Sports Federation" label="Mountain Pacific Sports Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982248" start="18289" end="18312" title="Golden Coast Conference" label="Golden Coast Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020252" start="18408" end="18433" title="NACDA Director&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="NACDA Director&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="18497" end="18505" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="18506" end="18516" title="Division I (NCAA)" label="Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="18697" end="18701" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q938372" start="19129" end="19141" title="Robbie Weiss" label="Robbie Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q461060" start="19167" end="19182" title="Carlos Di Laura" label="Carlos Di Laura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521308" start="19189" end="19200" title="Kelly Jones (tennis)" label="Kelly Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q110732399" start="19226" end="19238" title="Jerome Jones (tennis)" label="Jerome Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="19318" end="19338" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376293" start="19352" end="19381" title="Raleigh Runnels Memorial Pool" label="Raleigh Runnels Memorial Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="19812" end="19839" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="19902" end="19925" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836140" start="20059" end="20102" title="Santa Monica-Malibu Unified School District" label="Santa Monica-Malibu Unified School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644252" start="20138" end="20210" title="List of universities and colleges affiliated with the Churches of Christ" label="List of universities and colleges affiliated with the Churches of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="20530" end="20547" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077208" start="20628" end="20661" title="Charles E. Young Research Library" label="Charles E. Young Research Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="20663" end="20700" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
</links>
</doc>
