<doc id="426049" wikidata="Q464503" url="?curid=426049" title="Empress Myeongseong">
<text>Empress Myeongseong (; 17 November 1851 – 8 October 1895) was the official wife of Gojong, the 26th king of Joseon and the first emperor of the Korean Empire. During her lifetime, she was known by the name Queen Min (). After the founding of the Korean Empire, she was posthumously given the title of Myeongseong, the Great Empress ().

The later Empress was of aristocratic background and in 1866 was chosen by the &quot;de facto&quot; Regent Heungseon Daewongun to marry his son, the future King Gojong. Seven years later his daughter-in-law and her Min clan forced him out of office. Daewongun was a conservative Confucian later implicated in unsuccessful rebellion against his daughter-in-law&#x27;s faction. He believed in isolation of Joseon from all foreign contact as a means of preserving independence. She, by contrast, was a believer in gradual modernisation using Western and Chinese help. From 1873 to her assassination in 1895 she oversaw economic, military and governmental modernisation.

In the 1880s and 1890s the relationship between Joseon and neighbouring Japan deteriorated. The queen consort was considered an obstacle by the government of Meiji Japan to its overseas expansion. She took a firmer stand against Japanese influence after Daewongun&#x27;s failed rebellions that were intended to remove her from the political arena. Miura Gorō, Japanese Minister to Korea, backed the faction headed by Daewongun and directly ordered the assassination. On 8 October 1895, the Hullyeondae Regiment loyal to the Daewongun attacked the Gyeongbokgung Palace and overpowered its Royal Guards. The intruders then allowed a group of ronin, specifically recruited for this purpose, to assassinate the queen consort. Her assassination sparked international outrage.

The Japanese-backed cabinet in the winter of 1895–1896 ordered Korean men to cut off their top-knot of hair. This caused uproar, because this style of hair was considered a badge of Korean identity. This topknot edict and the assassination provoked nationwide protests. Gojong and the Crown Prince (later Emperor Sunjong of Korea) accepted refuge in the Russian legation in 1896. The anti-Japanese backlash led to the repeal of the Gabo Reform, which had introduced other measures increasing Japanese influence. In October 1897, Gojong returned to Gyeongungung (modern-day Deoksugung). Whilst there, he proclaimed the founding of the Korean Empire and raised the status of his deceased wife to Empress.

== Names and titles ==
As was the custom in late Joseon society, the woman who came to be Empress Myeongseong never had a personal name. &quot;Min&quot; is the name of her clan. &quot;Empress&quot; was a title conferred after her assassination. Changes in her marital status or the status of her husband are reflected in her own title. In Western terms, she was nameless throughout her life. For the most part, the narrative below refers to her as the queen consort because that was her title during life at the beginning of her political activity, and was her functioning position. For convenience the description queen regent is not separately used.

==Background==
===Clan tensions at the death of the King===
In 1864, at the age of 32, Cheoljong of Joseon died suddenly under ambiguous causes. Cheoljong was childless and had not appointed an heir. The Andong Kim clan had risen to power through intermarriage with the royal House of Yi. Queen Cheorin, Cheoljong&#x27;s consort and a member of the Andong Kim clan, claimed the right to choose the next king. Traditionally, the most senior Queen Dowager had the official authority to select the new king. Cheoljong&#x27;s cousin, Grand Royal Dowager Hyoyu (once known as Queen Sinjeong), was the most senior Dowager. She was of the Pungyang Jo clan and the widow of Heonjong of Joseon&#x27;s father. She had risen to prominence by intermarriage with the Yi family.

=== Alliance between the Pungyang Jo clan and Yi Ha-eung ===
Grand Queen Dowager Hyoyu saw an opportunity to advance the cause of her Pungyang Jo clan, the only true rival of the Andong Kim clan in Korean politics. As King Cheoljong was dying, she was approached by Yi Ha-eung, a distant descendant of King Injo (r.1623–1649), whose father was made an adoptive son of Prince Eunsin, a nephew of King Yeongjo (r.1724–1776).

The branch that Yi Ha-eung&#x27;s family belonged to was a distant line of descendants of the Yi clan. They survived the often deadly political intrigue that frequently embroiled the Joseon court by forming no affiliation with any factions. Yi Ha-eung himself was not eligible for the throne due to a law that dictated that a successor had to be part of the generation after the most recent monarch. Yi Ha-eung&#x27;s second son, Yi Myeong-bok, was a possible candidate for the throne.

The Pungyang Jo clan saw that Yi Myeong-bok, was only 12 years old and would not be able to rule in his own name until he came of age. They hoped to influence Yi Ha-eung, who would be acting as &quot;de facto&quot; regent for his son. (Technically Grand Queen Dowager Hyoyu would be regent but in fact she did not intend to play an active role in the regency). As soon as news of King Cheoljong&#x27;s death reached Yi Ha-eung through his intricate network of spies in the palace, the hereditary royal seal required for the selection of a new monarch was taken to or by Grand Queen Dowager Hyoyu. She already was strictly entitled to make the appointment. She thereupon chose her great-grandson, Yi Myeong-bok. The Andong Kim clan was powerless to act because the formalities had been observed.

=== Accession of a new King ===
In the autumn of 1864, Yi Myeong-bok was renamed as Yi Hui () and was crowned as Gojong King of Joseon, with his father as Regent titled as Grand Internal Prince Heungseon. He is referred to in this article henceforth as Heungseon Daewongun or Daewongun.

The strongly Confucian Daewongun proved to be a decisive leader in the early years of Gojong&#x27;s reign. He abolished the old government institutions that had become corrupt under the rule of various clans, revised the law codes along with the household laws of the royal court and the rules of court ritual, and heavily reformed the military techniques of the royal armies. Within a few years, he was able to secure complete control of the court, and eventually receive the submission of the Pungyang Jos while successfully disposing of the last of the Andong Kims, whose corruption, he believed, was responsible for the country&#x27;s decline in the 19th century.

== Early life and family ==
=== Yeoheung Min clan antecedants ===
The future queen consort was born into the aristocratic Yeoheung Min clan on 17 November 1851 within the in Seomrak Village, Geundong-myeon, Yeoheung (now Yeoju), Gyeonggi Province, where the clan originated.

The Yeoheung Mins were a noble clan boasting many high-ranking bureaucrats in its illustrious past, princess consorts, and two queen consorts. These were firstly, Queen Wongyeong (wife of Taejong of Joseon and mother of Sejong the Great) and, secondly, Queen Inhyeon (second wife of Sukjong of Joseon).

When her father Min Chi-rok was young, he studied under scholar Oh Hui-sang (), and eventually married the scholar&#x27;s daughter. She became Min Chi-rok&#x27;s first wife, Lady Oh of the Haeju Oh clan. In 1833 Lady Oh died childless at the age of 36. After three years&#x27; mourning, Min Chi-rok in 1836 married Lady Yi of the Hansan Yi clan (later known as Internal Princess Consort Hanchang). She was the daughter of Yi Gyu-nyeon. The future Empress was the fourth and only surviving child of Lady Yi.

Before her marriage, the later empress was known as the daughter of Min Chi-rok, Lady Min, or Min Ja-yeong (). At age seven, she lost her father to an illness on 17 September 1858 while he was in Sado city. Lady Min was raised by her mother and Min relatives for eight years until she moved to the palace and became queen. Lady Min assisted her mother for three years while in living in Gamgodang. In 1861 it was decided that Min Seung-ho, would become her father&#x27;s heir.

=== Selection as queen consort and marriage ===
When Gojong reached the age of 15, his father began to seek a bride for his son. Ideally the choice would be a person without politically ambitious relatives and someone who was of noble lineage. After rejecting numerous candidates, the Daewongun&#x27;s wife, Grand Internal Princess Consort Sunmok (known at the time as Grand Internal Princess Consort Yeoheung; &quot;Yeoheung Budaebuin&quot;; ) and his mother, Princess Consort Min, proposed a bride from their own clan, the Yeoheung Min. The girl&#x27;s father was dead. She was said to possess beautiful features, a healthy body, and an ordinary level of education.

This possible bride underwent a strict selection process, culminating in a meeting with the Daewongun on 6 March, and a marriage ceremony on 20 March 1866. The Daewongun, likely fearing that the Andong Kim clan and the Pyungyang Jo clan, who were political rivalries for the future, may have been influenced favourably towards Lady Min due to her lack of a father or brother. He did not suspect Lady Min herself as politically ambitious, and he was satisfied with the interview. It was only later he observed that she &quot;...was a woman of great determination and poise“ but that he nevertheless allowed her to marry his son. In doing so, he raised to the throne a woman who by 1895 had proven herself to be &quot;his chief foil and implacable enemy.&quot;

Lady Min, aged 16, married the 15-year-old king and was invested in a ceremony (, ) as the Queen Consort of Joseon. Two places assert claims as the location of the marriage and accession. These are Injeongjeon Hall () at Changdeokgung and Norakdang Hall () at Unhyeongung. The headdress typically worn by brides at royal weddings was so heavy for the bride that a tall court lady was specially assigned to support it from the back. Directly following the wedding was the three-day ceremony for reverencing of ancestors.

When Lady Min became Queen Consort, her mother was given the royal title of &quot;Internal Princess Consort Hanchang&quot; (). Her father was given the royal title of &quot;Internal Prince Yeoseong&quot; (), and was posthumously appointed as Yeonguijeong after his death. Her father&#x27;s first wife also given the royal title of &quot;Internal Princess Consort Haeryeong&quot; ().

On the day of their marriage ceremony, Gojong did not go to his wife&#x27;s quarters to consummate the marriage, but to the quarters of concubine Royal Consort Yi Gwi-in of the Gyeongju Yi clan. This preference would later be approved by the Heungseon Daewongun.

The first impression of the queen consort at the palace was that she was dutiful and docile. Over time, Daewongun changed his view of her. Officials noticed that the new queen consort differed from previous queens before her in her choices and determination. She did not participate in lavish parties, rarely commissioned extravagant fashions from the royal ateliers, and almost never hosted afternoon tea parties with the various princesses of the royal family or powerful aristocratic ladies unless politics required her to do so. Expected to act as an icon for Korea&#x27;s high society, the queen rejected this role. Instead, she spent her time reading books written using Chinese characters, whose use in Korea was usually reserved for aristocratic men. &quot;Spring and Autumn Annals&quot; and its accompanying &quot;Zuo Zhuan&quot; are examples. She furthered her own education in history, science, politics, philosophy, and religion.

==As queen consort==

===Court domination===
By the age of twenty, the queen consort had begun to leave the total seclusion of her apartments at Changgyeonggung and to play an active part in politics. This was not at the invitation of Heungseon Daewongun and his high officials. Daewongun directed his son to conceive through the concubine Yi Gwi-in from the Yeongbo Hall (). On 16 April 1868, the concubine gave birth to Prince Wanhwa (), to whom Daewongun gave the title of crown prince. It was said that Daewongun was overwhelmed with joy at the arrival of Gojong&#x27;s first born son, and that afterwards the queen consort was not accorded respect or honour as before.

Discord between the queen consort and Daewongun became public when her infant son died in late 1871 four days after birth. Daewongun publicly accused her of being unable to bear a healthy male child. She suspected her father-in-law of foul play through the ginseng emetic treatment he had brought her. It seems likely the queen consort&#x27;s intense distrust of her father-in-law dates from this time.

Meanwhile the queen consort secretly formed a powerful faction against the Heungseon Daewongun. With the backing of high officials, scholars, and members of her clan, she desired to remove Daewongun from power. , the queen consort&#x27;s adoptive older brother, along with court scholar Choe Ik-hyeon, devised a formal impeachment of Daewongun. The impeachment was to be presented to the Royal Council of Administration, arguing that the 22 year old Gojong should now rule in his own right. In 1873, with the approval of Gojong and the Royal Council, the Heungseon Daewongun was forced to retire to Unhyeongung, his estate at Yangju. The queen consort then banished the royal concubine along with her child to a village outside the capital. The child was stripped of royal titles and died on 12 January 1880.

After these expulsions, the queen consort had control over the court, where her own clan family members received high office. As queen consort she ruled along with her husband but was recognized as being more politically active than him.

===Start of imperial Japanese influence===
After Korean refusal to receive Japanese envoys announcing the Meiji Restoration, some Japanese aristocrats favored an immediate invasion of Korea. Upon the return of the Iwakura Mission, this idea was quickly dropped because the new Japanese government was neither politically nor fiscally stable enough to start a war. When Heungseon Daewongun was ousted from politics, Japan renewed efforts to establish ties with Korea, but the Imperial envoy arriving at Dongnae in 1873 was turned away.

In 1875 the Japanese gunboat &quot;Unyō&quot; was dispatched towards Busan and a second warship was sent to the Bay of Yeongheung, ostensibly surveying sea routes. On 20 September 1875 in a move seen by the Koreans as provocative, the ,ventured into restricted waters off Ganghwa Island. Korean shore batteries then opened fire. Thus arose a violent confrontation between the Japanese and the Koreans known as the Ganghwa Island incident. Following this incident, six naval vessels and an imperial Japanese envoy were sent to Ganghwa Island to enforce the wishes of the Japanese government, which was then in a position to insist on Korea opening to trade generally. There was precedent for this line of action in the behaviour of European powers and their extraction of the so-called Unequal Treaties.

Whilst a majority of the royal Korean court favored absolute isolationism, Japan had demonstrated its willingness and capacity to use force. The deposed Daewongun took the opportunity to blame the Min clan for their weakness in contrast to his own previous isolationist, anti-foreign policies. After numerous meetings, the Ganghwa Treaty was signed on 26 February 1876, thus opening Korea to Japan and the world. The treaty was modeled after treaties imposed on Japan by the United States. Various ports were forced to open to Japanese trade, and Japanese now had rights to buy land in designated areas. The treaty permitted the immediate opening of Busan (1876) and later other major ports, Wonsan (1880) and Incheon (1883) to Japanese merchants. For the first few years, Japan enjoyed a near total monopoly of trade. Japanese cotton goods were imported to Korea, which was unindustrialised and still dominantly dependent on limited modes of agricultural production. Rice and cereals became the main export to Japan, whose merchants came to inhabit the major ports. By 1894 Busan gave every appearance, according to doctor-missionary Isabella Bird, of being a town in Japan. She reports the fact that the customs were levied by the Chinese Imperial Maritime Customs officers on behalf of the Korean Crown. At least one of these officers was English.

==Social revolution==
=== Reorganisation of Joseon government ===
In 1880, a mission headed by Kim Gi-su (Kim Hong-Jip) was commissioned by Gojong and the Min clan to study Japanese westernisation and its intentions for Korea. The immediate diplomatic objective was to persuade the Japanese that there was no need to open a Legation in Seoul and that the port of Incheon should not be opened. It arrived on 11 August 1880. 

While in Japan, Kim visited the Chinese embassy in Japan no less than six times. He met with the Chinese first envoy to Japan, He Ru-zhang, and his staff adviser, Huang Zunxian. In September 1880, a prepared paper was written for the benefit of, and was presented to, the visiting Koreans, the purpose of which was to change their whole approach towards modernisation through external contact. This paper, whose text survives in five differing forms, was written by Huang. It was entitled &quot;Korean Strategy&quot; and examined the strategic position of Korea in the context of its need for strength in the international situation of the day. The essence of its thesis was that Russia was land-hungry and represented the primary threat to Korea. The Chinese, it argued, should be regarded as natural close allies from whom full independence was undesirable. Huang advised that Korea should adopt a pro-Chinese policy, while retaining close ties with Japan for the time being. He also advised an alliance with the United States in particular because it did not occupy the countries with which it traded, and because it would be a protection against Russia. He considered it wise to open trade relations with Western nations and to adopt Western technology, arguing that their interest in Korea was trade rather than occupation. The modernisation of Japan through Western contact was pointed to as a promising precedent for study.

Kim returned from Japan in late 1880. By early 1881 the paper had made a considerable impression on the king and the queen consort. Copies were commissioned to be sent out to all ministers. She had hoped to win yangban (aristocratic) approval to invite Western nations into Korea, and to open up trade so as to keep Japan in check. She wanted to first allow Japan to help in the modernisation process but after completion of certain projects, have them be driven out by Western powers. However, the yangban aristocracy opposed any opening of the country to the West. Choi Ik-hyun, who had helped with the impeachment of Heungseon Daewongun, sided with the isolationists. He maintained that the Japanese were just like the &quot;Western barbarians&quot; and would spread subversive notions, just as previous Western contact had brought Roman Catholicism. That had been a major issue during Daewongun&#x27;s regency and Catholicism was crushed by widespread persecution.

To the socially conservative yangban, the queen consort&#x27;s plan meant the end of social order. Accordingly, the response to the distribution of &quot;Korean Strategy&quot; was a joint memorandum to the throne from scholars in every province of the kingdom. They stated that the ideas in the book were impractical theories, and that the adoption of Western technology was not the only way to enrich the country. They demanded that the number of envoys exchanged, ships engaged in trade and articles of trade be strictly limited, and further that all foreign books in Korea should be destroyed. Two thousand (out of office) scholars gathered at Cho-rio, planning to march on Seoul and overwhelm the serving Ministers. The gathering was met at Cho-rio by royal envoys who promised to stop the mission to Japan, to which the protesters objected. It was too late, however, and the Korean mission by then had landed in Nagasaki in Japan.

Thus in 1881, a large fact-finding mission was sent to Japan under Kim Hongjip. It stayed for seventy days observing Japanese government offices, factories, military and police organizations, and business practices. The visitors obtained information about innovations in the Japanese government copied from the West, especially the proposed constitution. On the basis of these reports, the queen consort began reorganisation of the government. Twelve new bureaus were established to deal with foreign relations with the West, China, and Japan. Other bureaus were established to supervise commerce. A bureau of the military was created, tasked to modernize weapons and techniques. Civilian departments were established to import Western technology.

Meanwhile in September 1881, a plot was uncovered to overthrow the queen consort&#x27;s faction, depose the King, and place Heungseon Daewongun&#x27;s illegitimate (third) son, Yi Jae-seon (known posthumously as Prince Imperial Waneun) on the throne. The plot was frustrated by informants to and spies of the queen consort. Heungseon Daewongun (whose involvement was not proved) was unharmed. However, the attempted coup resulted in Yi Jae-seon&#x27;s death in late October 1881.

In October 1881, the queen consort arranged for 60 top Korean military students to be sent to Tientsin in Qing China where they were to study arms manufacturing and deployment. The Japanese volunteered to supply military students with rifles and train a unit of the Korean army to use them. She agreed but reminded the Japanese that students would still be sent to China for further education on Western military technologies. The modernisation of the military was met with opposition.

===The insurrection of 1882===
In June 1882, members of the old military became resentful of the special treatment of the new units. They destroyed the house of Min Gyeom-ho and killed him. He was Gojong&#x27;s maternal uncle, being his mother&#x27;s younger brother, and was the administrative head of the training units and in charge of the treasury. Yi Choi-eung and Kim Bo-hyun, a magistrate, were also killed. These had been associated with the Min corruption whereby the soldiers got rotten rice in payment of wages. These soldiers then fled to the protection of Daewongun, who publicly rebuked but privately encouraged them. Daewongun took control of the old units. He ordered an attack on the administrative district of Seoul that housed the Gyeongbokgung, the diplomatic quarter, military centers, and science institutions. These soldiers attacked police stations to free comrades who had been arrested and ransacked private estates and mansions belonging to relatives of the queen consort. These units stole rifles and killed Japanese training officers. They narrowly missed murdering the Japanese ambassador to Seoul, who escaped to Incheon, and thence to Japan where he was interviewed at court for an account of events. The military rebellion then headed towards the palace but both queen consort and the King escaped in disguise. They fled to her relative&#x27;s villa in Cheongju, where they remained in hiding. Rumour supplied differing accounts of the escape. The truth may lie in the detailed account recorded by Homer Hulbert.

One rumour was that Grand Internal Princess Consort Sunmok had entered the palace, and hidden her daughter-in-law, the queen consort, in a wooden litter that the older woman was riding on. Allegedly a court officer saw this and informed the soldiers invading the palace.

Princess Sunmok did try to persuade her husband Heungseon Daewongun to stop the hunt for the queen consort. This seemed so suspicious that later he kept her away from his affairs. When Daewongun could not find the queen consort, he likely assumed she was dead (according to Hulbert). He announced, &quot;the queen is dead&quot;. Numerous supporters of the queen consort were executed once Daewongun took control of Gyeongbokgung Palace. He immediately dismantled the recent reform measures and relieved the new units of duty. Foreign policy reverted to isolationism. Both Chinese and Japanese representatives were forced to leave the capital.

Li Hongzhang, with the consent of Korean envoys in Beijing, sent 4,500 Chinese troops to restore order and secure Chinese interests in Korea. His troops arrested Daewongun, who was then taken to Paoting in China where he remained under house arrest. The royal couple returned and overturned all of Daewongun&#x27;s actions.

The Japan-Korea Treaty of 1882, signed on 10 August 1882 required the Koreans to pay 550,000 yen damages in respect of Japanese lives and property lost during the insurrection. This agreement also permitted Japanese troops to guard the Japanese embassy in Seoul. The queen consort proposed to China a new trade agreement granting the Chinese special privileges and rights to ports inaccessible to the Japanese. Public order was enforced by Wu Chang-ching and his detachment of 3,000 Chinese troops. She also successfully requested that a Chinese commander, General Yuan Shih-kai, take control of the new military units and that a German adviser, Paul Georg von Möllendorff, head the Maritime Customs Service. The Chinese desired further trade treaties so as to deflect a Japanese monopoly. Treaties were later signed with the United States (1882) and France (1886).
===Mission to North America===

In July 1883 the queen consort sent a special mission to the United States. It was headed by Min Yeong-ik, her adoptive nephew. The mission arrived at San Francisco on 2 September 1883 carrying the newly created Korean national flag. It visited U.S. historical sites, heard lectures on U.S. history, and attended a gala event in their honor given by the mayor of San Francisco and other U.S. officials. The mission dined in New York at the Fifth Avenue Hotel with President Chester A. Arthur, and discussed the growing threat of the Japanese and the possibility of U.S. investment in Korea. The Korean visit lasted three months, returning via San Francisco. At the end of September, Min Yeong-ik travelled to Seoul and reported to the queen consort. She at once established English language schools with U.S. instructors. Min Yeong-ik&#x27;s report had been optimistic:

Matters culminated in October 1883 with a royal request that the Americans send an adviser to Korea to the office of foreign affairs, and instructors for the army. An order for arms was placed with a US firm based in Yokohama. A complement of three military instructors arrived in April 1888.

===Progressives vs Conservatives===
The Progressives were founded during the late 1870s by a group of yangban who supported westernisation of Joseon. They wanted immediate westernisation, including a complete cessation of ties with Qing China. With the queen consort possibly unaware of their anti-Chinese sentiments, they were granted frequent royal audiences and meetings to discuss progressivism and nationalism. They advocated for educational and social reforms, including the equality of the sexes by granting women full rights. The queen consort was convinced at first, but she did not support their anti-Chinese stance. In the result, she became a proponent of the Sadae faction which was pro-China and in favour of gradual westernisation.

In 1884, the conflict between the Progressives and the Sadaes intensified. The Progressives, frustrated by the Sadaes and the growing influence of the Chinese, successfully conspired to secure the aid of Japanese Legation staff and troops. American Legation officials, in particular Naval Attaché George C. Foulk, heard about the possibility of trouble breaking out caused by the Progressives. This rumour reached the British who put out feelers to their various other contacts. All this found its way back to the chief Progressive conspirators, who, fearing their dangerous game was almost up, decided to act immediately.

They staged a bloody palace coup on 4 December 1884 (the Gapsin Coup) on the occasion of a diplomatic dinner celebrating the opening of the new Korean postal service. The Progressives killed numerous high-ranking Sadaes and secured key government positions vacated by Sadaes who had fled the capital or had been killed. This new administration began to issue edicts in both the King and queen consort&#x27;s names. The King and the queen consort had been kidnapped and were held prisoner by armed Japanese guards. The new cabinet did not secure popular support despite their agenda of modernisation and planned political, economic, social, and cultural reforms.

The queen consort was horrified by the violence of the Progressives. They effected seven murders of high-ranking Koreans. Clan leaders summoned to the palace by letters purporting to come from the King were beheaded on stepping out of their sedan chairs. Following suppression of the coup, the queen consort no longer trusted the Japanese. She refused to support the actions of the Progressives, declaring any documents signed in her name to be null and void. After only two days of control over the administration, the Progressives were crushed by Chinese troops under Yuan Shikai&#x27;s command. These were sent following a secret request by the queen consort to the Chinese Resident. A handful of Progressive leaders were killed, others escaping to Japan. The Japanese troops were only 130 in all and were easily overwhelmed. Japanese deaths and property damage followed. The Treaty of Hanseong (8 January 1885) negotiated by Count Inouye on behalf of the Japanese required Joseon to pay a &quot;moderate&quot; indemnity for damages inflicted: 40 Japanese were killed during the coup and the Japanese legation was burned to the ground. In addition, the Koreans agreed to rebuild the Japanese Legation plus some barracks for their troops. Lastly, those guilty of murdering a Japanese officer were to be punished.

On 18 April, the Convention of Tientsin (1885) was made in Tianjin, China, between the Japanese and the Chinese. In it, they both agreed to pull troops out of Joseon. Each party agreed it would send troops only if their property was endangered; each would inform the other before doing so. Both nations also agreed to pull out their military instructors so as to allow the newly arrived Americans to perform that task. The Japanese withdrew troops from Korea, leaving a number of legation guards.

==Public policy==

===Economy===

Following the opening of all Korean ports to the Japanese and Western merchants in 1888, contact and involvement with outsiders increased foreign trade rapidly. In 1883, the Maritime Customs Service was established under the patronage of the queen consort and the supervision of Sir Robert Hart, 1st Baronet of the United Kingdom. The Maritime Customs Service administered the business of foreign trade and collection of tariffs.

By 1883, the economy was now no longer in a state of monopoly conducted by Japanese merchants as it had been only a few years ago. Much of the economy was controlled by the Koreans, with some participation shared between Western nations, Japan and China. In 1884, the first Korean commercial firms such as the Daedong and the Changdong Company emerged. The Korean copper coinage had been debased to the exchange of 500 &quot;cash&quot; to one US dollar. This meant that transactions in &quot;cash&quot; were heavy and bulky. It was not a currency suited to the scale of commercial transactions. Japanese yen and Japanese banks were used everywhere. In 1883 the Korean Bureau of Mint produced a new coin, or &quot;dangojeon&quot; thereby securing a stable Korean currency, but in the five years following the new currency was blamed, rightly or wrongly, for the inflation of basic commodities. Western investment also began to grow in 1886. One third of all imported goods were carried inland by men or pack animals. They were frequently stopped and taxed for transit by road barriers on the way. The Seoul government in exchange for a fee authorised these barrier levies.

The German A.H. Maeterns, with the aid of the United States Department of Agriculture, created a new project designated the &quot;American Farm.&quot; This was on a large plot of land donated by the queen consort to promote modern agriculture. Farm implements, seeds, and milk cows were imported from the United States. In June 1883, the Bureau of Machines was established and steam engines were imported. Finally, telegraph lines facilitating communication between Joseon, China, and Japan were laid between 1883 and 1885.

Despite the fact that the royal couple had brought the Korean economy to a degree of westernisation, modern manufacturing facilities did not emerge.

===Education===
From early projections in 1880, in May 1885 a palace school to educate the children of the elite was approved by the queen consort. The Royal English School () was established by the American missionary Homer Hulbert and three other missionaries. The school had two departments, liberal education and military education. Courses were taught exclusively in English using English textbooks. However, due to low attendance, the school was closed shortly after the last English teacher, Bunker, resigned in late 1893.

In 1886, the queen consort patronized the first all-girls&#x27; educational institution, Ewha Academy (later Ewha University). The school was established in Seoul by Mary F. Scranton. She collaborated with Methodist missionary and teacher Henry Gerhardt Appenzeller, who worked in Korea from 1885 to his death in June 1902. As Louisa Rothweiler, a founding teacher of Ewha Academy observed, the school was, at its early stage, more of a place for poor girls to be fed and clothed than a place of education. The creation of the academy was a significant social change.

Missionaries contributed much to the development of Western education in Joseon.

===Medicine, music, and religion===
The arrival of Horace Newton Allen under invitation of the queen consort in September 1884 marked the formal introduction of Christianity, which spread rapidly in Joseon. He was able, with the queen consort&#x27;s permission and official sanction, to arrange for the appointment of other missionaries as government employees. He also introduced modern medicine in Korea by establishing the first western Royal Medical Clinic of Gwanghyewon in February 1885.

In April 1885, numerous Protestant missionaries began to arrive in Joseon. Prominent Protestant missionaries Horace Grant Underwood, Lillias Horton Underwood, and William B. Scranton (with his mother, Mary Scranton) moved to Korea in May 1885. They established churches within Seoul and began to establish centers in the countryside. Catholic missionaries arrived soon afterwards.

Christian missionaries made converts but also created contributions towards modernisation of the country. Concepts of equality, human rights and freedom, and the participation of both men and women in religious activities were introduced for the first time to Joseon. The queen consort wanted the literacy rate to rise, and with the aid of Christian educational programs, it did so within a matter of a few years.

Notable changes were made in music. Western music theory partly displaced the traditional Eastern concepts. Protestant missions introduced Christian hymns and other Western songs that created a strong impetus to modify Korean ideas about music. The organ and other Western musical instruments were introduced in 1890, and a Christian hymnal was published in the Korean language in 1893 under the commission of the queen consort.

The queen consort invited different missionaries to enter Joseon. She valued their knowledge of Western history, science, and mathematics. It can be assumed these advantages were seen as outweighing the potential loss of ancestor worship, which Catholic converts were well-known to have resisted in face of sustained persecution in the past. Isolationists continued to view Christianity as subversive of morals in the refusal to perform rites for ancestors and the perceived disloyalty to the state. Some scholars had attempted to classify Christianity not as a religion but a school of learning. A degree of religious tolerance was a practical outcome of the queen consort&#x27;s policies, whether or not it had been an overt goal. The queen consort herself never became a Christian, but remained a devout Buddhist with influences from shamanism and Confucianism.

===Military===
Modern weapons were imported from Japan and the United States in 1883. The first military factories were established and new military uniforms were created in 1884. In a show of her support for pro-American government, a request was made to the United States for more American military instructors to speed up the military modernisation of Korea under joint patronage of Gojong and the queen consort. Military modernisation was slow compared to the other projects.

In October 1883, American minister Lucius Foote arrived to take command of the modernisation of Joseon&#x27;s older army units, which had not started to Westernise. In April 1888, General William McEntyre Dye and two other military instructors arrived from the United States, followed in May by a fourth instructor. They brought about more rapid military development.

A new military school was created called , and an officers&#x27; training program began. Visible progress in the preparedness and capacity of the Korean military was being achieved. The growing troop numbers caused the Japanese concern as to the possible impact of Korean troops if the Japanese government did not interfere to stall the process. By 1898 the Korean army comprised 4,800 men in Seoul who were drilled by the Russians at that time. There were 1,200 Korean soldiers in the provinces and the navy owned two small vessels.

Despite army training becoming increasingly on par with that of the Chinese and the Japanese, naval investment of all kinds was neglected. This omission represented a gap in the modernisation project. Failure to develop naval defence rendered Joseon&#x27;s long sea borders more vulnerable to invasion. This was a severe contrast to the period nearly 300 years earlier when Joseon&#x27;s navy under Admiral Yi Sun-sin had been the strongest in East Asia. Now, the Korean navy comprised old ships almost powerless against the advanced ships of modern navies.

===Press===

The first newspaper to be published in Joseon was the Hanseong Sunbo , an all-Hanja newspaper. It was published as a thrice monthly official government gazette by the (publishing house), an agency of the Foreign Ministry. It included contemporary news of the day, essays and articles about westernisation, and news of modernisation of Joseon. In January 1886, the published a new newspaper, &quot;Hanseong Jubo&quot; (&quot;The Seoul Weekly&quot;). The publication of a Korean-language newspaper was a significant development, and the paper itself played an important role as a communication medium to the masses until it was abolished in 1888 under pressure from the Chinese government. A newspaper entirely in Hangul, making no use of the Korean Hanja script, was not published again until 1894. &quot;Kanjō Shinpō&quot; was published as a weekly newspaper under the patronage of both Gojong and the queen consort. It was written half in Korean and half in Japanese.

== Reforms, rebellion, and war ==

=== Trade 1875 onwards ===
The queen consort&#x27;s economic reforms opened the Korean economy to the world, but in practice the majority of trade for Korean agricultural products was with China and Japan. After the failure of the Progressive coup, Japanese policy focused on expanding economic ties. Between 1877-81 imports into Korea increased by 800%; between 1885 and 1891 rice and other grain exports increased by 700%. Most grain was exported to Japan via Osaka. Many kinds of household and luxury goods were imported into Korea, in turn encouraging officials to demand extra or new taxes from the farmers. Between 1891 and 1895 the chief Korean exports were rice, beans, tobacco, raw hides, gold dust and silk. Ginseng was now permitted to be exported as a privately traded product, the old government monopoly ending and being replaced by high taxation. The 1895 trade value was almost 13 million US dollars of the day.

Economic activity between 1883 and 1897 was conducted in a society unprepared for the impact of mass importation of foreign-produced goods, largely from Japan. In the period 1886 to 1888 an ineffective currency reform fuelled inflation; it was not until 1897 that relative price stability in textiles was experienced.

From 1875 to 1894, Korea signed 11 treaties with 9 foreign powers. These were: Austria (1892); China (1882); France (1886); Germany (1883); Great Britain (1883); Italy (1884); Japan (1876), (1882), (1885); Russia (1884); and the United States of America (1882). Their descriptions and chronological sequence are given with Korean names elsewhere.

=== Political instability 1894–1895 ===

Under this external economic pressure, Korean peasants decided to protest, then rebel. The Donghak Peasant Revolution, that lasted from January 1894 to 25 December 1895, presented the queen consort with an extremely dangerous situation. Its causes are complex, being religious, nationalistic and economic. The queen consort was assassinated in October 1895 before this matter was resolved. During 1894, much of Southern Korea was in a state of open peasant revolt which the government could not control. The Chinese were requested by Korea to send troops to restore order, which they did, hoping to establish a fully committed pro-Chinese policy at court. The Japanese government unilaterally sent troops to Korea, abducting the now pro-Chinese Daewongun and effecting a violent coup at the palace resulting in a pro-reform, pro-Japanese government. By this time the peasants had largely withdrawn and neither Japanese nor Chinese troops were required for any Korean purpose. Each side refused to return troops to their country of origin until the other did so first. Thus arose the First Sino-Japanese War (January 1894-25 December 1895) in which the Japanese were the decisive victors.

==Personal life==

===Personality and appearance===
Detailed descriptions of the queen consort can be found in The National Assembly Library of Korea and in records kept by Lillias Underwood a close and trusted American friend of the queen consort. Underwood had come to Korea in 1888 as a missionary and was appointed by the queen consort as her doctor.

These sources describe the queen consort&#x27;s appearance, voice, and public manner. She was said to have had a soft face with strong features. These were considered attributes of classic beauty in contrast to the king&#x27;s known preference for &quot;sultry&quot; women. The queen consort&#x27;s personal speaking voice was soft and warm, but when conducting affairs of the state, she asserted her points with strength. Her public manner was formal, and she heavily adhered to court etiquette and traditional law. Underwood described her in the following way:

Isabella Bird Bishop, a well-known British travel writer and member of the Royal Geographical Society, described the queen consort&#x27;s appearance as that of &quot;...a very nice-looking slender woman, with glossy raven-black hair and a very pale skin, the pallor enhanced by the use of pearl powder&quot; while meeting with her when Bishop traveled to Korea. Bishop had also mentioned Empress Myeongseong in her book, &quot;Korea and Her Neighbors&quot;:

Bishop described Jayeong as &quot;clever and educated&quot;, and Gojong to be &quot;kind&quot; during the time she visited the palace.

William Franklin Sands, a United States diplomat who came to Korea during Japan&#x27;s colonisation, also spoke highly about the queen consort:

=== Early years ===
The young queen consort and her husband were incompatible in the beginning of their marriage. Both found the other&#x27;s preferences unattractive. She preferred to stay in her chambers studying, while he enjoyed spending his days and nights drinking, attending banquets and enjoying royal parties. The queen, who was genuinely concerned to understand affairs of state, immersed herself in philosophy, history, and science books of a kind normally reserved for men. Court officials noted that the queen consort was highly selective in choosing who she associated with and confided in.

Her first pregnancy came five years after marriage, at the age of 21, and ended in despair and humiliation when her infant son died shortly after birth. She lost all her children apart from Yi Cheok, born when she was 24. His older sister was born when the queen consort was 23, but died and with a birth of two sons followed Yi Cheok&#x27;s birth. They were born respectively during the queen consort&#x27;s 25th and 28th years, and neither survived. These difficulties experienced in bearing healthy children may reflect in part the stresses of family and political relationships. There were no pregnancies after the age of 28, which was earlier than some other royal wives whose child-bearing ended in around their early thirties.

Korean politics had resulted in the deaths of many of the queen consort&#x27;s immediate relatives. In August 1866, the year of the royal marriage, there was an armed skirmish between the French Admiral Roze and the Korean troops at Ganghwa Island. In 1876, the process leading to the Treaty of Ganghwa soured the relationship of Heungseon Daewongun with his son. As that relationship deteriorated, the king&#x27;s father made death threats against the queen consort. Her mother was assassinated in 1874 in a bombing incident, along with her adoptive older brother, Min Seung-ho. During the Insurrection of 1882 and the 1884 coup, some of the queen consort&#x27;s relatives were killed. The queen consort herself was exposed to personal danger as the attempts on her life and safety demonstrate.

The royal couple&#x27;s surviving son, Sunjong, was a sickly child, frequently catching illnesses and convalescing for weeks. The Empress cared personally for the Crown Prince and sought help from shamans and monks. The latter received rewards for blessings. Had the Crown Prince died, his rights would have devolved to the offspring of a royal concubine. The Crown Prince and his mother shared a close relationship despite her strong personality.

===Later years===
Gojong and his wife shared an affection during the later years of their marriage. Gojong was chosen to become King not because of his astuteness (lacking because he was never formally educated) or because of his bloodline (which was mixed with courtesan and common blood), but because the Pungyang Jo clan had wrongly assumed they could control him indefinitely through his father. Eventually Gojong was pressured by his Min advisers to seize control of the government, which he did. In attending to responsibilities of state, he depended frequently on his capable wife for the conduct of international and domestic affairs. In so doing, Gojong came to appreciate his wife&#x27;s wit, intelligence, and ability to learn quickly. As the problems of the kingdom increased, Gojong relied even more on his wife.

By the years of modernisation of Joseon, it is safe to assume that Gojong had come to love his wife. They began to spend much time with each other, privately and officially. His affection for her was enduring. When Daewongun regained political power after the death of the queen consort, he presented a proposal with the aid of certain Japanese officials posthumously to lower his daughter-in-law&#x27;s status from queen consort to commoner. The official degree of degradation issued against the dead queen was regarded as a fraud and was rescinded by the issuers not long afterwards, in the meantime having been rejected by the US and all legations bar one. On 15 October 1895, a few days after the murder, when the terrified King and the Crown Prince were confined to the palace, still believing that the queen consort had managed to run away from her pursuer, Daewongun issued in the King&#x27;s name an edict that she was to be divorced for desertion and that the King would remarry.

Gojong bitterly refused to cooperate. Instead, he raised his deceased wife&#x27;s position to (); the title being the first rank of Women of the Internal Court. He erected a spirit shrine to her in the inner palace enclosure. It was connected to the house by a decorated gallery.

After Gojong&#x27;s father died in early 1898, he did not attend the funeral due to their strained relationship in consequence of the queen consort&#x27;s murder and Daewongun&#x27;s subsequent actions. It is said that Gojong&#x27;s cries at the death of his father were heard over the palace walls.

=== Residence ===
The royal couple had three palaces available to them in Seoul. They chose to reside in the Northern Palace, Gyeongbokgung Palace, where ultimately the queen&#x27;s assassination took place. After that, and following his return from sanctuary in the Russian Legation, Gojong refused to live in Gyeongbokgung Palace. In life, the queen consort used a series of inter-communicating small rooms separated by sliding panel doors. These rooms were approximately 8 foot (2.4 metres) square. This palace also contained the great Throne Hall, Geunjeongjeon.

==Assassination==

=== The Eulmi Incident ===
In the immediate run-up to her death, the queen consort had allied herself with Russian interests to counterbalance Japanese influence. She was perceived by the Japanese as an important hostile target. Her assassination took place in the early hours on 8 October 1895 within the king&#x27;s private quarters, in an attack known in Korea as the Eulmi Incident (). A few court ladies also shared her fate due to the Japanese mistaking them for the queen. The attack was organized by Miura Gorō and carried out by over fifty Japanese agents. The royal palace was in disarray after the ordeal, but Gojong ordered a eunuch to search for the queen&#x27;s remains: only a singed finger bone was later found.

===Funeral procession and tomb===
On 13 October 1897, Gojong (with Russian support) regained his throne, and spent a fortune (70,000 dollars in United States money of the day) to have his beloved queen&#x27;s remains properly honored and entombed. On 22 November 1897, her mourning procession included 5,000 soldiers, 650 police, 4,000 lanterns, hundreds of scrolls honoring her, and giant wooden horses intended for her use in the afterlife. The honors Gojong placed on her at her funeral were a recognition of her diplomatic and heroic efforts on behalf of Korea against the Japanese. They were also a statement of his own love for her. The recovered remains are in her tomb located in Namyangju, Gyeonggi, South Korea.

=== Aftermath ===

Gojong left the palace in 1896 and took refuge on 11 February for a year in the nearby armed Russian Legation where he remained safe with the Crown Prince until February 1897. Meanwhile, the third stage of the Gabo Reforms were hugely unpopular including because Korean men were ordered to cut off their topknots. By the time Gojong returned to the palace, the temporary ascendancy of Japanese interests (a pro-Japanese cabinet and the Japanese-instigated Gabo Reform) following the Sino-Japanese war and the assassination of the queen consort was over. This was because of popular anti-Japanese sentiment and the fact that the King had been in the effective control of the Russians. In the longer term, these tensions resulted in Japan&#x27;s victory in the Russo-Japanese War. In 1910, the Japan-Korea Annexation Treaty established Korea&#x27;s status as a Japanese colony. This status lasted between 29 August 1910 and 15 August 1945.

=== Proclaimed titles ===

On 6 January 1897, Gojong changed the queen consort&#x27;s posthumous name to &quot;Queen Munseong&quot; (), and altered her funeral location to Hongneung. Officials advised that the name was too similar to King Jeongjo&#x27;s &quot;Munseong&quot; temple name, therefore on 2 March 1897 Gojong changed the name to &quot;Myeongseong&quot;. That name is not to be confused with Queen Myeongseong of the Cheongpung Kim clan, King Hyeonjong&#x27;s wife.

Gojong proclaimed a new reign and became Emperor Gwangmu on 13 October 1897. The queen&#x27;s title was also changed to &quot;Empress Myeongseong&quot; (), that same month adding (), meaning Great, to her posthumous title.

=== Memorials ===

In the place where the limited physical remains of the queen consort were found after cremation, a marker of the site was erected by 1898. Gojong built a spirit house for her, now demolished, a photograph of which survives from 1912. The mortal remains of the couple are interred together at the Joseon Royal tombs complex at Hongyuneung (), Namyangju.

==Photographs and illustrations==

=== Photographs of Myeongseong ===

Although documents note that the queen consort was in an official royal family photograph, its whereabouts are unknown. Another royal family photograph depicting Gojong, Sunjong, and Crown Princess Min exists, but it was taken after the Empress&#x27; death. Shin Byong-ryong, a professor at Konkuk University, has stated his belief that the lack of photos of the queen consort derives from her constant fear of being recognizable to the public. Myeongseong&#x27;s political prominence has led many to believe that a photo of her must have existed at some point in history. Others have suspected that the Japanese government may have removed all evidence of this kind after her assassination. Some further speculated that the Japanese themselves may have kept a photo of her. As at 2022, it remains questionable whether any contemporary image of her in photographic form survives.
In 2003, KBS News reported that an alleged photograph of the queen consort had been disclosed to the public. The photograph was said to have been preserved as a family heirloom upon its purchase by the grandfather of Min Su-gyeong. In the photo, a woman is accompanied by a retinue at her rear. Experts have stated that the woman was clearly of high rank and possibly the wife of a bureaucrat. The woman&#x27;s clothing appeared to be of the kind worn only by the royal family but her outfit did not display the embroideries expected to decorate the apparel of the Empress. Some have further speculated that the figure may have been a high-ranking maidservant of the Empress.

=== Alleged portraits ===
At the time of her assassination, an oil painting by Italian artist Giuseppe Castiglione (1688–1766) was alleged to be a portrait of the Empress. However, the painting was too early and was subsequently discovered to be a portrait of Xiang Fei, a concubine of the Qianlong Emperor during 18th century Qing Dynasty.

In August 2017, a gallery exhibition held by Daboseong Ancient Art Museum in Central Seoul displayed a portrait of a woman said to be Empress Myeongseong. The woman is seen wearing a white hanbok, a white hemp hat, and leather shoes. She sits on a western-style chair. Kim Jong-chun, director of Daboseong Gallery, stated that when the portrait was examined, &quot;Min clan&quot; was written above the face side, and &quot;portrait of a Madame&quot; had been inscribed on the back. Subsequently, based on infrared research by the gallery, scholars and an art professor doubt the identification of the woman as being the queen consort.

===Japanese illustration===

On 13 January 2005, history professor Lee Tae-jin () of Seoul National University unveiled an illustration from an old Japanese magazine he had found at an antique bookstore in Tokyo. The 84th edition of the Japanese magazine Fūzokugahō (風俗畫報) published on 25 January 1895 has a Japanese illustration of Gojong and the queen consort receiving Inoue Kaoru, the Japanese chargé d&#x27;affaires. The illustration is marked 24 December 1894 and signed by an artist with the surname Ishizuka (石塚). It also has an inscription: &quot;The [Korean] King and Queen, moved by our honest advice, realize the need for resolute reform for the first time.&quot; Lee considered that the depiction of clothes and background are sufficiently detailed to suggest that it was drawn at the scene. Both the King and Inoue are shown looking at the queen consort in a manner that suggests the conversation was taking place between the queen consort and Inoue, with the King listening.

==Family==

* Grandfather
** Min Gi-hyeon (; 1751–1 August 1811)
* Grandmother
** Lady Jeong of the (1773–9 March 1838); Min Gi-hyeon&#x27;s third wife
* Father
** Min Chi-rok, Internal Prince Yeoseong (; 1799 – 17 September 1858) 
* Mother
** Internal Princess Consort Hanchang of the Hansan Yi clan (; 1818 – 28 November 1874); Min Chi-rok&#x27;s second wife
*** Grandfather: Yi Gyu-nyeon (; 1788–?)
*** Grandmother: Lady Kim of the Andong Kim clan (; 1788–?)
** Stepmother: Internal Princess Consort Haeryeong of the Haeju Oh clan (1798 – 15 March 1833)
*** Step-Grandfather: Oh Hui-sang (; 1763–1833)
* Siblings
** Adoptive older brother: (1830 – 28 November 1874); son of Min Chi-gu (1795–1874)
*** Adoptive sister-in-law: Lady Kim of the Gwangsan Kim clan clan (1843–1867 23 April); Min Seung-ho&#x27;s first wife 
**** Unnamed adoptive nephew (1864–1874)
*** Adoptive sister-in-law: Lady Kim of the Yonan Kim clan; 1830–11 February 1859); Min Seung-ho&#x27;s second wife
*** Adoptive sister-in-law: Lady Yi of the (1851–1 July 1919); Min Seung-ho&#x27;s third wife
**** Adoptive nephew: (1860–1914); eldest son of Min Tae-ho (1834–1884)
** Unnamed older brother (1840–1847)
** Older sister: Lady Min of the Yeoheung Min clan (1843–1849)
** Older sister: Lady Min of the Yeoheung Min clan (1847–1852)
* Husband
**King Gojong (later &quot;Emperor Gojong&quot;; 9 September 1852 – 21 January 1919)
*** Father-in-law: Heungseon Daewongun (21 December 1820 – 22 February 1898)
**** Legal father-in-law: King Munjo of Joseon (18 September 1809 – 25 June 1830)
*** Mother-in-law: Grand Internal Princess Consort Sunmok of the Yeoheung Min clan (3 February 1818 – 8 January 1898)
**** Legal mother-in-law: Queen Shinjeong of the Pungyang Jo clan (21 January 1809 – 4 June 1890)
* Children
** Son: Prince Royal Yi Choi (; 4 November 1871 – 8 November 1871)
** Unnamed daughter (13 February 1873 – 28 September 1873)
** Son: Yi Cheok, Emperor Sunjong (25 March 1874 – 24 April 1926)
*** Daughter-in-law: Empress Sunmyeong of the Yeoheung Min clan (20 November 1872 – 5 November 1904) – daughter of Min Tae-ho, leader of the Yeoheung Min clan
*** Daughter-in-law: Yun Jeung-sun, Empress Sunjeong of the Haepyeong Yun clan (19 September 1894 – 3 February 1966) – daughter of Marquis Yun Taek-yeong
** Son: Grand Prince Yi Deol (; 5 April 1875 – 18 April 1875)
** Son: Grand Prince Yi Bu (; 18 February 1878 – 5 June 1878)

==In popular culture==
===Film and television===
* Portrayed by Hwang Jeong-sun in the 1959 film &quot;Daewongun and Minbi&quot;
* Portrayed by Choi Eun-hee in the 1964 film &quot;The Sino-Japanese War and Queen Min the Heroine&quot;
* Portrayed by Do Geum-bong in the 1969 film &quot;Destiny of My Load&quot;
* Portrayed by Yoon Jeong-hee in the 1971 film &quot;The Women of Gyeongbokgung&quot;
* Portrayed by Kim Yeong-ae in the 1973 MBC TV series &quot;Queen Min&quot;
* Portrayed by Do Geum-bong in the 1973 film &quot;Three Days of Their Reign&quot;
* Portrayed by Kang Soo-yeon and Kim Yeong-ae in the 1982 KBS1 TV series &quot;Wind and Cloud&quot;
* Portrayed by Kim Ji-sook in the 1989–1990 KBS2 TV series &quot;Wind, Clouds, and Rain&quot;
* Portrayed by Kim Hee-ae in the 1990 MBC TV series &quot;500 Years of Joseon: Daewongun&quot;
* Portrayed by Ha Hee-ra in the 1995–1996 KBS1 TV series &quot;Dazzling Dawn&quot;
* Portrayed by Moon Geun-young, Lee Mi-yeon and Choi Myung-gil in the 2001–2002 KBS2 TV series &quot;Empress Myeongseong&quot;.
* Portrayed by Soo Ae in the 2009 film &quot;The Sword With No Name&quot;.
* Portrayed by Kang Soo-yeon in the 2006 film &quot;Hanbando&quot;
* Portrayed by Seo Yi-sook in the 2010 SBS TV series &quot;Jejungwon&quot;.
* Portrayed by Ha Ji-eun in the 2014 KBS2 TV series &quot;Gunman in Joseon&quot;.
* Portrayed by Choi Ji-na in the 2015 KBS2 TV series &quot;The Merchant: Gaekju 2015&quot;
* Portrayed by Lee Yoon-jeong in the 2015 film &quot;The Sound of a Flower&quot;
* Portrayed by Kim Ji-hyeon in the 2019 SBS TV series &quot;Nokdu Flower&quot;
* Portrayed by Park Jung-yeon in the 2020 TV Chosun TV series &quot;&quot;
* Portrayed by Cha Ji-yeon in the 2021 film &quot;Lost Face&quot;

=== Musicals ===

* Myeongseong is the subject of the South Korean musical &quot;The Last Empress&quot;, based on a historical novel by Yi Mun-yol.

== See also ==
* Society in the Joseon dynasty
* Political factions during the Joseon dynasty
* Japanese Occupation of Gyeongbokgung Palace
* Joseon Dynasty

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
===Veritable Records===
* 
* 
* 


===Secondary Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* Dechler, Martina. (1999). &quot;Culture and the State in Late Choson Korea.&quot; 
* Duus, Peter. (1998). &quot;The Abacus and the Sword: The Japanese Penetration of Korea, 1895–1910.&quot; Berkeley: University of California Press. /; 
* Hann, Woo-Keun. (1996). &quot;The History of Korea.&quot; 
* Keene, Donald. (2002). &quot;Emperor of Japan: Meiji and His World, 1852–1912.&quot; New York: Columbia University Press. ; OCLC 46731178
* Lewis, James Bryant. (2003). &quot;Frontier Contact between Choson Korea and Tokugawa Japan.&quot; 
* MacKensie, Frederick Arthur. (1920). &quot;Korea&#x27;s Fight for Freedom.&quot; Chicago: Fleming H. Revell. OCLC 3124752 Revised 2006: (See also Project Gutenberg.)
* __________. (1908). &quot;The Tragedy of Korea.&quot; London: Hodder and Stoughton. OCLC 2008452 Reprinted 2006: 
* Nahm, Andrew C. (1996). &quot;A History of the Korean People: Tradition and Transformation.&quot; (1996) 
* _________. (1997). &quot;Introduction to Korean History and Culture.&quot; 
* Schmid, Andre. (2002). &quot;Korea between Empires, 1895–1919.&quot; New York: Columbia University Press. ; ; OCLC 48618117
* Andrews, William. (2018) &quot;The Dragon Queen. (Fiction)&quot; Amazon Publishing. 

==External links==

* Making of an Asian hit: A Korean royal tragedy in the Broadway style by Ricardo Saludo, Asia Week (18 December 1998)
* Source of Illustrations by Henry Savage-Landor in &quot;Corea or Cho-sen, Land of the Morning Calm&quot; A. Henry Savage-Landor (1895) William Heinemann, London https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/13128/pg13128-images.html#LIST_OF_PLATES
* Characteristics of Queen of Corea, The New York Times, 10 November 1895.
* Japanese Document Sheds New Light on Korean Queen&#x27;s Murder by Yoo Seok-jae, The Chosun Ilbo (12 January 2005)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q464503" start="0" end="19" title="Empress Myeongseong" label="Empress Myeongseong"/>
<link wikidata="Q257425" start="83" end="89" title="Gojong of Korea" label="Gojong"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="108" end="114" title="Joseon" label="Joseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233" start="144" end="157" title="Korean Empire" label="Korean Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q464503" start="206" end="215" title="Empress Myeongseong" label="Queen Min"/>
<link wikidata="Q464503" start="301" end="331" title="Empress Myeongseong" label="Myeongseong, the Great Empress"/>
<link wikidata="Q469432" start="444" end="463" title="Heungseon Daewongun" label="Heungseon Daewongun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322181" start="1149" end="1174" title="government of Meiji Japan" label="government of Meiji Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q704307" start="1353" end="1363" title="Miura Gorō" label="Miura Gorō"/>
<link wikidata="Q5936137" start="1495" end="1506" title="Hullyeondae" label="Hullyeondae"/>
<link wikidata="Q482485" start="1552" end="1565" title="Gyeongbokgung" label="Gyeongbokgung"/>
<link wikidata="Q212418" start="1645" end="1650" title="ronin" label="ronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q623757" start="1727" end="1744" title="Assassination of Empress Myeongseong" label="Her assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q334111" start="2090" end="2106" title="Sunjong of Korea" label="Sunjong of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q488535" start="2131" end="2147" title="Korea royal refuge at the Russian legation" label="Russian legation"/>
<link wikidata="Q716803" start="2209" end="2220" title="Gabo Reform" label="Gabo Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q482631" start="2350" end="2360" title="Deoksugung" label="Deoksugung"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233" start="2411" end="2424" title="Korean Empire" label="Korean Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q482850" start="3221" end="3240" title="Cheoljong of Joseon" label="Cheoljong of Joseon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3261" end="3277" title="Cheoljong of Joseon#Death and succession" label="ambiguous causes"/>
<link wikidata="Q625987" start="3338" end="3353" title="Andong Kim clan" label="Andong Kim clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q626937" start="3410" end="3421" title="House of Yi" label="House of Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q625758" start="3423" end="3436" title="Queen Cheorin" label="Queen Cheorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q718768" start="3574" end="3587" title="Queen Dowager" label="Queen Dowager"/>
<link wikidata="Q624353" start="3664" end="3720" title="Queen Sinjeong" label="Grand Royal Dowager Hyoyu (once known as Queen Sinjeong)"/>
<link wikidata="Q484966" start="3800" end="3818" title="Heonjong of Joseon" label="Heonjong of Joseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q624353" start="3961" end="3986" title="Queen Sinjeong" label="Grand Queen Dowager Hyoyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139474" start="4034" end="4050" title="Pungyang Jo clan" label="Pungyang Jo clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q484453" start="4202" end="4211" title="Injo of Joseon" label="King Injo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454483" start="4268" end="4281" title="Prince Eunsin" label="Prince Eunsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q485009" start="4295" end="4307" title="Yeongjo of Joseon" label="King Yeongjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="5026" end="5032" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q625987" start="5526" end="5541" title="Andong Kim clan" label="Andong Kim clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q257425" start="5720" end="5726" title="Gojong of Korea" label="Gojong"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="5735" end="5741" title="Joseon" label="Joseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q469432" start="5860" end="5879" title="Heungseon Daewongun" label="Heungseon Daewongun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="5908" end="5917" title="Confucianism" label="Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q625300" start="6686" end="6703" title="Yeoheung Min clan" label="Yeoheung Min clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50257" start="6785" end="6790" title="Yeoju" label="Yeoju"/>
<link wikidata="Q20937" start="6793" end="6810" title="Gyeonggi Province" label="Gyeonggi Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q625300" start="6844" end="6857" title="Yeoheung Min clan" label="Yeoheung Mins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6853912" start="7003" end="7018" title="Queen Wongyeong" label="Queen Wongyeong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14304" start="7028" end="7045" title="Taejong of Joseon" label="Taejong of Joseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37682" start="7060" end="7076" title="Sejong the Great" label="Sejong the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q485599" start="7093" end="7106" title="Queen Inhyeon" label="Queen Inhyeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q485664" start="7123" end="7140" title="Sukjong of Joseon" label="Sukjong of Joseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16172437" start="7160" end="7171" title="Min Chi-rok" label="Min Chi-rok"/>
<link wikidata="Q16175142" start="7333" end="7346" title="Haeju Oh clan" label="Haeju Oh clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q106756129" start="7505" end="7539" title="Internal Princess Consort Hanchang" label="Internal Princess Consort Hanchang"/>
<link wikidata="Q499047" start="7848" end="7857" title="Sado city" label="Sado city"/>
<link wikidata="Q7214169" start="8438" end="8476" title="Sunmok Budaebuin" label="Grand Internal Princess Consort Sunmok"/>
<link wikidata="Q477157" start="9780" end="9793" title="Changdeokgung" label="Changdeokgung"/>
<link wikidata="Q490392" start="9819" end="9830" title="Unhyeongung" label="Unhyeongung"/>
<link wikidata="Q716348" start="10322" end="10334" title="Yeonguijeong" label="Yeonguijeong"/>
<link wikidata="Q747720" start="11493" end="11517" title="Spring and Autumn Annals" label="Spring and Autumn Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q230230" start="11551" end="11560" title="Zuo Zhuan" label="Zuo Zhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q482852" start="11816" end="11831" title="Changgyeonggung" label="Changgyeonggung"/>
<link wikidata="Q20817212" start="12603" end="12610" title="ginseng" label="ginseng"/>
<link wikidata="Q489792" start="13037" end="13050" title="Choe Ik-hyeon" label="Choe Ik-hyeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q490392" start="13349" end="13360" title="Unhyeongung" label="Unhyeongung"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="13905" end="13922" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q696860" start="14013" end="14028" title="Iwakura Mission" label="Iwakura Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q50383" start="14301" end="14308" title="Dongnae" label="Dongnae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158724" start="14370" end="14374" title="Japanese gunboat Un&amp;#x27;yō" label="Unyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q16520" start="14404" end="14409" title="Busan" label="Busan"/>
<link wikidata="Q494786" start="14607" end="14621" title="Ganghwa Island" label="Ganghwa Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q496905" start="14749" end="14772" title="Ganghwa Island incident" label="Ganghwa Island incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q864737" start="15120" end="15136" title="Unequal Treaties" label="Unequal Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q623391" start="15462" end="15476" title="Ganghwa Treaty" label="Ganghwa Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q109374" start="15831" end="15837" title="Wonsan" label="Wonsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20934" start="15849" end="15856" title="Incheon" label="Incheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q288210" start="16274" end="16287" title="Isabella Bird" label="Isabella Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q709087" start="17079" end="17092" title="Huang Zunxian" label="Huang Zunxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q696994" start="18559" end="18566" title="yangban" label="yangban"/>
<link wikidata="Q489792" start="18915" end="18927" title="Choi Ik-hyun" label="Choi Ik-hyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="19189" end="19200" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q625753" start="20322" end="20333" title="Kim Hongjip" label="Kim Hongjip"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612473" start="21216" end="21238" title="Prince Imperial Waneun" label="Prince Imperial Waneun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22133" end="22145" title="Min Gyeom-ho" label="Min Gyeom-ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q482485" start="22722" end="22735" title="Gyeongbokgung" label="Gyeongbokgung"/>
<link wikidata="Q42147" start="23358" end="23366" title="Cheongju" label="Cheongju"/>
<link wikidata="Q378517" start="24435" end="24447" title="Li Hongzhang" label="Li Hongzhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q708068" start="24764" end="24790" title="Japan-Korea Treaty of 1882" label="Japan-Korea Treaty of 1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="25325" end="25338" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shih-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q215816" start="25406" end="25432" title="Paul Georg von Möllendorff" label="Paul Georg von Möllendorff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25751" end="25763" title="Min Yeong-ik" label="Min Yeong-ik"/>
<link wikidata="Q127296" start="25870" end="25890" title="Flag of South Korea" label="Korean national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q35498" start="26132" end="26149" title="Chester A. Arthur" label="Chester A. Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q696994" start="26925" end="26932" title="yangban" label="yangban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397496" start="27495" end="27500" title="Sadae" label="Sadae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362881" start="27868" end="27883" title="George Clayton Foulk" label="George C. Foulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q488282" start="28200" end="28246" title="Gapsin Coup" label="staged a bloody palace coup on 4 December 1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="29428" end="29439" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q912109" start="29737" end="29755" title="Japan-Korea Treaty of 1885" label="Treaty of Hanseong"/>
<link wikidata="Q705189" start="30191" end="30213" title="Convention of Tientsin" label="Convention of Tientsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704958" start="30985" end="31013" title="Sir Robert Hart, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Robert Hart, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12591104" start="31850" end="31859" title="dangojeon" label="dangojeon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32321" end="32334" title="A.H. Maeterns" label="A.H. Maeterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="32356" end="32395" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="32687" end="32700" title="steam engines" label="steam engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890091" start="33204" end="33217" title="Homer Hulbert" label="Homer Hulbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q41114" start="33625" end="33640" title="Ewha Womans University" label="Ewha University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779508" start="33682" end="33698" title="Mary F. Scranton" label="Mary F. Scranton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145616" start="33755" end="33781" title="Henry Appenzeller" label="Henry Gerhardt Appenzeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q505508" start="34218" end="34237" title="Horace Newton Allen" label="Horace Newton Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="34686" end="34696" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q623878" start="34771" end="34793" title="Horace Grant Underwood" label="Horace Grant Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q55721069" start="34795" end="34819" title="Lillias Horton Underwood" label="Lillias Horton Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q12609622" start="34825" end="34844" title="William B. Scranton" label="William B. Scranton"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="35044" end="35061" title="Christian mission" label="Christian mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="35821" end="35836" title="Korean language" label="Korean language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11349185" start="37271" end="37283" title="Lucius Foote" label="Lucius Foote"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015391" start="37424" end="37444" title="William McEntyre Dye" label="William McEntyre Dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q117599305" start="37751" end="37766" title="Joseon Army (late 19th century)" label="Korean military"/>
<link wikidata="Q576338" start="38484" end="38508" title="Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598)" label="nearly 300 years earlier"/>
<link wikidata="Q50184" start="38547" end="38557" title="Yi Sun-sin" label="Yi Sun-sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973318" start="38766" end="38780" title="Hanseong sunbo" label="Hanseong Sunbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q485619" start="38790" end="38795" title="Hanja" label="Hanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q8222" start="39424" end="39430" title="Hangul" label="Hangul"/>
<link wikidata="Q124373463" start="39516" end="39528" title="Kanjō Shinpō" label="Kanjō Shinpō"/>
<link wikidata="Q701045" start="41445" end="41471" title="Donghak Peasant Revolution" label="Donghak Peasant Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="42437" end="42460" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q624865" start="42654" end="42692" title="The National Assembly Library of Korea" label="The National Assembly Library of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q288210" start="43463" end="43476" title="Isabella Bird" label="Isabella Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q691152" start="43538" end="43564" title="Royal Geographical Society" label="Royal Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009349" start="44058" end="44080" title="William Franklin Sands" label="William Franklin Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q334111" start="44999" end="45007" title="Sunjong of Korea" label="Yi Cheok"/>
<link wikidata="Q334111" start="46380" end="46387" title="Sunjong" label="Sunjong"/>
<link wikidata="Q909641" start="48739" end="48766" title="Naemyeongbu" label="Women of the Internal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q704307" start="50284" end="50294" title="Miura Gorō" label="Miura Gorō"/>
<link wikidata="Q42084" start="51193" end="51202" title="Namyangju" label="Namyangju"/>
<link wikidata="Q20937" start="51204" end="51212" title="Gyeonggi Province" label="Gyeonggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q488535" start="51282" end="51308" title="Gojong&amp;#x27;s internal exile to the Russian legation" label="took refuge on 11 February"/>
<link wikidata="Q716803" start="51703" end="51714" title="Gabo Reform" label="Gabo Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="51730" end="51747" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="Sino-Japanese war"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="52006" end="52024" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q495558" start="52039" end="52068" title="Japan-Korea Treaty of 1910" label="Japan-Korea Annexation Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q495276" start="52358" end="52367" title="Royal Tombs of the Joseon dynasty" label="Hongneung"/>
<link wikidata="Q483178" start="52589" end="52633" title="Queen Myeongseong" label="Queen Myeongseong of the Cheongpung Kim clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q484253" start="52635" end="52656" title="Hyeonjong of Joseon" label="King Hyeonjong&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q495276" start="53210" end="53229" title="Royal Tombs of the Joseon dynasty" label="Royal tombs complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q42084" start="53249" end="53258" title="Namyangju" label="Namyangju"/>
<link wikidata="Q334111" start="53502" end="53509" title="Sunjong" label="Sunjong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7214272" start="53515" end="53533" title="Empress Sunmyeong" label="Crown Princess Min"/>
<link wikidata="Q41765" start="53623" end="53640" title="Konkuk University" label="Konkuk University"/>
<link wikidata="Q694166" start="54486" end="54493" title="retinue" label="retinue"/>
<link wikidata="Q458671" start="54983" end="55003" title="Giuseppe Castiglione (Jesuit painter)" label="Giuseppe Castiglione"/>
<link wikidata="Q985615" start="55149" end="55158" title="Fragrant Concubine" label="Xiang Fei"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="55179" end="55195" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39913" start="55952" end="55977" title="Seoul National University" label="Seoul National University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56122" end="56132" title="Fūzokugahō" label="Fūzokugahō"/>
<link wikidata="Q493818" start="56239" end="56250" title="Inoue Kaoru" label="Inoue Kaoru"/>
<link wikidata="Q217713" start="56265" end="56287" title="chargé d&amp;#x27;affaires" label="chargé d&amp;#x27;affaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q16172437" start="57022" end="57033" title="Min Chi-rok" label="Min Chi-rok"/>
<link wikidata="Q106756129" start="57102" end="57158" title="Hanchang, Princess Consort to the Internal Prince" label="Internal Princess Consort Hanchang of the Hansan Yi clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q625987" start="57293" end="57308" title="Andong Kim clan" label="Andong Kim clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16175142" start="57378" end="57391" title="Haeju Oh clan" label="Haeju Oh clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623319" start="57602" end="57619" title="Gwangsan Kim clan" label="Gwangsan Kim clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525878" start="57764" end="57778" title="Yonan Kim clan" label="Yonan Kim clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q625300" start="58072" end="58089" title="Yeoheung Min clan" label="Yeoheung Min clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q257425" start="58177" end="58188" title="Emperor Gojong of the Korean Empire" label="King Gojong"/>
<link wikidata="Q469432" start="58279" end="58298" title="Heungseon Daewongun" label="Heungseon Daewongun"/>
<link wikidata="Q489514" start="58363" end="58383" title="Crown Prince Hyomyeong" label="King Munjo of Joseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7214169" start="58438" end="58476" title="Sunmok Budaebuin" label="Grand Internal Princess Consort Sunmok"/>
<link wikidata="Q625300" start="58484" end="58501" title="Yeoheung Min clan" label="Yeoheung Min clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q624353" start="58563" end="58578" title="Queen Shinjeong" label="Queen Shinjeong"/>
<link wikidata="Q334111" start="58780" end="58805" title="Emperor Sunjong of the Korean Empire" label="Yi Cheok, Emperor Sunjong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7214272" start="58859" end="58876" title="Empress Sunmyeong" label="Empress Sunmyeong"/>
<link wikidata="Q128454" start="59018" end="59049" title="Empress Sunjeong" label="Yun Jeung-sun, Empress Sunjeong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16175260" start="59057" end="59075" title="Haepyeong Yun clan" label="Haepyeong Yun clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q449397" start="59420" end="59432" title="Choi Eun-hee" label="Choi Eun-hee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286104" start="59525" end="59537" title="Do Kum-bong" label="Do Geum-bong"/>
<link wikidata="Q465263" start="59601" end="59615" title="Yoon Jeong-hee" label="Yoon Jeong-hee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681300" start="59687" end="59699" title="Kim Young-ae" label="Kim Yeong-ae"/>
<link wikidata="Q482607" start="59712" end="59715" title="Munhwa Broadcasting Corporation" label="MBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286104" start="59763" end="59775" title="Do Kum-bong" label="Do Geum-bong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768930" start="59799" end="59824" title="The Three-Day Reign" label="Three Days of Their Reign"/>
<link wikidata="Q449147" start="59846" end="59859" title="Kang Soo-yeon" label="Kang Soo-yeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681300" start="59864" end="59876" title="Kim Young-ae" label="Kim Yeong-ae"/>
<link wikidata="Q777278" start="59889" end="59893" title="KBS1" label="KBS1"/>
<link wikidata="Q624509" start="59975" end="59979" title="KBS2" label="KBS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q484360" start="60040" end="60050" title="Kim Hee-ae" label="Kim Hee-ae"/>
<link wikidata="Q482607" start="60063" end="60066" title="Munhwa Broadcasting Corporation" label="MBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q625766" start="60135" end="60144" title="Ha Hee-ra" label="Ha Hee-ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q777278" start="60162" end="60166" title="KBS1" label="KBS1"/>
<link wikidata="Q102098" start="60218" end="60233" title="Moon Geun-young" label="Moon Geun-young"/>
<link wikidata="Q484399" start="60235" end="60246" title="Lee Mi-yeon" label="Lee Mi-yeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q623856" start="60251" end="60265" title="Choi Myung-gil" label="Choi Myung-gil"/>
<link wikidata="Q624509" start="60283" end="60287" title="KBS2" label="KBS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q491789" start="60304" end="60323" title="Empress Myeongseong (TV series)" label="Empress Myeongseong"/>
<link wikidata="Q491071" start="60346" end="60352" title="Soo Ae" label="Soo Ae"/>
<link wikidata="Q493734" start="60376" end="60398" title="The Sword With No Name" label="The Sword With No Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q449147" start="60421" end="60434" title="Kang Soo-yeon" label="Kang Soo-yeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q623993" start="60458" end="60466" title="Hanbando (film)" label="Hanbando"/>
<link wikidata="Q928831" start="60512" end="60515" title="Seoul Broadcasting System" label="SBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q485499" start="60532" end="60541" title="Jejungwon (TV series)" label="Jejungwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16690418" start="60607" end="60623" title="Gunman in Joseon" label="Gunman in Joseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811678" start="60646" end="60656" title="Choi Ji-na" label="Choi Ji-na"/>
<link wikidata="Q624509" start="60669" end="60673" title="KBS2" label="KBS2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="60690" end="60715" title="The Merchant: Gaekju 2015" label="The Merchant: Gaekju 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q20444117" start="60775" end="60796" title="The Sound of a Flower" label="The Sound of a Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q928831" start="60843" end="60846" title="Seoul Broadcasting System" label="SBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q60996790" start="60863" end="60875" title="Nokdu Flower" label="Nokdu Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q93835625" start="60897" end="60911" title="Park Jung-yeon" label="Park Jung-yeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q486605" start="60924" end="60933" title="TV Chosun" label="TV Chosun"/>
<link wikidata="Q16092068" start="60972" end="60983" title="Cha Ji-yeon" label="Cha Ji-yeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745739" start="61105" end="61121" title="The Last Empress (musical)" label="The Last Empress"/>
<link wikidata="Q116288" start="61160" end="61170" title="Yi Munyeol" label="Yi Mun-yol"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166293" start="61190" end="61219" title="Society in the Joseon dynasty" label="Society in the Joseon dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391842" start="61222" end="61266" title="Political factions during the Joseon dynasty" label="Political factions during the Joseon dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q108523769" start="61269" end="61312" title="Japanese Occupation of Gyeongbokgung Palace" label="Japanese Occupation of Gyeongbokgung Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="61315" end="61329" title="Joseon Dynasty" label="Joseon Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240040" start="61773" end="61786" title="Donald Keene" label="Keene, Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="63114" end="63132" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426051" wikidata="Q4750555" url="?curid=426051" title="Anabaptist Association of Australia and New Zealand">
<text>The Anabaptist Association of Australia and New Zealand (AAANZ) is a network of individuals from a variety of Christian denominations in Australia and New Zealand who share a common interest in the Anabaptist tradition.

In 1998 the body was incorporated with about 80 members. The association believes that the enduring legacy of the Anabaptists includes: 

* baptism upon profession of faith 
* church membership is voluntary and members are accountable to the Bible (read through the revelation of Jesus) and to each other 
* commitment to the way of peace and other teachings of Jesus as a rule for life 
* separation of church and state 
* worshipping congregations which create authentic community and reach out through vision and service

==Annual meetings==
*1998 
*1999, Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia
*2000
*2001, Melbourne, Australia
*2003, Sydney, Australia
*2005, Canberra, Australia
*2007, Perth, Australia
*2009, Melbourne, Australia
*2011, New Zealand

==Notes==

==External links==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4750555" start="4" end="55" title="Anabaptist Association of Australia and New Zealand" label="Anabaptist Association of Australia and New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="137" end="146" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="151" end="162" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="198" end="208" title="Anabaptist" label="Anabaptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q187861" start="780" end="790" title="Wollongong" label="Wollongong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="885" end="893" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="912" end="917" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426053" wikidata="Q5284445" url="?curid=426053" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision D, Newfoundland and Labrador">
<text>Division No. 1, Subdivision D is an unorganized subdivision on the Avalon Peninsula in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. It is in Division 1 and contains the unincorporated communities of Flatrock, Neils Pond and Three Island Pond.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q790092" start="67" end="83" title="Avalon Peninsula" label="Avalon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="87" end="112" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303397" start="131" end="141" title="Division 1, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division 1"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426058" wikidata="Q5887108" url="?curid=426058" title="Holyrood, Newfoundland and Labrador">
<text>Holyrood is a town on the Avalon Peninsula in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. It is in Division 1, on Conception Bay. It is approximately a 30-minute drive from the capital city of St. John&#x27;s. During King William&#x27;s War, the village was destroyed in the Avalon Peninsula Campaign.

The town is famous for being at the bottom of the bay and having a large cross on the top of the predominant mountain &quot;George Cove&quot;. Holyrood is also renowned for its squid fishery and caplin &quot;rolling&quot; which happens in late spring, early summer. &quot;Rolling&quot; refers to the mating of the caplin when they beach themselves and can be picked up by hand. It also hosts the popular &quot;Squid Fest,&quot; several days of squid-themed activities culminating in an outdoor festival of drinking and traditional music. The festival attracts thousands of locals and tourists each year.

The town has a population of 2,471 (as of 2021). Since 2021, Holyrood has been considered part of the St. John&#x27;s metropolitan area.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Holyrood had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

==Services==
Holyrood contains an elementary school, Holy Cross Elementary (kindergarten and grades 1 to 6). After completing grade 6, students attend Roncalli Central High in Avondale.

==Notable people==
* Kate Corbett, actress
* Philip J. Lewis (1900–1985), was a lawyer and politician in Newfoundland

==See also==
* List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador
* Holyrood weather radar
* Monarchy in Newfoundland and Labrador

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5887108" start="0" end="8" title="Holyrood, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Holyrood"/>
<link wikidata="Q790092" start="26" end="42" title="Avalon Peninsula" label="Avalon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="46" end="71" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303397" start="90" end="100" title="Division 1, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879752" start="105" end="119" title="Conception Bay" label="Conception Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082" start="184" end="199" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070342" start="208" end="231" title="King William&amp;#x27;s War" label="King William&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935388" start="266" end="291" title="Avalon Peninsula Campaign" label="Avalon Peninsula Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q143359" start="489" end="495" title="Capelin" label="caplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588794" start="1001" end="1034" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s metropolitan area" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="1063" end="1088" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="1102" end="1119" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874476" start="1473" end="1481" title="Avondale, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Avondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408054" start="1505" end="1517" title="Kate Corbett" label="Kate Corbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183825" start="1529" end="1544" title="Philip J. Lewis" label="Philip J. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134052" start="1618" end="1671" title="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador" label="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456612" start="1674" end="1696" title="Canadian weather radar network" label="Holyrood weather radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898077" start="1699" end="1736" title="Monarchy in Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Monarchy in Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426059" wikidata="Q1397277" url="?curid=426059" title="Rainbow (Greece)">
<text>The Rainbow (, &quot;Ouránio Tóxo&quot;; , &quot;Vinožito&quot;) is a political party in Greece, and a former member of the European Free Alliance. It is known for its activism amongst what it regards as the ethnic Macedonian minority in Greece and their descendants abroad. The Rainbow states that it sees the acceptance of the Republic of North Macedonia in the European Union with a positive regard.

In the past, it had an alliance with the Organization for the Reconstruction of the Communist Party of Greece (OAKKE). The two formed a coalition in the Parliamentary elections in 1996. Members of the party retain Greek names and surnames. This is both due to bureaucratic barriers for name-changing and due to their wishing not to alienate their target electorate.

In 2005, the European Court of Human Rights found the Greek government guilty of violating the European Convention on Human Rights by restricting party members&#x27; freedom of assembly and failing to provide due process within reasonable time. The Greek government was ordered to pay 35,000 euros in compensation.

== History ==
The Rainbow party was founded in 1994, succeeding the Macedonian Movement for Balkan Prosperity. The party offices were opened in Florina on 6 September 1995. On 7 September, the offices were broken into and ransacked. A sign hanging outside the office which had clearly written on it &#x27;ВИНОЖИТО, ΟΥΡΑΝΙΟ ΤΟΞΟ, ЛЕРИНСКИ КОМИТЕТ&#x27; (Vinožito, Ouránio Tóxo, Lerinski Komitet). This sign had words &quot;Rainbow Party, Florina Committee&quot; written in both Greek and Macedonian. This sign was then stolen during the raid.

The sign was replaced. However, on 12 September, priests from the Florina region called on people to join a &quot;demonstration to protest against the enemies of Greece who arbitrarily display signs with anti-Hellenic inscriptions&quot;. The statement also called for the “deportation” of those responsible. Early in the morning of 13 September, the offices of the party were attacked by a number of people, including the mayor of Florina. They broke into the premises, assaulted those inside and confiscated the sign. During the course of the night, equipment and furniture on the premises were thrown out the window and set alight. No one was charged for the attack.

On 13 September, four leaders of the party Pavlos Voskopoulos, Petros Vasiliadis, Vasilis Romas and Costas Tasopoulos were charged with &quot;causing and inciting mutual hatred among the citizens&quot; under Article 192 of the Greek Penal Code. Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch called on Greek authorities to drop the charges against them. A trial was held against them in September 1998 and they were acquitted.

== Electoral results ==
1 

=== 1994 European Parliament election ===
In the June 1994 Euroelections, a Rainbow list was presented by the Macedonian Movement for Balkan Prosperity (MAKIVE), in cooperation with the Rainbow group of the European Parliament (which included the minority and regionalist MEPs between 1989–1994). The list was immediately strongly attacked and slandered by the state news agency and some media; then the country’s Supreme Court invalidated its candidacy, on the grounds that it had not declared it was not aiming at overthrowing the regime, a declaration not used since 1974. Following the outcry, the Rainbow and two other leftist lists, which were initially excluded were reinstated. The Rainbow list was the only one not to get any air time on state television during the campaign and was not able to distribute ballots in most Southern Greek electoral districts; also, on election day, GHM and MRG-Greece received reliable information that the Rainbow ballot was not given to the voters in many Greater Athens voting places. Despite all those problems, Rainbow received 7,263 votes or 0.1% of the total electorate. Its relative share of the vote was significant in three districts where it received more than half its votes: 5.7% in Florina, 1.3% in Pella, and 0.9% in Kastoria. In the October 1994 more polarized district elections, the Rainbow list in Florina received 3.5%.

=== 1999 European Parliament Election ===
Rainbow participated in the 1999 elections for the European Parliament, obtaining 4,951 votes (0.08% of the total Greek vote) and failing to elect anyone.

=== 2002 Greek local elections ===
Petros Dimtsis, a Rainbow Party member, was elected prefecture counselor in the Florina prefecture on a local list also supported by the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK), as was the case that same year and at the next elections in 2006 for the candidate of the Turkish minority&#x27;s Party of Friendship, Equality and Peace, Achmet Chatziosman, elected on a local list supported by PASOK and Synaspismós in the Rhodope Prefecture. So far, he was the only member of the party ever to have been elected to any office.

=== 2004 Greek Parliament Election ===
They decided not to take part in the 2004 parliamentary elections, citing shortage of funds as the reason.

=== 2004 European Parliament Election ===
Rainbow took part in the 2004 elections, obtaining 6,176 votes (0.098%). Their best return was in the Florina prefecture, where they managed to tally 1,203 votes out of 39,532 cast, failing to elect anyone. Out of the 6,176 votes Rainbow Party received, less than half (2,955) were cast in the region of Macedonia itself. Because parties stand for election across the entire length and breadth of the country, the pro-ethnic Macedonian Rainbow Party polled better in such distant regions as Crete and the Peloponnese than it did in many Macedonian prefectures.

=== 2006 Greek local elections ===
Rainbow elected several candidates in the Florina region, including Petros Dimtsis who was reelected to the office of prefecture counselor in the Florina prefecture.

=== 2007 Greek Parliament Election ===
Rainbow chose not to participate in the 2007 Greek legislative election, again citing a shortage of funds.

=== 2009 European Parliament Election ===
In the 2009 European Parliament election, which resulted in a record low voter turnout, Rainbow tallied a countrywide total of 4,530 votes (out of over 5.25 million cast), a 0.09% percentage result, and failed to gain a seat in the European Parliament. Their best return was in the Florina prefecture, with 1,195 votes (a 0.57% increase from the 2004 elections). Votes tallied in other prefectures were mostly in the two-digit ballpark.

=== 2010 Greek local elections ===
Panayotis Anastasiadis (Pando Ashlakov), an active member of the party&#x27;s leadership, was elected president of the village of Meliti/Ovchareni, but on a broader list, as for the local elections in Greece national parties are forbidden to take part, only local lists compete, usually with the support of several parties.

=== 2019 European Parliament elections ===
The Rainbow Party received a total of 6,413 votes in the 2019 European Parliament election in Greece. The party performed best in Florina where it received 3.3% (1,123 votes) of the vote, finishing sixth among the parties.

== Political programme and reception ==
The Rainbow Party is interested in achieving political recognition of what they regard as an ethnic Macedonian minority in Greece, and preserving its culture, language, and customs. Greece officially recognizes the party but not the ethnic group due to the existence of their own regional group also named Macedonians, their own historical association with ancient Macedonians and concerns of irredentism on behalf of the Republic of Macedonia (now North Macedonia). This issue was subject to a naming dispute mediated by the United Nations, resolved in 2019.

An issue very important to the party is the reestablishment back to Greece of the former ELAS and Democratic Army of Greece partisans expelled during the Greek Civil War from Macedonia (Greece). During the Greek Civil War (1944–1949), many of them took refuge in parts of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (particularly the Socialist Republic of Macedonia), under the protection of the Yugoslav leader Josip Broz Tito. When PASOK was elected for the first time, they allowed all Greek communist refugees, located in many communist states, to return to Greece. However, the refugees now living in the Republic of North Macedonia were never re-granted their citizenship. In Bulgaria, historians such as Tsanko Serafimov connect the establishment of the party and the spread of Macedonian nationalism in the Greek region of Macedonia as a whole to a large extent with the disinterest of the Bulgarian state for the rights of the residents with Bulgarian identity in the area after 1944; at the same time, Yugoslavia was conducting intensified propaganda.

== See also ==
* Politics of Greece
* Slavic speakers of Greek Macedonia

== References ==
== External links ==
* Press Releases, via the Greek Helsinki Committee for Human Rights</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1397277" start="4" end="11" title="Rainbow (Greece)" label="Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="70" end="85" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="89" end="95" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q639383" start="124" end="146" title="European Free Alliance" label="European Free Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="208" end="225" title="Minorities in Greece#Slavic-speaking" label="ethnic Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="329" end="356" title="Republic of North Macedonia" label="Republic of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="364" end="378" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567312" start="445" end="513" title="Organization for the Reconstruction of the Communist Party of Greece" label="Organization for the Reconstruction of the Communist Party of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q737031" start="557" end="588" title="1996 Greek legislative election" label="Parliamentary elections in 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="784" end="814" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="866" end="901" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q162254" start="937" end="956" title="freedom of assembly" label="freedom of assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="1063" end="1068" title="euros" label="euros"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1564" end="1569" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="1574" end="1584" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408174" start="2343" end="2361" title="Pavlos Voskopoulos" label="Pavlos Voskopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2363" end="2380" title="Petros Vasiliadis" label="Petros Vasiliadis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2382" end="2395" title="Vasilis Romas" label="Vasilis Romas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2400" end="2417" title="Costas Tasopoulos" label="Costas Tasopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="2545" end="2566" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="2571" end="2589" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880692" start="2758" end="2791" title="1994 European Parliament election in Greece" label="1994 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="2961" end="2980" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q202272" start="3991" end="3998" title="Florina" label="Florina"/>
<link wikidata="Q213679" start="4008" end="4013" title="Pella" label="Pella"/>
<link wikidata="Q206954" start="4027" end="4035" title="Kastoria" label="Kastoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623406" start="4140" end="4173" title="1999 European Parliament election in Greece" label="1999 European Parliament Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623406" start="4206" end="4220" title="1999 European Parliament election in Greece" label="1999 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="4229" end="4248" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602020" start="4338" end="4364" title="2002 Greek local elections" label="2002 Greek local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q202595" start="4421" end="4431" title="Prefectures of Greece" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q202272" start="4449" end="4456" title="Florina" label="Florina"/>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="4506" end="4536" title="Panhellenic Socialist Movement" label="Panhellenic Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469635" start="4636" end="4652" title="Turks of Western Thrace" label="Turkish minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141080" start="4660" end="4699" title="Party of Friendship, Equality and Peace" label="Party of Friendship, Equality and Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696170" start="4701" end="4719" title="Achmet Chatziosman" label="Achmet Chatziosman"/>
<link wikidata="Q219573" start="4768" end="4779" title="Synaspismós" label="Synaspismós"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896603" start="4787" end="4805" title="Rhodope Prefecture" label="Rhodope Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518129" start="4897" end="4927" title="2004 Greek legislative election" label="2004 Greek Parliament Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623412" start="5044" end="5077" title="2004 European Parliament election in Greece" label="2004 European Parliament Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623412" start="5107" end="5121" title="2004 European Parliament election in Greece" label="2004 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q202272" start="5184" end="5191" title="Florina" label="Florina"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="5386" end="5395" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="5573" end="5578" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="5587" end="5598" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602019" start="5648" end="5674" title="2006 Greek local elections" label="2006 Greek local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q202272" start="5721" end="5728" title="Florina" label="Florina"/>
<link wikidata="Q19890743" start="5825" end="5843" title="Florina prefecture" label="Florina prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204824" start="5850" end="5880" title="2007 Greek legislative election" label="2007 Greek Parliament Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204824" start="5925" end="5956" title="2007 Greek legislative election" label="2007 Greek legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q611416" start="5997" end="6030" title="2009 European Parliament election in Greece" label="2009 European Parliament Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q611416" start="6042" end="6075" title="2009 European Parliament election in Greece" label="2009 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q202272" start="6317" end="6324" title="Florina" label="Florina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555570" start="6477" end="6503" title="2010 Greek local elections" label="2010 Greek local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393190" start="6638" end="6644" title="Meliti" label="Meliti"/>
<link wikidata="Q55594075" start="6933" end="6976" title="2019 European Parliament election in Greece" label="2019 European Parliament election in Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q19890743" start="7006" end="7013" title="Florina (regional unit)" label="Florina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="7233" end="7250" title="Macedonians (ethnic group)" label="ethnic Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="7299" end="7307" title="Macedonian language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401272" start="7446" end="7457" title="Greek Macedonians" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q576065" start="7497" end="7516" title="ancient Macedonians" label="ancient Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139479" start="7635" end="7649" title="Macedonia naming dispute" label="naming dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q172648" start="7790" end="7794" title="Ethnikos Laikos Apeleftherotikos Stratos" label="ELAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186143" start="7799" end="7824" title="Democratic Army of Greece" label="Democratic Army of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q188972" start="7855" end="7870" title="Greek Civil War" label="Greek Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="7876" end="7894" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia (Greece)"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="7984" end="8024" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q240592" start="8043" end="8074" title="Socialist Republic of Macedonia" label="Socialist Republic of Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="8121" end="8136" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q849866" start="8240" end="8256" title="communist states" label="communist states"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="8319" end="8346" title="Republic of North Macedonia" label="Republic of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="8391" end="8399" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407487" start="8494" end="8516" title="Macedonian nationalism" label="Macedonian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="8660" end="8678" title="Bulgarians" label="Bulgarian identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="8721" end="8731" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="8759" end="8769" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056647" start="8789" end="8807" title="Politics of Greece" label="Politics of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991432" start="8810" end="8844" title="Slavic speakers of Greek Macedonia" label="Slavic speakers of Greek Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396296" start="8916" end="8951" title="Helsinki Committee for Human Rights" label="Helsinki Committee for Human Rights"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426063" wikidata="Q415501" url="?curid=426063" title="EDL">
<text>EDL may refer to:

== Politics ==
* English Defence League, an English fascist organisation. 
** European Defence League, an offshoot organization of the English Defence League
** English Disco Lovers, an internet movement to lower the search ranking of EDL as the English Defence League
* Estonian Defence League, an Estonian voluntary militarily organized national defence organisation
* European Democratic Lawyers, a labour union
*European Day of Languages, an annual event aimed at encouraging language learning in Europe

== Technology ==
* Edit decision list
* Electrical double layer
* Entry, descent and landing (rocketry)
* Event Driven Language, a computer language for the IBM Series/1 Event Driven Executive operating system
* Experiment Description Language, a computer language for the program Fsc2 for controlling spectrometers
* Eye Dome Lighting is a non-photorealistic, image-based shading technique
* Qualcomm EDL mode, a debugging feature in SoCs from Qualcomm

== Transport ==
* Edale railway station, in England
* Eldoret International Airport, in Kenya
* Johor Bahru Eastern Dispersal Link Expressway, a highway in Johor, Malaysia

== Medicine ==
* Essential Drugs List, also known as a list of essential medicines

== Other uses ==
* Electricité Du Liban, a Lebanese electrical utility
* Electricité du Laos, the state electrical utility of Laos
* Electronic Defense Laboratories, a defunct American defense company
* Enhanced Drivers License, in North America
* Every Day Life, an American rapcore group</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q415501" start="0" end="3" title="EDL" label="EDL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341558" start="36" end="58" title="English Defence League" label="English Defence League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317269" start="97" end="120" title="European Defence League" label="European Defence League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121298" start="180" end="200" title="English Disco Lovers" label="English Disco Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721814" start="290" end="313" title="Estonian Defence League" label="Estonian Defence League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874449" start="390" end="417" title="European Democratic Lawyers" label="European Democratic Lawyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q496423" start="435" end="460" title="European Day of Languages" label="European Day of Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q452930" start="547" end="565" title="Edit decision list" label="Edit decision list"/>
<link wikidata="Q904857" start="568" end="591" title="Electrical double layer" label="Electrical double layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="594" end="620" title="Entry, descent and landing" label="Entry, descent and landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q475040" start="634" end="655" title="Event Driven Language" label="Event Driven Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506799" start="740" end="771" title="Experiment Description Language" label="Experiment Description Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q108704092" start="921" end="938" title="Qualcomm EDL mode" label="Qualcomm EDL mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859134" start="1001" end="1022" title="Edale railway station" label="Edale railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258402" start="1037" end="1066" title="Eldoret International Airport" label="Eldoret International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268878" start="1079" end="1124" title="Johor Bahru Eastern Dispersal Link Expressway" label="Johor Bahru Eastern Dispersal Link Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q35456" start="1219" end="1238" title="essential medicines" label="essential medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q39047344" start="1259" end="1279" title="Electricité Du Liban" label="Electricité Du Liban"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587598" start="1313" end="1332" title="Electricité du Laos" label="Electricité du Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358235" start="1373" end="1404" title="Electronic Defense Laboratories" label="Electronic Defense Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378775" start="1443" end="1467" title="Enhanced Drivers License" label="Enhanced Drivers License"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417477" start="1488" end="1502" title="Every Day Life" label="Every Day Life"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426071" wikidata="Q5284443" url="?curid=426071" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision O, Newfoundland and Labrador">
<text>Division No. 1, Subdivision O is an unorganized subdivision on the Avalon Peninsula in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada, in Division 1. It&#x27;s divided into two parts, the northern portion touches Conception Bay. It includes the unincorporated communities of Marysvale and Salmonier Line.

==Marysvale==

Marysvale is a settlement in Newfoundland and Labrador.

Prior to about 1900 the community of Marysvale was known as Turk&#x27;s Gut. Somewhat later the nearby community of English Cove (sometimes mistakenly called English Harbour) also became part of Marysvale.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5284443" start="0" end="29" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision O, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division No. 1, Subdivision O"/>
<link wikidata="Q790092" start="67" end="83" title="Avalon Peninsula" label="Avalon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="87" end="112" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303397" start="125" end="135" title="Division 1, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879752" start="200" end="214" title="Conception Bay" label="Conception Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284443" start="262" end="271" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision O, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Marysvale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252517" start="323" end="333" title="List of communities in Newfoundland and Labrador" label="settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="337" end="362" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426073" wikidata="Q1342206" url="?curid=426073" title="USS Lake Champlain">
<text>Three ships of the United States Navy have been named USS &quot;Lake Champlain&quot;, after the Battle of Lake Champlain in the War of 1812.

*, was a cargo ship in use during 1918 and 1919 and then sold
*, was an aircraft carrier in service from 1945 to 1966
*, was a guided missile cruiser in service from 1988 to 2023

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="19" end="37" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342206" start="54" end="78" title="USS Lake Champlain" label="USS &amp;quot;Lake Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237111" start="96" end="120" title="Battle of Lake Champlain" label="Battle of Lake Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="128" end="139" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="214" end="230" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843" start="269" end="291" title="guided missile cruiser" label="guided missile cruiser"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426077" wikidata="Q1153595" url="?curid=426077" title="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace">
<text>The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace (CEIP) is a nonpartisan international affairs think tank headquartered in Washington, D.C., with operations in Europe, South Asia, East Asia, and the Middle East, as well as the United States. Founded in 1910 by Andrew Carnegie, the organization describes itself as being dedicated to advancing cooperation between countries, reducing global conflict, and promoting active international engagement between the United States and countries around the world. It engages leaders from multiple sectors and across the political spectrum.

In the University of Pennsylvania&#x27;s &quot;2019 Global Go To Think Tanks Report&quot;, Carnegie was ranked the number 1 top think tank in the world. In the &quot;2015 Global Go To Think Tanks Report&quot;, Carnegie was ranked the third most influential think tank in the world, after the Brookings Institution and Chatham House. It was ranked as the top Independent Think Tank in 2018.

Its headquarters building, prominently located on the Embassy Row section of Massachusetts Avenue, was completed in 1989 on a design by architecture firm Smith, Hinchman &amp; Grylls. 

The chairperson of Carnegie&#x27;s board of trustees is businesswoman Catherine James Paglia, and the organization&#x27;s president is former California Supreme Court justice Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar, who replaced CIA Director William J. Burns in 2021.

==Organizational history==

===Establishment===
Andrew Carnegie, like other leading internationalists of his day, believed that war could be eliminated by stronger international laws and organizations. &quot;I am drawn more to this cause than to any,&quot; he wrote in 1907. Carnegie&#x27;s single largest commitment in this field was his creation of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

On his seventy-fifth birthday, November 25, 1910, Andrew Carnegie announced the establishment of the Endowment with a gift of $10 million worth of first mortgage bonds, paying a 5% rate of interest. The interest income generated from these bonds was to be used to fund a new think tank dedicated to advancing the cause of world peace. In his deed of gift, presented in Washington on December 14, 1910, Carnegie charged trustees to use the fund to &quot;hasten the abolition of international war, the foulest blot upon our civilization&quot;, and he gave his trustees &quot;the widest discretion as to the measures and policy they shall from time to time adopt&quot; in carrying out the purpose of the fund.

Carnegie chose longtime adviser Elihu Root, senator from New York and former Secretary of War and of State, to be the Endowment&#x27;s first president. Awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1912, Root served until 1925. Founder trustees included Harvard University president Charles William Eliot, philanthropist Robert S. Brookings, former US Ambassador to Great Britain Joseph Hodges Choate, former secretary of state John W. Foster, and Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching president Henry Smith Pritchett.

===The first fifty years: 1910–1960===
At the outset of America&#x27;s involvement in World War I in 1917, the Carnegie Endowment trustees unanimously declared, &quot;the most effective means of promoting durable international peace is to prosecute the war against the Imperial Government of Germany to final victory for democracy.&quot; In December 1918, Carnegie Endowment Secretary James Brown Scott and four other Endowment personnel, including James T. Shotwell, sailed with President Woodrow Wilson on the USS &quot;George Washington&quot; to join the peace talks in France.

Carnegie is often remembered for having built Carnegie libraries. They were funded by other Carnegie trusts. However, the Endowment built libraries in Belgium, France, and Serbia in three cities which had been badly damaged in the war. In addition, in 1918, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace (CEIP) began to support library special collections on international issues through its International Mind Alcove program, which aimed to foster a more global perspective among the public in the United States and other countries. The Endowment concluded its support for this program in 1958.

On July 14, 1923, the Hague Academy of International Law, an initiative of the Endowment, was formally opened in the Peace Palace at The Hague. The Peace Palace had been built by the Carnegie Foundation (Netherlands) in 1913 to house the Permanent Court of Arbitration and a library of international law.

In 1925, Nicholas Murray Butler succeeded Elihu Root as president of the Endowment. In December of the same year, the endowment&#x27;s Board approved a proposal by President Butler to offer aid in modernizing the Vatican Library. From 1926 to 1939, the Carnegie Endowment expended some $200,000 on the endeavor. For his work, including his involvement with the Kellogg–Briand Pact, Butler was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1931.

In November 1944, the Carnegie Endowment published Raphael Lemkin&#x27;s &quot;Axis Rule in Occupied Europe: Laws of Occupation – Analysis of Government – Proposals for Redress&quot;. The work was the first to bring the word &quot;genocide&quot; into the global lexicon. In April 1945, James T. Shotwell, director of the Carnegie Endowment&#x27;s Division of Economics and History, served as chairman of the semiofficial consultants to the US delegation at the San Francisco conference to draw up the United Nations Charter. As chairman, Shotwell pushed for an amendment to establish a permanent United Nations Commission on Human Rights, which exists to this day.

In December 1945, Butler stepped down after twenty years as president and chairman of the board of trustees. Butler was the last living member of the original board selected by Andrew Carnegie in 1910. John Foster Dulles was elected to succeed Butler as chairman of the board of trustees, where he served until fellow board member Dwight D. Eisenhower was elected president of the US in 1952 and appointed Dulles Secretary of State.

In 1946, Alger Hiss succeeded Butler as president of the Endowment but resigned in 1949 after being denounced as a spy for the Soviet Union by Whittaker Chambers. Hiss was replaced in the interim by James T. Shotwell.

In 1947, the Carnegie Endowment&#x27;s headquarters were moved closer to the United Nations in New York City, while the Washington office at Peter Parker House (700 Jackson Pl., NW) became a subsidiary branch.

In 1950, the Endowment board of trustees appointed Joseph E. Johnson, a historian and former State Department official, to take the helm.

===The Cold War years: 1960–1990===
In 1963, the Carnegie Endowment reconstituted its International Law Program in order to address several emerging international issues: the increase in significance and impact of international organizations; the technological revolution that facilitated the production of new military weaponry; the spread of Communism; the surge in newly independent states; and the challenges of new forms of economic activity, including global corporations and intergovernmental associations. The program resulted in the New York-based Study Group on the United Nations and the International Organization Study Group at the European Centre in Geneva.
In 1970, Thomas L. Hughes became the sixth president of the Carnegie Endowment. Hughes moved the Endowment&#x27;s headquarters from New York to Washington, D.C., and closed the Endowment&#x27;s European Centre in Geneva.

The Carnegie Endowment acquired full ownership of &quot;Foreign Policy&quot; magazine in the spring of 1978. The Endowment published &quot;Foreign Policy&quot; for 30 years, moving it from a quarterly academic journal to a bi-monthly glossy covering the nexus of globalization and international policy. The magazine was sold to &quot;The Washington Post&quot; in 2008.

In 1981, Carnegie Endowment Associate Fred Bergsten co-founded the Institute for International Economics—today known as the Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Citing the growing danger of a nuclear arms race between India and Pakistan, Thomas L. Hughes formed an eighteen-member Task Force on Non-Proliferation and South Asian Security to propose methods for reducing the growing nuclear tensions on the subcontinent.
In 1989, two former Carnegie associates, Barry Blechman and Michael Krepon, founded the Henry L. Stimson Center.

===After the Cold War: 1990–2000===
In 1991, Morton Abramowitz was named the seventh president of the Endowment. Abramowitz, previously a State Department official, focused the Endowment&#x27;s attention on Russia in the post-Soviet era. In this spirit, the Carnegie Endowment opened the Carnegie Moscow Center in 1994 as a home of Russian scholar-commentators.

Jessica Mathews joined the Carnegie Endowment as its eighth president in May 1997. Under her leadership, Carnegie&#x27;s goal was to become the first multinational/global think tank.

In 2000, Mathews announced the creation of the Migration Policy Institute (MPI) headed by Demetrios Papademetriou which became the first stand-alone think tank concerned with international migration.

===The Global Think Tank: 2000present===
As first laid out with the &quot;Global Vision&quot; in 2007, the Carnegie Endowment aspired to be the first global think tank. Mathews said that her aim was to make Carnegie the place that brings what the world thinks into thinking about US policy and to communicate that thinking to a global audience. During Mathews&#x27; tenure as president, the Carnegie Endowment launched the Carnegie Middle East Center in Beirut (2006), Carnegie Europe in Brussels (2007), and the Carnegie-Tsinghua Center at the Tsinghua University in Beijing (2010). Additionally, in partnership with the al-Farabi Kazakh National University, Carnegie established the Al-Farabi Carnegie Program on Central Asia in Kazakhstan in late 2011.

In April 2016, the sixth international Center, Carnegie India, opened in New Delhi.

In February 2015, Mathews stepped down as president after 18 years. William J. Burns, former US Deputy Secretary of State, became Carnegie&#x27;s ninth president. After Burns&#x27; nomination and confirmation as Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, then-California Supreme Court Justice and Stanford professor Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar became President of the Carnegie Endowment on November 1, 2021.

In April 2022, the Carnegie Endowment was compelled to close its Moscow center at the direction of the Russian government.

In April 2023 Russia&#x27;s Ministry of Justice added the Centre to the so-called list of &quot;foreign agent&quot;, and in July 2024 it designated the organization as &quot;undesirable&quot;.

===Officers===
;Presidents

* Elihu Root (1912–1925)
* Nicholas Murray Butler (1925–1945)
* Alger Hiss (1946–1949)
* James T. Shotwell (1949–1950)
* Joseph E. Johnson (1950–1971)
* Thomas L. Hughes (1971–1991)
* Morton I. Abramowitz (1991–1997)
* Jessica Mathews (1997–2015)
* William J. Burns (2015–2021)
* Thomas Carothers (interim) (2021)
* Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar (2021–present)
;Chairpersons

* Elihu Root (1910–1925)
* Nicholas Murray Butler (1925–1945)
* John W. Davis (1946–1947)
* John Foster Dulles (1947–1953)
* Harvey Hollister Bundy (1953–1958)
* Whitney North Seymour (1958–1970)
* Seymour Milton Katz (1970–1978)
* John W. Douglas (1978–1986)
* Charles Zwick (1986–1993)
* Robert Carswell (1993–1999)
* William H. Donaldson (1999–2003)
* James C. Gaither (2003–2009)
* Richard Giordano (2009–2013)
* Harvey V. Fineberg (2013–2018)
* Penny Pritzker (2018–2023)
* Catherine James Paglia (2023–present)

===Board of trustees===
* Catherine James Paglia, Chair. Enterprise Asset Management and Robert and Ardis James Foundation.
* Steven A. Denning, Vice Chair. Chairman Emeritus, General Atlantic.
* Ayman Asfari, Executive Chairman, Venterra Group; Co-founder, The Asfari Foundation.
* Jim Balsillie, Founder and Chair, Centre for International Governance Innovation; Co-founder, Institute for New Economic Thinking.
* C. K. Birla, Chairman, CK Birla Group.
* Bill Bradley, Managing director, Allen &amp; Company.
* David Burke, Co-founder, CEO, and managing director, Makena Capital Management.
*Mariano-Florentino &quot;Tino&quot; Cuéllar, President, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
* Henri de Castries, Chairman, Institut Montaigne; Chairman, Europe General Atlantic; Vice Chairman, Nestlé.
* Eileen Donahoe, Executive Director, Global Digital Policy Incubator, Stanford University.
* Anne Finucane, Chairman of the Board, Bank of America Europe.
* Patricia House, Vice Chairman of the Board, C3.ai.
* Maha Ibrahim, General Partners, Canaan Partners.
* Walter B. Kielholz, Honorary Chairman, Swiss Re Ltd.
* Boon Hwee Koh, Chairman, Altara Ventures Pte Ltd.
* Susan Liautaud, Susan Liautaud &amp; Associates Ltd.
* Scott D. Malkin, Chairman, Value Retail PLC.
* Adebayo Ogunlesi, Chairman and Managing Partner, Global Infrastructure Partners.
* Kenneth E. Olivier, Past Chairman and CEO, Dodge &amp; Cox.
* Jonathan Oppenheimer, Director, Oppenheimer Generations.
* Catherine James Paglia, Director, Enterprise Asset Management.
* Deven J. Parekh, Managing Director, Insight Partners.
* Victoria Ransom, Founder &amp; CEO, Prisma; Former CEO, Wildfire &amp; Director of Product, Google.
* L. Rafael Reif, President, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* George Siguler, Founding Partner and Managing Director, Siguler Guff and Company.
* Ratan Tata, Chairman, Tata Trust.
* Rohan S. Weerasinghe, General Counsel, Citigroup Inc.
* Yichen Zhang, Chairman and CEO, CITIC Capital
* Robert Zoellick, Senior Counselor, Brunswick Group.

==Carnegie Global Centers==

===Carnegie Endowment Headquarters in Washington, D.C.===
The Carnegie Endowment office in Washington, D.C., is home to ten programs: Africa; American Statecraft; Asia; Democracy, Conflict, and Governance; Europe; Global Order and Institutions; Middle East; Nuclear Policy; Russia and Eurasia; South Asia; Sustainability, Climate, and Geopolitics; and Technology and International Affairs.

===Carnegie Moscow Center===
In 1993, the Endowment launched the Carnegie Moscow Center, with the belief that &quot;in today&#x27;s world a think tank whose mission is to contribute to global security, stability, and prosperity requires a permanent presence and a multinational outlook at the core of its operations.&quot;

The center&#x27;s stated goals were to embody and promote the concepts of disinterested social science research and the dissemination of its results in post-Soviet Russia and Eurasia; to provide a free and open forum for the discussion and debate of critical national, regional and global issues; and to further cooperation and strengthen relations between Russia and the United States by explaining the interests, objectives and policies of each. From 2006 until December 2008, the center was led by former Deputy Secretary General of NATO, Rose Gottemoeller. The center was headed by Dmitri Trenin until the Russian government ordered its closure in April 2022, shortly after the invasion of Ukraine by Russia in February 2022.

===Malcolm H. Kerr Carnegie Middle East Center===
The Carnegie Middle East Center was established in Beirut, Lebanon, in November 2006. The center aims to better inform the process of political change in the Arab Middle East and deepen understanding of the complex economic and security issues that affect it. In October 2020, it was renamed the Malcolm H. Kerr Carnegie Middle East Center in honor of scholar Malcolm H. Kerr. , the current director of the center is Maha Yahya.

===Carnegie Europe===
Founded in 2007 by Fabrice Pothier, Carnegie Europe is the European centre of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. From its newly expanded presence in Brussels, Carnegie Europe combines the work of its research platform with the fresh perspectives of Carnegie&#x27;s centres in Washington, Moscow, Beijing, and Beirut, bringing a unique global vision to the European policy community. Through publications, articles, seminars, and private consultations, Carnegie Europe aims to foster new thinking on the daunting international challenges shaping Europe&#x27;s role in the world.

Carnegie Europe is currently directed by Rosa Balfour.

===Carnegie-Tsinghua Center for Global Policy===
The Carnegie-Tsinghua Center for Global Policy was established at Tsinghua University in Beijing in 2010. The center&#x27;s focuses include China&#x27;s foreign relations; international economics and trade; climate change and energy; nonproliferation and arms control; and other global and regional security issues such as North Korea, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iran.

The current director of the center is Paul Haenle.

===Carnegie India===
In April 2016, Carnegie India opened in New Delhi, India. The center&#x27;s focuses include the political economy of reform in India, foreign and security policy, and the role of innovation and technology in India&#x27;s internal transformation and international relations.
The current director of the center is Rudra Chaudhuri.

===Carnegie Russia Eurasia Center===
In April 2023, the Carnegie Russia Eurasia Center opened in Berlin, Germany. The center focuses on major policy challenges across the wider region in the wake of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. It is home to the digital publication Carnegie Politika.

The current director of the center is .

==See also==

* &quot;International Economics Bulletin&quot;
* List of peace activists

==References==
==Sources and further reading==
* Adesnik, David, ed. &quot;100 Years of Impact. Essays on the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace&quot; ( Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2011).
* Berman, Edward H. &quot;The Ideology of Philanthropy: The Influence of the Carnegie, Ford, and Rockefeller Foundations on American Foreign Policy&quot; (State University of New York Press, 1983).
* Dubin, Martin David. &quot;The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and the Advocacy of a League of Nations, 1914–1918&quot; &quot;Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society&quot; 123#6 (1979) pp: 344–368. 
* Greco, John Frank. &quot;A foundation for internationalism: the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 1931–1941&quot; (PhD dissertation, Syracuse University; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 1971. 7123444).
* Lutzker, Michael A. &quot;The Formation of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace: A Study of the Establishment-Centered Peace Movement, 1910–1914&quot; in &quot;Building the Organizational Society: Essays on Associational Activities in Modern America&quot;, edited by Jerry Israel, (Free Press, 1972) pp 143–162. 
* Parmar, Inderjeet. &quot;The Carnegie Corporation and the mobilisation of opinion in the United States&#x27; rise to globalism, 1939–1945.&quot; &quot;Minerva&quot; (1999): 355–378. 
* Parmar, Inderjeet. &quot;Engineering Consent: The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and the Mobilization of American Public Opinion, 1939–1945&quot; &quot;Review of International Studies&quot; 26#1 (2000): 35–48. 
* Patterson, David S. &quot;Andrew Carnegie&#x27;s quest for world peace.&quot; &quot;Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society&quot; 114.5 (1970): 371–383. 
* Rietzler, Katharina. &quot;Before the Cultural Cold Wars: American Philanthropy and Cultural Diplomacy in the Interwar Years.&quot; &quot;Historical Research&quot; 84, no. 223 (2011): 148–164.
* Rietzler, Katharina. &quot;Fortunes of a Profession: American Foundations and International Law, 1910–1939.&quot; &quot;Global Society&quot; 28, no. 1 (2014): 8–23.
* Rietzler, Katharina Elisabeth. &quot;American foundations and the &#x27;scientific study&#x27; of international relations in Europe, 1910–1940&quot; (PhD Diss University College London, 2009); online
* Wegener, Jens. &quot;Creating an &#x27;International Mind&#x27;? The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Europe, 1911–1940&quot; (Doctoral dissertation, European University Institute, 2015) online
* Winn, Joseph W. &quot;Nicholas Murray Butler, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, and the Search for Reconciliation in Europe, 1919–1933.&quot; &quot;Peace &amp; Change&quot; 31.4 (2006): 555–584.
* Winn, Joseph W. &quot;The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace: Missionaries for cultural internationalism, 1911–1939&quot; (PhD dissertation, University of Kentucky, 2004; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 3123823).

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1153595" start="4" end="46" title="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace" label="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153595" start="48" end="52" title="Carnegie Endowment for International Peace" label="CEIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="71" end="92" title="international affairs" label="international affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q155271" start="93" end="103" title="think tank" label="think tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="121" end="137" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="259" end="274" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="382" end="397" title="global conflict" label="global conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="587" end="613" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="872" end="893" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q263016" start="898" end="911" title="Chatham House" label="Chatham House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572308" start="1025" end="1036" title="Embassy Row" label="Embassy Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365085" start="1048" end="1068" title="Massachusetts Avenue (Washington, D.C.)" label="Massachusetts Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7544941" start="1125" end="1153" title="SmithGroup" label="Smith, Hinchman &amp;amp; Grylls"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213917" start="1332" end="1358" title="Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar" label="Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276563" start="1386" end="1402" title="William J. Burns (diplomat)" label="William J. Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="1461" end="1476" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q695838" start="1497" end="1514" title="Internationalism (politics)" label="internationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q155271" start="2088" end="2098" title="think tank" label="think tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q220619" start="2553" end="2563" title="Elihu Root" label="Elihu Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="2598" end="2614" title="United States Secretary of War" label="Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="2622" end="2627" title="United States Secretary of State" label="State"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="2685" end="2702" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="2762" end="2780" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066447" start="2791" end="2812" title="Charles William Eliot" label="Charles William Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q521310" start="2829" end="2848" title="Robert S. Brookings" label="Robert S. Brookings"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426137" start="2888" end="2908" title="Joseph Hodges Choate" label="Joseph Hodges Choate"/>
<link wikidata="Q703642" start="2936" end="2950" title="John W. Foster" label="John W. Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491651" start="2956" end="3007" title="Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching" label="Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654776" start="3018" end="3039" title="Henry Smith Pritchett" label="Henry Smith Pritchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130367" start="3427" end="3444" title="James Brown Scott" label="James Brown Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236629" start="3491" end="3508" title="James T. Shotwell" label="James T. Shotwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="3532" end="3546" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q877351" start="3554" end="3587" title="SS George Washington" label="USS &amp;quot;George Washington&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="3600" end="3621" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="peace talks in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043939" start="3670" end="3688" title="Carnegie libraries" label="Carnegie libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="3796" end="3802" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141717" start="4244" end="4278" title="Hague Academy of International Law" label="Hague Academy of International Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q834448" start="4339" end="4351" title="Peace Palace" label="Peace Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="4355" end="4364" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050362" start="4405" end="4438" title="Carnegie Foundation (Netherlands)" label="Carnegie Foundation (Netherlands)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046797" start="4497" end="4525" title="Peace Palace Library" label="library of international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q271517" start="4537" end="4559" title="Nicholas Murray Butler" label="Nicholas Murray Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q220619" start="4570" end="4580" title="Elihu Root" label="Elihu Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q213678" start="4741" end="4756" title="Vatican Library" label="Vatican Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q205073" start="4889" end="4908" title="Kellogg–Briand Pact" label="Kellogg–Briand Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="4933" end="4950" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q505586" start="5012" end="5026" title="Raphael Lemkin" label="Raphael Lemkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="5192" end="5200" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236629" start="5247" end="5264" title="James T. Shotwell" label="James T. Shotwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790584" start="5308" end="5341" title="Division of Economics and History of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace" label="Division of Economics and History"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="5462" end="5484" title="United Nations Charter" label="United Nations Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q685248" start="5557" end="5598" title="United Nations Commission on Human Rights" label="United Nations Commission on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="5829" end="5847" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="5958" end="5978" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q549966" start="6070" end="6080" title="Alger Hiss" label="Alger Hiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204764" start="6204" end="6222" title="Whittaker Chambers" label="Whittaker Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236629" start="6260" end="6277" title="James T. Shotwell" label="James T. Shotwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="6357" end="6371" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043887" start="6421" end="6439" title="Peter Parker House" label="Peter Parker House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157431" start="6445" end="6456" title="Jackson Place" label="Jackson Pl."/>
<link wikidata="Q2160231" start="6542" end="6559" title="Joseph E. Johnson (government official)" label="Joseph E. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="7294" end="7300" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791636" start="7311" end="7327" title="Thomas L. Hughes" label="Thomas L. Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063573" start="7580" end="7594" title="Foreign Policy" label="Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="7787" end="7800" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="7858" end="7877" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006458" start="7932" end="7945" title="Fred Bergsten" label="Fred Bergsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981447" start="8018" end="8064" title="Peterson Institute for International Economics" label="Peterson Institute for International Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q550452" start="8098" end="8115" title="nuclear arms race" label="nuclear arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="8124" end="8129" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="8134" end="8142" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791636" start="8144" end="8160" title="Thomas L. Hughes" label="Thomas L. Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724590" start="8414" end="8437" title="Henry L. Stimson Center" label="Henry L. Stimson Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914890" start="8485" end="8502" title="Morton Abramowitz" label="Morton Abramowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205826" start="8728" end="8750" title="Carnegie Moscow Center" label="Carnegie Moscow Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177681" start="8803" end="8818" title="Jessica Mathews" label="Jessica Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q95305283" start="9077" end="9100" title="Demetrios Papademetriou" label="Demetrios Papademetriou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="9642" end="9648" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="9676" end="9684" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955" start="9733" end="9752" title="Tsinghua University" label="Tsinghua University"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="9756" end="9763" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q427677" start="9810" end="9846" title="al-Farabi Kazakh National University" label="al-Farabi Kazakh National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="9919" end="9929" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="10018" end="10027" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177681" start="10048" end="10055" title="Jessica Mathews" label="Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276563" start="10098" end="10114" title="William J. Burns (diplomat)" label="William J. Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q27656" start="10242" end="10285" title="Director of the Central Intelligence Agency" label="Director of the Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213917" start="10348" end="10374" title="Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar" label="Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="10578" end="10584" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q264356" start="10592" end="10611" title="Ministry of Justice (Russia)" label="Ministry of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071473" start="10660" end="10673" title="Russian foreign agent law" label="foreign agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720744" start="10738" end="10749" title="Russian undesirable organizations law" label="undesirable"/>
<link wikidata="Q220619" start="10788" end="10798" title="Elihu Root" label="Elihu Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q271517" start="10813" end="10835" title="Nicholas Murray Butler" label="Nicholas Murray Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q549966" start="10850" end="10860" title="Alger Hiss" label="Alger Hiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236629" start="10875" end="10892" title="James T. Shotwell" label="James T. Shotwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160231" start="10907" end="10924" title="Joseph E. Johnson (government official)" label="Joseph E. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791636" start="10939" end="10955" title="Thomas L. Hughes" label="Thomas L. Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914890" start="10970" end="10990" title="Morton I. Abramowitz" label="Morton I. Abramowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177681" start="11005" end="11020" title="Jessica Mathews" label="Jessica Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276563" start="11035" end="11051" title="William J. Burns (diplomat)" label="William J. Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788241" start="11066" end="11082" title="Thomas Carothers" label="Thomas Carothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213917" start="11102" end="11128" title="Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar" label="Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332779" start="11223" end="11236" title="John W. Davis" label="John W. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="11251" end="11269" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677294" start="11284" end="11306" title="Harvey Hollister Bundy" label="Harvey Hollister Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996727" start="11321" end="11342" title="Whitney North Seymour" label="Whitney North Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q64019942" start="11357" end="11376" title="Milton Katz" label="Seymour Milton Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262236" start="11391" end="11406" title="John W. Douglas" label="John W. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083994" start="11421" end="11434" title="Charles Zwick" label="Charles Zwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010383" start="11479" end="11499" title="William H. Donaldson" label="William H. Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677639" start="11576" end="11594" title="Harvey V. Fineberg" label="Harvey V. Fineberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q293365" start="11609" end="11623" title="Penny Pritzker" label="Penny Pritzker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531717" start="11853" end="11869" title="General Atlantic" label="General Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831456" start="11873" end="11885" title="Ayman Asfari" label="Ayman Asfari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178732" start="11960" end="11973" title="Jim Balsillie" label="Jim Balsillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062486" start="11994" end="12040" title="Centre for International Governance Innovation" label="Centre for International Governance Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665142" start="12054" end="12089" title="Institute for New Economic Thinking" label="Institute for New Economic Thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q16727524" start="12093" end="12104" title="C. K. Birla" label="C. K. Birla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916541" start="12116" end="12130" title="CK Birla Group" label="CK Birla Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q504025" start="12134" end="12146" title="Bill Bradley" label="Bill Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731492" start="12167" end="12186" title="Allen &amp;amp; Company" label="Allen &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213917" start="12271" end="12314" title="Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar" label="Mariano-Florentino &amp;quot;Tino&amp;quot; Cuéllar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381360" start="12373" end="12390" title="Henri de Castries" label="Henri de Castries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151772" start="12402" end="12420" title="Institut Montaigne" label="Institut Montaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q160746" start="12472" end="12478" title="Nestlé" label="Nestlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349351" start="12482" end="12496" title="Eileen Donahoe" label="Eileen Donahoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="12551" end="12570" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q42571366" start="12574" end="12587" title="Anne Finucane" label="Anne Finucane"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="12612" end="12627" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q118538114" start="12723" end="12738" title="Canaan Partners" label="Canaan Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545052" start="12742" end="12760" title="Walter Kielholz" label="Walter B. Kielholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q605565" start="12781" end="12789" title="Swiss Re" label="Swiss Re"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378097" start="12904" end="12919" title="Scott D. Malkin" label="Scott D. Malkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681470" start="12951" end="12967" title="Adebayo Ogunlesi" label="Adebayo Ogunlesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570413" start="13000" end="13030" title="Global Infrastructure Partners" label="Global Infrastructure Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234076" start="13077" end="13092" title="Dodge &amp;amp; Cox" label="Dodge &amp;amp; Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581764" start="13096" end="13116" title="Jonathan Oppenheimer" label="Jonathan Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q741361" start="13189" end="13216" title="Enterprise Asset Management" label="Enterprise Asset Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038111" start="13256" end="13272" title="Insight Partners" label="Insight Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q22095858" start="13276" end="13291" title="Victoria Ransom" label="Victoria Ransom"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="13368" end="13374" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961301" start="13378" end="13392" title="L. Rafael Reif" label="L. Rafael Reif"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="13405" end="13442" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q333460" start="13529" end="13539" title="Ratan Tata" label="Ratan Tata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528519" start="13551" end="13561" title="Sir Ratan Tata Trust" label="Tata Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="13604" end="13617" title="Citigroup" label="Citigroup Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q124325764" start="13653" end="13666" title="CITIC Capital" label="CITIC Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q312724" start="13669" end="13684" title="Robert Zoellick" label="Robert Zoellick"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="13842" end="13858" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q18205826" start="14207" end="14229" title="Carnegie Moscow Center" label="Carnegie Moscow Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="15002" end="15006" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q512705" start="15008" end="15025" title="Rose Gottemoeller" label="Rose Gottemoeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462405" start="15052" end="15065" title="Dmitri Trenin" label="Dmitri Trenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043961" start="15251" end="15278" title="Carnegie Middle East Center" label="Carnegie Middle East Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q204029" start="15607" end="15622" title="Malcolm H. Kerr" label="Malcolm H. Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q29949491" start="15718" end="15733" title="Fabrice Pothier" label="Fabrice Pothier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955" start="16462" end="16481" title="Tsinghua University" label="Tsinghua University"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="16485" end="16492" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="16536" end="16541" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q47417" start="16568" end="16591" title="international economics" label="international economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q55607790" start="16603" end="16628" title="climate change and energy" label="climate change and energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="16719" end="16730" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="16732" end="16743" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="16745" end="16753" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="16759" end="16763" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151084" start="16804" end="16815" title="Paul Haenle" label="Paul Haenle"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="16879" end="16888" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="16890" end="16895" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="17266" end="17272" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="17274" end="17281" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="17372" end="17399" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050246" start="17522" end="17554" title="International Economics Bulletin" label="International Economics Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921049" start="17563" end="17586" title="List of peace activists" label="List of peace activists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426083" wikidata="Q1060062" url="?curid=426083" title="Special operations">
<text>Special operations or special ops are military activities conducted, according to NATO, by &quot;specially designated, organized, selected, trained, and equipped forces using unconventional techniques and modes of employment.&quot; Special operations may include reconnaissance, unconventional warfare, and counterterrorism, and are typically conducted by small groups of highly trained personnel, emphasizing sufficiency, stealth, speed, and tactical coordination, commonly known as &quot;special forces&quot;.

== History ==
===Australia===
In World War II, following advice from the British, Australia began raising special forces. The first units to be formed were independent companies, which began training at Wilson&#x27;s Promontory in Victoria in early 1941 under the tutelage of British instructors. With an establishment of 17 officers and 256 men, the independent companies were trained as &quot;stay behind&quot; forces, a role that they were later employed in against the Japanese in the South West Pacific Area during 1942–43, most notably fighting a guerrilla campaign in Timor, as well as actions in New Guinea. In all, a total of eight independent companies were raised before they were reorganized in mid-1943 into commando squadrons and placed under the command of the divisional cavalry regiments that were re-designated as cavalry commando regiments. As a part of this structure, a total of 11 commando squadrons were raised.

They continued to act independently and were often assigned at the brigade level during the later stages of the war, taking part in the fighting in New Guinea, Bougainville and Borneo, where they were employed largely in long-range reconnaissance and flank protection roles. In addition to these units, the Australians also raised the Z Special Unit and M Special Unit. M Special Unit was largely employed in an intelligence-gathering role, while Z Special Force undertook direct action missions. One of its most notable actions came as part of Operation Jaywick, in which several Japanese ships were sunk in Singapore Harbour in 1943. A second raid on Singapore in 1944, known as Operation Rimau, was unsuccessful.

===Poland===
On 20 September 1940 the Polish government in exile in London formed a special military unit in Britain with the soldiers called Cichociemni (silent and unseen) paratroopers to be deployed into Poland to help the resistance. The Cichociemni were trained similar to the early British Special Forces with each soldier receiving specialization training for their specific task of deployment to Poland through a paradrop as a special operation to sustain a Polish state through training the members of the resistance in fighting the German occupants. This included Operation Tempest and uprisings in Wilno, Lwów and 91 operators taking part in the Warsaw Uprising.

Previous to the formation of the GROM unit Polish special operations rescued six CIA, DIA and NSA officers from Iraq on 25 October 1990.

===Japan===
The Imperial Japanese Army first deployed army paratroops in combat during the Battle of Palembang, on Sumatra in the Netherlands East Indies, on 14 February 1942. The 425 men of the 1st Parachute Raiding Regiment seized Palembang airfield, while the paratroopers of the 2nd Parachute Raiding Regiment seized the town and its important oil refinery. Paratroops were subsequently deployed in the Burma campaign.

However, as with similar airborne units created by the Allies and other Axis powers, the Japanese paratroops suffered from a disproportionately high casualty rate, and the loss of men who required such extensive and expensive training limited their operations to only the most critical ones. Two regiments of &quot;Teishin Shudan&quot; were formed into the 1st Raiding Group, commanded by Major General Rikichi Tsukada under the control of the Southern Expeditionary Army Group, during the Philippines campaign. Although structured as a division, its capabilities were much lower, as its six regiments had manpower equivalent to a standard infantry battalion, and it lacked any form of artillery, and had to rely on other units for logistical support. Its men were no longer parachute-trained, but relied on aircraft for transport.

Some 750 men from the 2nd Raiding Brigade, of this group were assigned to attack American air bases on Luzon and Leyte on the night of 6 December 1944. They were flown in Ki-57 transports, but most of the aircraft were shot down. Some 300 commandos managed to land in the Burauen area on Leyte. The force destroyed some planes and inflicted casualties before they were destroyed.

===United States===
Between the 17th and 18th centuries, there were wars between American colonists and Native American tribes. The United States established specialized Rangers. Learning frontier skills from friendly Native Americans the Rangers helped carry out offensive strikes &quot;frontier combat&quot; against hostile Natives. Thus Ranger companies were formed to provide reconnaissance, intelligence, light infantry, and scouting. Colonel Benjamin Church (c. 1639–1718) was the captain of the first Ranger force in America (1676). Several Ranger companies were established in the American colonies, including Knowlton&#x27;s Rangers, an elite corps of Rangers who supplied reconnaissance and espionage for George Washington&#x27;s Continental Army. Rogers&#x27; Rangers on Roger&#x27;s Island, in modern-day Fort Edward, New York, is regarded as the &quot;spiritual home&quot; of the United States Special Operations Forces, specifically the United States Army Rangers. These early American light infantry battalions were trained under Robert Rogers&#x27; 28 &quot;Rules of Ranging&quot;, which is considered the first known manual of modern asymmetric warfare tactics used in modern special operations. 

Army Rangers were essential to several World War II campaigns such as North Africa campaign &quot;Operation Torch&quot;, Tunisian campaign, Sicily campaign &quot;Operation Husky&quot;, and Normandy landings during D-day, Ranger companies landed at Pointe du Hoc.

In WWII, more elite units were needed to carry out special operations, raids, and reconnaissance, especially behind enemy lines. President Franklin D. Roosevelt established the Marine Raiders in February 1942 after Admiral Chester Nimitz requested commando units to raid Japanese-held islands. Major General Thomas Holcomb, the Marine Commandant, chose the name &quot;Raiders&quot; and created two battalions. Other specialized units such as Naval Combat Demolition Units and Underwater Demolition Teams (UDTs), the predecessors of the Navy&#x27;s current SEALs, were formed in 1943.

Many more US special operation units had developed after and had fought in every major 20th-century conflict. In the 21st century, 2003–2012 saw U.S. national security strategy rely on special operations to an unprecedented degree. Identifying, hunting, and killing terrorists became a central task in the Global War on Terrorism (GWOT). Linda Robinson, Adjunct Senior Fellow for U.S. National Security and Foreign Policy at the Council on Foreign Relations, argued that the organizational structure became flatter and cooperation with the intelligence community was stronger, allowing special operations to move at the &quot;speed of war&quot;. Special operations appropriations are costly: Its budget went from $2.3 billion in 2001 to $10.5 billion in 2012. Some experts argued the investment was worthwhile, pointing to the raid in May 2011 that killed Osama bin Laden in Abbottabad, Pakistan. 

That raid was organized and overseen by Admiral William H. McRaven, who was both a student and practitioner of special operations, having published a thesis on them in the 1990s. McRaven&#x27;s theory of special operations was that they had the potential to achieve significant operational, political, or strategic effects. This potential required such units to be organized and commanded by special operations professionals rather than being subsumed into larger military units or operations, and required that &quot;relative superiority&quot; be gained during the special operation in question via characteristics such as simplicity, security, rehearsals, surprise, speed, and clearly but narrowly defined purpose.

Others claimed that special operations&#x27; emphasis precipitated a misconception that it was a substitute for prolonged conflict. &quot;Raids and drone strikes are rarely decisive tactics and often incur significant political and diplomatic costs for the United States. Although raids and drone strikes are necessary to disrupt dire and imminent threats... special operations leaders readily admit that they should not be the central pillar of U.S. military strategy.&quot; Instead, special operations advocates stated that grand strategy should include their &quot;indirect approach&quot;, suggesting that &quot;the ability to operate with a small footprint and low-visibility, invest time and resources to foster interagency and foreign partnerships, develop deep cultural expertise, and rapidly adapt emerging technologies&quot; was vital for maintaining deterrence and countering aggression. &quot;Special operations forces forge relationships that can last for decades with a diverse collection of groups: training, advising, and operating alongside other countries&#x27; militaries, police forces, tribes, militias or other information groups.&quot;

== Countries and units with special operation focus ==
===Australia===
The Special Air Service Regiment, 1st Commando Regiment, and 2nd Commando Regiment are among the Army&#x27;s special forces under the command of Special Operations Command.

===Canada===
&quot;Canadian Special Operations Forces Command&quot; (&quot;CANSOFCOM&quot;) is a command of the Canadian Armed Forces. It is responsible for all special forces operations responding to terrorism and threats to Canadians and Canadian interests around the world.

Canada&#x27;s tier one unit is &quot;Joint Task Force 2&quot; (&quot;JTF 2&quot;), an elite special operations force, serving under the CANSOFCOM. JTF 2 works alongside many other special operations forces, such as Delta Force, SEAL Team Six, and the British SAS and has distinguished itself as a highly secretive, world-class special operations unit.
===India===
There are numerous special operation units in India, each branch of the Indian Armed Forces having its own unique SOF unit. The Indian Air Force has the Garud Commando Force, the Indian Navy has the MARCOS, and the Indian Army has the Para SF. Other special forces, like the National Security Guard under the Home Ministry, are not under military command but rather function as paramilitary organisations.

===Ireland===

The Army Ranger Wing is the special operations unit of the Defence Forces (Ireland).

===Israel===
Like the British Special Air Service and the US Army&#x27;s Delta Force, General Staff Reconnaissance Unit 269 - Sayeret Matkal is the main Sayeret unit in the IDF. Its primary missions include obtaining strategic intelligence behind enemy lines and conducting hostage-rescue missions on foreign soil. 
The naval commando unit known as 13th Flotilla, or Shayetet 13, is comparable to the British Special Boat Service and the United States SEALs. It is assigned to maritime hostage-rescue missions and is a component of the Israeli Navy. 

===Jordan===
&quot;King Abdullah II Special Forces Group&quot; (), commonly known as the &quot;JORSOF&quot; are strategic-level special forces of the Royal Jordanian Army under the Jordanian Armed Forces. Founded on April 15, 1963 on the orders of King Hussein, its primary roles include reconnaissance, counter-terrorism, search and evacuation, intelligence gathering combat, and the protection of key sites. The special forces group is also charged with carrying out precision strikes against critical enemy targets.

===Poland===
&quot;Special Troops Command&quot; (Pol.: &quot;Wojska Specjalne&quot;) is the fourth military branch of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Poland which includes the unit Grom and was officially formed in early 1990 after the fall of communism in 1989, in which the Polish Special Forces were first deployed into the conflict in Lebanon. The conflict in Lebanon was the first official battlefield experience in post-communist times.

===Türkiye===
The &quot;Special Forces Command (Tur.: Özel Kuvvetler Komutanlığı – ÖKK)&quot; is the main special forces unit of the Turkish Armed Forces, under the direct command of Turkish General Staff. Unit is particularly active in battle against PKK. Turkish Navy also have a special operations unit, &quot;Underwater Offence&quot; (Tur.: &quot;Sualtı Taaruz – SAT&quot;). They have participated in the Turkish invasion of Cyprus.

===United Kingdom===
The &quot;United Kingdom Special Forces&quot; (&quot;UKSF&quot;) is a directorate comprising the Special Air Service, the Special Boat Service, the Special Reconnaissance Regiment, the Special Forces Support Group, 18 (UKSF) Signal Regiment and the Joint Special Forces Aviation Wing.

In UK law, &quot;special forces&quot; means those units of the armed forces of the Crown and the maintenance of whose capabilities is the responsibility of the Director Special Forces or which are for the time being subject to the operational command of that director. 

The British Army and the Royal Marines also have special operations-capable forces that do not form part of the UKSF, such as the Pathfinder Platoon, 148 Meiktila Battery, 4/73 Sphinx Battery, and Mountain Leaders of the Brigade Patrol Troop and commando unit recce troops.

The Army Special Operations Brigade was formed in 2021 and consists of four battalions of the Ranger Regiment. The formation is described as being &quot;akin to that of the Special Forces Groups of the US Army Special Forces.&quot; The intention is that the brigade will be widely and actively deployable, including with the ability to train, advise and accompany the forces of partner countries, potentially in high-threat environments.

===United States===
The &quot;United States Special Operations Command&quot; (&quot;USSOCOM&quot; or &quot;SOCOM&quot;) is the unified combatant command charged with overseeing the various special operations component commands of the Army, Marine Corps, Navy, and Air Force of the United States Armed Forces. The command is part of the Department of Defense and is the only unified combatant command created by an Act of Congress. USSOCOM is headquartered at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, Florida. Outside of the US military, the CIA SAC&#x27;s Special Operations Group also conducts special operations missions as covert action represents an additional option within the realm of national security when diplomacy and military action are not feasible.

==See also==

* Airborne forces
* Covert operation
* Foreign internal defense
* Frogman
* List of military special forces units
* Long-range reconnaissance patrol

==References==
===Works cited===

==Further reading==
* Capt. Malcolm Brailey, &quot;The Transformation of Special Operations Forces in Contemporary Conflict: Strategy, Missions, Organisation and Tactics&quot;. Canberra, ACT: Land Warfare Studies Centre, Working Paper No. 127, 2005. 
* Colin S. Gray, &quot;Part III: Strategy and Special Operations&quot;, &quot;Explorations in Strategy&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1996, pp. 139–232.
* William H. McRaven, &quot;Spec Ops: Case Studies of Special Operations Warfare; Theory and Practice&quot;. Novato, CA: Presidio, 1995.
* Linda Robinson, &quot;One Hundred Victories: Special Ops and the Future of American Warfare&quot;, New York: Public Affairs, 2013. .

==External links==
* List of US Special Operations Forces</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1060062" start="0" end="18" title="Special operations" label="Special operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060062" start="22" end="33" title="Special operations" label="special ops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="82" end="86" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="263" end="277" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342628" start="279" end="301" title="unconventional warfare" label="unconventional warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="307" end="323" title="counterterrorism" label="counterterrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="490" end="504" title="special forces" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="546" end="558" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824866" start="669" end="690" title="Australian commandos" label="independent companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936166" start="716" end="740" title="Wilson&amp;#x27;s Promontory" label="Wilson&amp;#x27;s Promontory"/>
<link wikidata="Q581261" start="1002" end="1025" title="South West Pacific Area" label="South West Pacific Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440764" start="1088" end="1093" title="Battle of Timor" label="Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276692" start="1117" end="1127" title="New Guinea campaign" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="1234" end="1242" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q704785" start="1609" end="1621" title="Bougainville campaign" label="Bougainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156895" start="1626" end="1632" title="Borneo Campaign (1945)" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741860" start="1784" end="1798" title="Z Special Unit" label="Z Special Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6720529" start="1803" end="1817" title="M Special Unit" label="M Special Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097191" start="1994" end="2011" title="Operation Jaywick" label="Operation Jaywick"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="2058" end="2067" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097464" start="2130" end="2145" title="Operation Rimau" label="Operation Rimau"/>
<link wikidata="Q324781" start="2308" end="2319" title="Cichociemni" label="Cichociemni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363019" start="2681" end="2691" title="Polish resistance movement in World War II" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q422376" start="2740" end="2757" title="Operation Tempest" label="Operation Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q719515" start="2775" end="2780" title="Operation Ostra Brama" label="Wilno"/>
<link wikidata="Q718839" start="2782" end="2786" title="Lwów Uprising" label="Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="2823" end="2838" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438930" start="2874" end="2878" title="GROM" label="GROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q673626" start="2910" end="2947" title="Operation Simoom" label="rescued six CIA, DIA and NSA officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="2995" end="3017" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583233" start="3070" end="3089" title="Battle of Palembang" label="Battle of Palembang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="3094" end="3101" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="3109" end="3132" title="Netherlands East Indies" label="Netherlands East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8131" start="3212" end="3221" title="Palembang" label="Palembang"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="3386" end="3400" title="Burma campaign" label="Burma campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="3458" end="3464" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="3475" end="3486" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458517" start="3806" end="3821" title="Rikichi Tsukada" label="Rikichi Tsukada"/>
<link wikidata="Q706996" start="3847" end="3880" title="Southern Expeditionary Army Group" label="Southern Expeditionary Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q371573" start="3893" end="3913" title="Philippines campaign (1944–45)" label="Philippines campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="3995" end="4003" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="4052" end="4061" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="4089" end="4098" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q101068312" start="4258" end="4277" title="2nd Raiding Brigade" label="2nd Raiding Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="4339" end="4344" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q211377" start="4349" end="4354" title="Leyte" label="Leyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q332039" start="4407" end="4423" title="Mitsubishi Ki-57" label="Ki-57 transports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="4475" end="4483" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q212945" start="4508" end="4515" title="Burauen" label="Burauen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501784" start="4787" end="4794" title="United States Army Rangers" label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896036" start="5057" end="5080" title="Benjamin Church (ranger)" label="Colonel Benjamin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423430" start="5235" end="5258" title="Knowlton&amp;#x27;s Rangers" label="Knowlton&amp;#x27;s Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="5332" end="5349" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768093" start="5375" end="5395" title="Rogers&amp;#x27; Rangers" label="Rogers&amp;#x27; Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893188" start="5510" end="5549" title="United States Special Operations Forces" label="United States Special Operations Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030538" start="5662" end="5713" title="Robert Rogers&amp;#x27; 28 &amp;quot;Rules of Ranging&amp;quot;" label="Robert Rogers&amp;#x27; 28 &amp;quot;Rules of Ranging&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q752673" start="5768" end="5786" title="asymmetric warfare" label="asymmetric warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q495203" start="5832" end="5844" title="75th Ranger Regiment" label="Army Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5871" end="5883" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="5902" end="5951" title="Operation Torch" label="North Africa campaign &amp;quot;Operation Torch&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q852365" start="5953" end="5970" title="Tunisian campaign" label="Tunisian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="5972" end="6015" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Sicily campaign &amp;quot;Operation Husky&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="6021" end="6038" title="Normandy landings" label="Normandy landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q284649" start="6080" end="6093" title="Pointe du Hoc" label="Pointe du Hoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="6225" end="6256" title="President Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="President Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764203" start="6273" end="6287" title="Marine Raiders" label="Marine Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6538" end="6567" title="Seabee#Naval Combat Demolition Units" label="Naval Combat Demolition Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883853" start="6572" end="6606" title="Underwater Demolition Team" label="Underwater Demolition Teams (UDTs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q178033" start="6652" end="6657" title="United States Navy SEALs" label="SEALs"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="6987" end="7010" title="Global War on Terrorism" label="Global War on Terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="7110" end="7138" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q19085" start="7504" end="7512" title="Killing of Osama bin Laden" label="the raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="7537" end="7552" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q170315" start="7556" end="7566" title="Abbottabad" label="Abbottabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q522205" start="7628" end="7646" title="William H. McRaven" label="William H. McRaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q782735" start="9532" end="9560" title="Special Air Service Regiment" label="Special Air Service Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596277" start="9562" end="9583" title="1st Commando Regiment (Australia)" label="1st Commando Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128143" start="9589" end="9610" title="2nd Commando Regiment (Australia)" label="2nd Commando Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574646" start="9673" end="9699" title="Special Operations Command (Australia)" label="Special Operations Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032368" start="9721" end="9763" title="Canadian Special Operations Forces Command" label="Canadian Special Operations Forces Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="9814" end="9835" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="Canadian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143059" start="10017" end="10035" title="Joint Task Force 2" label="Joint Task Force 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="10072" end="10096" title="special operations force" label="special operations force"/>
<link wikidata="Q209114" start="10195" end="10206" title="Delta Force" label="Delta Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q963354" start="10208" end="10221" title="SEAL Team Six" label="SEAL Team Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="10231" end="10242" title="British SAS" label="British SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q320919" start="10416" end="10435" title="Indian Armed Forces" label="Indian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524457" start="10497" end="10517" title="Garud Commando Force" label="Garud Commando Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714457" start="10543" end="10549" title="MARCOS" label="MARCOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133642" start="10579" end="10586" title="Para (Special Forces)" label="Para SF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520949" start="10619" end="10642" title="National Security Guard" label="National Security Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q689767" start="10770" end="10786" title="Army Ranger Wing" label="Army Ranger Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q327063" start="10825" end="10849" title="Defence Forces (Ireland)" label="Defence Forces (Ireland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="10874" end="10901" title="Special Air Service" label="British Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q209114" start="10910" end="10936" title="Delta Force" label="US Army&amp;#x27;s Delta Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q927370" start="10938" end="10992" title="Sayeret Matkal" label="General Staff Reconnaissance Unit 269 - Sayeret Matkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="11025" end="11028" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="IDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137295" start="11172" end="11191" title="Frogman" label="naval commando unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140181" start="11201" end="11230" title="Shayetet 13" label="13th Flotilla, or Shayetet 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q843421" start="11253" end="11281" title="Special Boat Service" label="British Special Boat Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q178033" start="11290" end="11309" title="United States Navy SEALs" label="United States SEALs"/>
<link wikidata="Q510534" start="11388" end="11400" title="Israeli Navy" label="Israeli Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690085" start="11423" end="11460" title="King Abdullah II Special Forces Group" label="King Abdullah II Special Forces Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="11532" end="11546" title="special forces" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117226" start="11554" end="11574" title="Royal Jordanian Army" label="Royal Jordanian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075753" start="11585" end="11607" title="Jordanian Armed Forces" label="Jordanian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q146906" start="11652" end="11664" title="King Hussein" label="King Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016459" start="11943" end="11965" title="Polish Special Forces" label="Special Troops Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q781132" start="12023" end="12038" title="military branch" label="military branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q282696" start="12046" end="12084" title="Polish Armed Forces" label="Armed Forces of the Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q893452" start="12396" end="12418" title="Special Forces Command (Turkey)" label="Special Forces Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q501053" start="12505" end="12525" title="Turkish Armed Forces" label="Turkish Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501963" start="12555" end="12576" title="Turkish General Staff" label="Turkish General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293295" start="12629" end="12641" title="Turkish Navy" label="Turkish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805769" start="12685" end="12703" title="Underwater Offence" label="Underwater Offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050999" start="12781" end="12807" title="Turkish invasion of Cyprus" label="Turkish invasion of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139184" start="12841" end="12870" title="United Kingdom Special Forces" label="United Kingdom Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="12928" end="12947" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q843421" start="12953" end="12973" title="Special Boat Service" label="Special Boat Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166254" start="12979" end="13010" title="Special Reconnaissance Regiment" label="Special Reconnaissance Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574573" start="13016" end="13044" title="Special Forces Support Group" label="Special Forces Support Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557497" start="13046" end="13071" title="18 (UKSF) Signal Regiment" label="18 (UKSF) Signal Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269392" start="13080" end="13114" title="Joint Special Forces Aviation Wing" label="Joint Special Forces Aviation Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280531" start="13277" end="13300" title="Director Special Forces" label="Director Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="13392" end="13404" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="13413" end="13426" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13437" end="13463" title="#Special operations-capable" label="special operations-capable"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587653" start="13518" end="13536" title="Pathfinder Platoon" label="Pathfinder Platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549856" start="13538" end="13558" title="148 (Meiktila) Battery Royal Artillery" label="148 Meiktila Battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637265" start="13560" end="13579" title="4/73 (Sphinx) Special Observation Post Battery RA" label="4/73 Sphinx Battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925068" start="13585" end="13601" title="Mountain Leader Training Cadre" label="Mountain Leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967164" start="13609" end="13629" title="Brigade Patrol Troop" label="Brigade Patrol Troop"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847297" start="13667" end="13698" title="Army Special Operations Brigade" label="Army Special Operations Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q109905774" start="13757" end="13772" title="Ranger Regiment (United Kingdom)" label="Ranger Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067064" start="14132" end="14172" title="United States Special Operations Command" label="United States Special Operations Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q143467" start="14229" end="14254" title="unified combatant command" label="unified combatant command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342591" start="14336" end="14340" title="USASOC" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495385" start="14342" end="14354" title="MARSOC" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q476135" start="14356" end="14360" title="NAVSPECWARCOM" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q407200" start="14366" end="14375" title="AFSOC" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="14383" end="14409" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="14438" end="14459" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q476068" start="14516" end="14531" title="Act of Congress" label="Act of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583022" start="14561" end="14583" title="MacDill Air Force Base" label="MacDill Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="14587" end="14592" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="14635" end="14638" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974176" start="14639" end="14649" title="Special Activities Center" label="SAC&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546073" start="14720" end="14733" title="Covert operation" label="covert action"/>
<link wikidata="Q864306" start="14874" end="14889" title="Airborne forces" label="Airborne forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546073" start="14892" end="14908" title="Covert operation" label="Covert operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468408" start="14911" end="14935" title="Foreign internal defense" label="Foreign internal defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137295" start="14938" end="14945" title="Frogman" label="Frogman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351358" start="14948" end="14985" title="List of military special forces units" label="List of military special forces units"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673153" start="14988" end="15020" title="Long-range reconnaissance patrol" label="Long-range reconnaissance patrol"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426085" wikidata="Q15068796" url="?curid=426085" title="Harbour Main-Chapel's Cove-Lakeview">
<text>Harbour Main-Chapel&#x27;s Cove-Lakeview is a town on the Avalon Peninsula in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. It is in Division 1, on Conception Bay. During King William&#x27;s War, the village was destroyed in the Avalon Peninsula Campaign.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Harbour Main-Chapel&#x27;s Cove-Lakeview had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

==See also==
* List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15068796" start="0" end="40" title="Harbour Main-Chapel&amp;#x27;s Cove-Lakeview" label="Harbour Main-Chapel&amp;#x27;s Cove-Lakeview"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="46" end="50" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q790092" start="58" end="74" title="Avalon Peninsula" label="Avalon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="78" end="103" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303397" start="122" end="132" title="Division 1, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879752" start="137" end="151" title="Conception Bay" label="Conception Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070342" start="160" end="183" title="King William&amp;#x27;s War" label="King William&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935388" start="218" end="243" title="Avalon Peninsula Campaign" label="Avalon Peninsula Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="272" end="297" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="311" end="328" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134052" start="553" end="606" title="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador" label="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426086" wikidata="Q8085974" url="?curid=426086" title="USS San Jacinto">
<text>Three ships of the United States Navy have been named USS &quot;San Jacinto&quot;, after the Texas battle of San Jacinto in 1836, and the navy considered acquiring a fourth ship of the name:

* The first was an early screw frigate of the navy, launched in 1850. She bombarded the Taku Forts in support of British and French troops on the ground during the Second Opium War and was active during the American Civil War, but wrecked at the beginning of 1865. The ship is also known for its role in the &quot;Trent&quot; Affair.
* The US Navy considered acquiring a civilian passenger-cargo ship, , for use during World War I as USS &quot;San Jacinto&quot; (ID-1531), but never acquired or commissioned her.
* The second was a light aircraft carrier that saw action in the latter half of World War II and was decommissioned in 1947.
* The third was a guided missile cruiser commissioned in 1988, and decommissioned in 2023.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="19" end="37" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="93" end="98" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q841278" start="99" end="120" title="battle of San Jacinto" label="battle of San Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506352" start="217" end="230" title="screw frigate" label="screw frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q418151" start="356" end="372" title="Second Opium War" label="Second Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="399" end="417" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166330" start="500" end="524" title="Trent Affair" label="&amp;quot;Trent&amp;quot; Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185562" start="724" end="746" title="light aircraft carrier" label="light aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="785" end="797" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843" start="848" end="870" title="guided missile cruiser" label="guided missile cruiser"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426092" wikidata="Q2874476" url="?curid=426092" title="Avondale, Newfoundland and Labrador">
<text>Avondale is a town located on Newfoundland&#x27;s Avalon Peninsula in the province of Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada, which was incorporated in 1974. The community is situated at the southwestern head of Conception Bay in Division 1. It is located southwest of St. John&#x27;s and northeast of Placentia.

Up to 1897, the community was known as Salmon Cove, but was renamed to avoid confusion with two other nearby communities of the same name in the Port de Grave and Brigus Districts. The name Avondale was suggested by the parish priest Rev John Roe because of the resemblance to his native area in Ireland, taking the name from Thomas Moore&#x27;s poem, &quot;The Meeting of the Waters&quot;. Earliest record of settlement per Fishing Room Grants is for John Mahaney in 1773, a census of 1812 reports 12 inhabitants. Settlers to the area were primarily Irish Roman Catholic with a smaller number of Jersey French and English. Avondale incorporated the communities of Salmon Cove, Gasters, Northern Arm, and Southern Arm.

In addition to the railway station, it the town hosted a post office, a money order office, and one church. It functioned as a lumbering, fishing and farming settlement in what was known as the Harbour Main District. The population dwindled in the early 1900s as men began migrating to the eastern US (Boston and New York) to find work.

Its first postmaster was Edward Kennedy who came to the area in 1889 after the railway was built.

== Avondale Railway Station ==
In 1863, the Anglo American Telegraph Company set up a repeater station in Avondale.

In 1881, the Newfoundland Railway conducted a survey of the land and planning preparations were started for constructing a railway out to Harbour Grace, in which Salmon Cove was seen as a convenient place for a station.

Upon completion of the main railway line in 1898, the Reid Newfoundland Company took over the existing railway, and Avondale was one of these existing stations. It was used as a passenger and freight station.

In 1923 the Newfoundland Government took over the railway with the 1923 Railway Settlement Act, where the Government acquired the railway, coastal bats, and dry dock from the Reid Newfoundland Company for $2 million. The Avondale Railway Station then became a part of the Newfoundland Railway once again. In 1931 it was finalized for the post offices and telegraph stations to be managed by Newfoundland Railway agents; the Avondale office was taken over on December 15.

The Canadian National Railway took over from the Newfoundland Railway in 1949 when Newfoundland joined the Canadian Confederation. The Avondale Railway Station was managed by CN until 1984. The last train to run in Newfoundland was on September 20, 1988 and less than a month later CN started tearing up the tracks, finishing in 1990 (see: Terra Transport). The rails were sold for scrap and the rolling stock was retired, scrapped, or sold. But for the Avondale Railway Station the tearing of their tracks happened in 1984, and was something that upset the community. The Avondale Heritage Foundation applied to keep a section of their track as the museum could, and has, greatly benefit from it. They had not received any sort of reply to their application until workers came to tear up the tracks. The people of the community decided they would protest the removal of the tracks, by sitting on them as trucks and bulldozers moved around them. Determination won in the end and the Avondale Railway Station came to an agreement to officially keep a small part of the tracks.

The Avondale railway station remains preserved along with a small display of retired railway cars and a locomotive.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Avondale had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021. Avondale has lost approximately one third of its population since 1976 when it numbered 937 residents.

==See also==
* List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2874476" start="0" end="8" title="Avondale, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Avondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q48335" start="30" end="42" title="Newfoundland (island)" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q790092" start="50" end="66" title="Avalon Peninsula" label="Avalon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="86" end="111" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879752" start="207" end="221" title="Conception Bay" label="Conception Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303397" start="225" end="235" title="Division 1, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082" start="264" end="279" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607939" start="297" end="306" title="Placentia, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Placentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q315346" start="635" end="654" title="Thomas Moore" label="Thomas Moore&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q35054" start="1086" end="1097" title="post office" label="post office"/>
<link wikidata="Q11776449" start="1101" end="1112" title="money order" label="money order"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970" start="1129" end="1135" title="church (building)" label="church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="1156" end="1162" title="lumber" label="lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="1167" end="1174" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1179" end="1186" title="farming" label="farming"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1223" end="1244" title="Harbour Main District" label="Harbour Main District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017848" start="1596" end="1616" title="Newfoundland Railway" label="Newfoundland Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309974" start="1858" end="1883" title="Reid Newfoundland Company" label="Reid Newfoundland Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q624798" start="2486" end="2515" title="The Canadian National Railway" label="The Canadian National Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985441" start="2826" end="2841" title="Terra Transport" label="Terra Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="3706" end="3731" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="3745" end="3762" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134052" start="4058" end="4111" title="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador" label="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426093" wikidata="Q562765" url="?curid=426093" title="Cheomseongdae">
<text>Cheomseongdae () is an astronomical observatory in Gyeongju, South Korea. Cheomseongdae is the oldest surviving astronomical observatory in Asia, and possibly even the world. It was constructed during the Silla period, during the reign of Queen Seondeok (r. 632–647 AD). Cheomseongdae was designated as the country&#x27;s 31st national treasure on December 20, 1962. It is part of Gyeongju Historic Areas, a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

Modeled on Baekje&#x27;s Jeomseongdae, which now exists only in historical records, the Cheomseongdae influenced the construction of the Japanese observatory in 675, and Duke Zhou&#x27;s observatory in China in 723.

==Structure==

Cheomseongdae stands 9.17 meters high and consists of three parts: a stylobate, or base upon which a column is constructed, a curved cylindrical body, and a square top. Midway up the body stands a square window and entrance to the inside of the structure. When viewed from above, Cheomseongdae resembles the Korean Hanja character (Hangul: ), meaning &quot;well.&quot;

The square stylobate base is 5.7 meters wide and built from a single layer of 12 rectangular stones. From the base to the window, the tower is filled with earth and rubble.

The cylindrical body of the tower is built out of 365 pieces of cut granite, symbolizing the number of days in a year. However, various historical documents have reported different numbers of stones. Song (1983) cites a 1962 survey of the site by Gyeongju National Museum director Hong Sa-jun, who found 366 blocks. This discrepancy in stone count may be attributed to some researchers including or omitting a stone slab inside the top of the tower and not visible from the outside. The stones are fashioned as annular sectors, meaning each stone takes the shape of a curved or bent rectangle.

At the top, there are two tiers of (), and it is presumed that an observation device was placed on it.

Its construction style parallels that used at the Bunhwangsa in Gyeongju.

==Symbolism==

The number and placement of the stones in Cheomseongdae have been theorized to represent various historical and astronomical figures.

The central hole or window separates the body into 12 layers of stones both above and below, symbolizing the 12 months in a year and the 24 solar terms. Additionally, the 12 stones which comprise the stylobate may also reference the 12 months.

==Preservation==
Cheomseongdae&#x27;s original appearance and shape has remained unchanged for over 1300 years; however the structure now tilts slightly to the north-east. In 2007, a system was installed to measure the state of Cheomseongdae every hour. Of particular concern are cracks and structural displacements, and movements of the foundation stones. Cheomseongdae is additionally susceptible to wear due to aging and weathering, particularly from air pollution and structural imbalance caused by ground subsidence. The exterior of the structure is regularly washed down to remove moss.

The National Research Institute of Cultural Heritage in Korea has conducted inspections on the structure regularly since 1981. The Gyeongju municipal government oversees the site&#x27;s management and preservation.

==Popular culture==
Cheomseongdae is mentioned in the popular Korean drama &quot;Queen Seondeok&quot;. In the 2009 drama, Cheomseongdae was constructed when Queen Seondeok was still a princess; this was her first decree as a princess. Cheomseongdae was meant to share the knowledge of astronomy with everyone, rather than letting one person (Lady Misil) abuse the knowledge of it. By doing so, she also abdicated her divine rights. Because this was uncommon at the time and unsupported by many conservatives, at the opening of Cheomseongdae, barely any nobles showed up.

==References==
==Further reading==

*Jeon, Sang-woon. (1998). &quot;A history of science in Korea&quot;. Seoul:Jimoondang. 
* Nha, Il-seong. Silla&#x27;s Cheomseongdae. (2001) &quot;Korea Journal&quot; 41(4), 269-281 (2001)
* Song, Sang-Yong. &quot;A brief history of the study of the Ch&#x27;ŏmsŏng-dae in Kyongju&quot;; &quot;Korea Journal&quot; 23(8), 16-21 (1983)

==External links==

*UNESCO Portal to the Heritage of Astronomy - Cheomseongdae
*Asian Historical Architecture: Cheomseongdae
*Travel in Korea Cheomsongdae information page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q562765" start="0" end="13" title="Cheomseongdae" label="Cheomseongdae"/>
<link wikidata="Q62832" start="23" end="47" title="astronomical observatory" label="astronomical observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q42097" start="51" end="59" title="Gyeongju" label="Gyeongju"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456" start="205" end="210" title="Silla" label="Silla"/>
<link wikidata="Q485131" start="239" end="253" title="Queen Seondeok of Silla" label="Queen Seondeok"/>
<link wikidata="Q486245" start="322" end="344" title="national treasures of Korea" label="31st national treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q495241" start="381" end="404" title="Gyeongju Historic Areas" label="Gyeongju Historic Areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="415" end="434" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q28428" start="448" end="454" title="Baekje" label="Baekje"/>
<link wikidata="Q465110" start="738" end="747" title="stylobate" label="stylobate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817" start="770" end="776" title="column" label="column"/>
<link wikidata="Q485619" start="984" end="989" title="Hanja" label="Hanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="1281" end="1288" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="1326" end="1330" title="year" label="year"/>
<link wikidata="Q45926" start="1724" end="1739" title="Annulus (mathematics)" label="annular sectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q491069" start="1962" end="1972" title="Bunhwangsa" label="Bunhwangsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190993" start="2277" end="2287" title="solar term" label="solar term"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="2885" end="2902" title="Subsidence" label="ground subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q482612" start="3254" end="3266" title="Korean drama" label="Korean drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q461452" start="3273" end="3287" title="Queen Seondeok (TV series)" label="Queen Seondeok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038955" start="3539" end="3544" title="Misil" label="Misil"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426094" wikidata="Q1128596" url="?curid=426094" title="Content">
<text>Content or contents may refer to:
==Media==
* Content (media), information or experience provided to audience or end-users by publishers or media producers
** Content industry, an umbrella term that encompasses companies owning and providing mass media and media metadata
** Content provider, a provider of non-core services in the telecommunications industry
** Free content, published material that can be used, copied, and modified without significant legal restriction
** Open content, published material licensed to authorize copying and modification by anyone
** Web content, information published on the World Wide Web
* Content analysis, a methodology used in the social sciences and humanities for studying the content of communication
* Content format, an encoded format for converting a specific type of data to displayable information
* Digital content
* Table of contents, a list of chapters or sections in a document

==Places==
* Content (Centreville, Maryland) also known as C.C. Harper Farm, a historic home located at Centreville, Maryland
* Content (Upper Marlboro, Maryland) also known as the Bowling House, a historic home located in Upper Marlboro, Maryland
* Content, Pennsylvania, an unincorporated community

==People with the surname==
* Charles Content (born 1987), Mauritian footballer
* Karina Content (born 1960), Dutch writer and politician
* Sylvain Content (born 1971), Mauritian footballer

==Arts and entertainment==
===Music===
* &quot;Content&quot; (Gang of Four album), a 2011 studio album by Gang of Four
* &quot;Content&quot; (Joywave album), a 2017 studio album by Joywave
* &quot;Content&quot;, a 2021 song by Bo Burnham from the special &quot;Bo Burnham: Inside&quot;

===Periodicals===
* &quot;Brill&#x27;s Content&quot;, a former media watchdog publication by Steven Brill (journalist)

===Television and web series===
* &quot;Content&quot; (web series); an Australian ABC comedy web series starring Charlotte Nicdao and Gemma Bird Matheson

==Mathematics==
* Content (measure theory), a concept in mathematics
* Primitive part and content, in mathematics, content is the greatest common divisor of the coefficients of a polynomial

==Ships==
* HMS &quot;Content&quot;, ships of the British Royal Navy
* USS &quot;Content&quot; (SP-538), a United States Navy vessel

==Other uses==
* Content (Freudian dream analysis), a dream as it is remembered and the hidden meaning of the dream in Freudian analysis
* Contents insurance, insurance that pays for damage to, or loss of, an individual&#x27;s personal possessions whilst they are located within that individual&#x27;s home

==See also==
* Content security (disambiguation)
* Contentment, a state of being
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1128596" start="0" end="7" title="Content" label="Content"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128596" start="11" end="19" title="Content" label="contents"/>
<link wikidata="Q15824073" start="46" end="61" title="Content (media)" label="Content (media)"/>
<link wikidata="Q719664" start="159" end="175" title="Content industry" label="Content industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43201039" start="180" end="193" title="umbrella term" label="umbrella term"/>
<link wikidata="Q349044" start="275" end="291" title="Content provider" label="Content provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q14075" start="363" end="375" title="Free content" label="Free content"/>
<link wikidata="Q14075" start="476" end="488" title="Open content" label="Open content"/>
<link wikidata="Q3948731" start="569" end="580" title="Web content" label="Web content"/>
<link wikidata="Q653137" start="628" end="644" title="Content analysis" label="Content analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165081" start="747" end="761" title="Content format" label="Content format"/>
<link wikidata="Q11320476" start="849" end="864" title="Digital content" label="Digital content"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456936" start="867" end="884" title="Table of contents" label="Table of contents"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165056" start="945" end="976" title="Content (Centreville, Maryland)" label="Content (Centreville, Maryland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165058" start="1060" end="1094" title="Content (Upper Marlboro, Maryland)" label="Content (Upper Marlboro, Maryland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22072823" start="1182" end="1203" title="Content, Pennsylvania" label="Content, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076426" start="1264" end="1279" title="Charles Content" label="Charles Content"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666604" start="1316" end="1330" title="Karina Content" label="Karina Content"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660618" start="1374" end="1389" title="Sylvain Content" label="Sylvain Content"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688824" start="1466" end="1506" title="Content (Gang of Four album)" label="&amp;quot;Content&amp;quot; (Gang of Four album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39072393" start="1546" end="1581" title="Content (Joywave album)" label="&amp;quot;Content&amp;quot; (Joywave album)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1686" end="1704" title="Bo Burnham: Inside" label="Bo Burnham: Inside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614513" start="1805" end="1830" title="Steven Brill (journalist)" label="Steven Brill (journalist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753941" start="1866" end="1898" title="Content (web series)" label="&amp;quot;Content&amp;quot; (web series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="1914" end="1917" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q514569" start="1945" end="1961" title="Charlotte Nicdao" label="Charlotte Nicdao"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1966" end="1985" title="Gemma Bird Matheson" label="Gemma Bird Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165061" start="2005" end="2029" title="Content (measure theory)" label="Content (measure theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663499" start="2058" end="2084" title="Primitive part and content" label="Primitive part and content"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631951" start="2190" end="2213" title="HMS Content" label="HMS &amp;quot;Content&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868543" start="2249" end="2281" title="USS Content (SP-538)" label="USS &amp;quot;Content&amp;quot; (SP-538)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688833" start="2329" end="2362" title="Content (Freudian dream analysis)" label="Content (Freudian dream analysis)"/>
<link wikidata="Q174897" start="2451" end="2469" title="Contents insurance" label="Contents insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16769768" start="2635" end="2668" title="Content security (disambiguation)" label="Content security (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q352126" start="2671" end="2682" title="Contentment" label="Contentment"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426102" wikidata="Q695852" url="?curid=426102" title="Bombay High Court">
<text>The High Court of Bombay is the high court of the states of Maharashtra and Goa in India, and the union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu. It is seated primarily at Mumbai (formerly known as Bombay), and is one of the oldest high courts in India. The High Court has circuit benches at Nagpur and Aurangabad in Maharashtra and Porvorim.

The first Chief Justice, the Attorney General and the Solicitor General of independent India were from this court. Since India&#x27;s independence, 22 judges from this court have been elevated to the Supreme Court and 8 have been appointed to the office of Chief Justice of India.

The court has original jurisdiction in addition to its appellate jurisdiction. Judgments issued by this court can be appealed only to the Supreme Court of India. The Bombay High Court has a sanctioned strength of 94 judges (71 permanent, 23 additional). The building is part of The Victorian and Art Deco Ensemble of Mumbai, which was added to the list of World Heritage Sites in 2018.

As of 2025, the Court is currently understaffed, with only 52 permanent and 16 additional judges.

==History and premises==
The Bombay High Court was inaugurated on 14 August 1862 by letters patent issued by Queen Victoria, dated 26 June 1862, under powers granted by the Indian High Courts Act 1861. It was of the three High Courts in India established at the Presidency Towns, the others being Calcutta (capital of the Bengal Presidency) and Madras.

The work on the present building of the High Court was commenced in April 1871 and completed in November 1878. It was designed by British engineer Col. James A. Fuller. It is a Gothic revival building in the Early English style. It is long and wide. To the west of the central tower are two octagonal towers. Statues of Justice and Mercy are atop this building. The first sitting in this building was on 10 January 1879.

Justice M. C. Chagla was the first Indian permanent Chief Justice of Bombay High Court after independence (1948–1958).

In 2016, it was announced that the premises of the Bombay High Court would be shifting to Bandra Kurla Complex.

The 125th anniversary of the building was marked by the release of a book, commissioned by the Bar Association, called &quot;The Bombay High Court: The Story of the Building – 1878–2003&quot; by local historians Rahul Mehrotra and Sharada Dwivedi.

==Name of the court==

Although the name of the city was changed from Bombay to Mumbai in 1995, the Court as an institution did not follow suit and retained the name Bombay High Court. Although, a bill to rename it as &quot;Mumbai High Court&quot; was approved by the Union Cabinet on 5 July 2016, along with the change of name of the Calcutta High Court and Madras High Court as Kolkata High Court and Chennai High Court respectively, the same is pending approval before the Parliament of India but may not be enacted for some time.

==Sesquicentennial celebrations==
In 2010, the High Court organized several functions to mark the completion of 150 years of the establishment of the High Court. A special postal cover was released by Milind Deora, the then Minister of State for Communications and Information Technology at the historical Central Court Hall of the High Court on 14 August 2012.

An exhibition displaying important artifacts, royal charters, stamps, old maps and other documents of historical importance was inaugurated by the then Chief Minister of Maharashtra, Prithviraj Chavan, in the Central Court Hall on 15 August 2012. The then Prime Minister of India, Dr. Manmohan Singh was the Chief Guest at the concluding ceremony of the year-long Sesquicentennial celebrations on 18 August 2012.

A book titled &quot;A Heritage of Judging: The Bombay High Court through one hundred and fifty years&quot;, edited by Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud, Anoop V. Mohta and Roshan S. Dalvi was published by the Maharashtra Judicial Academy.

==Famous cases==
In its illustrious history, the Bombay High Court has been the site for numerous noteworthy trials and court cases. Bal Gangadhar Tilak was tried a number of times in the Bombay High Court, but the most famous was his trial for sedition in the 1916 case &quot;Emperor v. Bal Gangadhar Tilak&quot;.

===Controversies===
Bar Council had boycotted some judges of the High Court in 1991 under the leadership of Senior Counsel Iqbal Chagla. In 2011, a couple of petitions came to be filed challenging housing societies built by judges upon plots of land reserved for other purposes.

In November 2021, the Bombay High Court issued a controversial criminal case against AstraZeneca for misinformation and misleading claims regarding the safety of their vaccines. The suit claims this misinformation is responsible for the death of the afflicted. Some rumors appeared that the suit was against Bill Gates for partial funding of AstraZeneca, but these rumors were fake. The suit is addressed to both The State of Maharashtra and AstraZeneca.

==Judges==
The Bombay High Court sits at Mumbai, the capital of the state of Maharashtra, and has additional benches in Aurangabad and Nagpur in Maharashtra, as well as Panaji in the state of Goa. It may have a maximum of 94 judges, of which 71 must be permanently appointed and 23 may be additionally appointed. Currently, it has a total of 67 Judges.

=== Permanent judges ===
=== Additional judges ===
==List==
==Principal seat and benches==
The court has jurisdiction over the states of Maharashtra, Goa and the Union territories of Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli. The court has benches in Nagpur, Aurangabad and Panaji.

==Nagpur bench==
Nagpur is an industrial and commercial city situated in the centre of India. Formerly, it was the capital of the former State of CP &amp; Berar, later old Madhya Pradesh and now it is the sub-capital of the State of Maharashtra. A full-fledged High Court was established at Nagpur on 9 January 1936 and contracted by Sir Sobha Singh. Later it was included as a separate bench in the Bombay High Court jurisdiction after the formation of the state of Maharashtra in 1960.

===History===

Sir Gilbert Stone, a Judge of the Madras High Court was appointed as first Chief Justice. The foundation stone of the new building (present High Court building) was laid by late Sir Hyde Gowan on 9-1-1937. The building was designed by Mr. H.A.N. Medd, Resident Architect. It was constructed at a cost of Rs./-.The building consisted of two stories with a garden courtyard in the centre. The outside dimensions are 400 ft x 230 ft. The original design provided for a main central dome rising 109 feet above ground land, the remainder of the building being approximately 52 feet in height. The building has been constructed with sandstone. The building has Ashlar stone facing and brick hearting. The flooring in the corridors and offices is of Sikosa and Shahabad flag stones. The building is declared open on 6 January 1940. On the opening ceremony the Viceroy of India described this building as a poem in stone. The High Court has a fairly well planned garden on the eastern as well as western sides.

The High Court of Judicature at Nagpur continued to be housed in this building till the reorganisation of states in 1956. With effect from 1-11-1956, eight Marathi speaking districts of Vidarbha formed part of the greater bilingual State of Bombay which came into existence. Remaining fourteen Hindi speaking districts of the former State of Madhya Pradesh became part of the newly constituted State of Madhya Pradesh with the capital at Bhopal. The High Court of Madhya Pradesh was treated as the successor of the former High Court at Nagpur.

===New building===
A bench of the High Court at Bombay began to sit in this building at Nagpur with effect from 1-11-1956 and continues to do so even after the formation of the State of Maharashtra on 1-5-1960. During the year 1960 the strength of this Bench consisted of four Honourable Judges.

The extension of High Court building consists of two annex buildings on both sides of the existing building viz., North and South Wings. For this Government of Maharashtra has sanctioned Rs. 1,/- on dated 21 March 1983. &#x27;South Wing&#x27; houses various utilities for the public, i.e. litigants and the Bar as well as High Court Government Pleader&#x27;s Establishment including Standing Counsel for Central Government and &#x27;A Panel Counsels, and also for the establishment. In the North Wing, it is proposed to accommodate additional Court Halls, Chambers of the Hobble Judges, Judges&#x27; Library and the office.

Presently, the strength of this Bench consists of 10 Honourable Judges and total employees are 412.

==Aurangabad bench==
The Aurangabad bench was established in 1982. Initially, only a few districts of Maharashtra were under the Aurangabad bench. Subsequently, in 1988, Ahmednagar &amp; other districts were attached to the bench. The bench at Aurangabad has more than 13 judges.
The jurisdiction of the Aurangabad Bench is over Aurangabad, Dhule, Nandurbar, Jalna, Jalgaon, Beed, Parbhani, Latur &amp; Osmanabad. The bench also has a Bar Council of Maharashtra &amp; Goa office. The present building of bench is situated in huge premises. The garden is beautifully maintained. Lush green grass invites the attention of any passerby. The HC bench at Aurangabad is approximately 4 km from the Aurangabad Airport and around 6 km from the central bus stand. The new building has 13 court halls in all now including two new ones. All the court halls are on the first floor of the building, while the registry of the Court is on the ground floor. The Aurangabad bench has a strong Bar of more than 1000 advocates, but the Aurangabad bench does not have jurisdiction over company law matters.

The Aurangabad Bench celebrated its 28th anniversary on 27 August 2009.

===History===
Due to the continued demand of the people of Marathwada region for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the High Court at Aurangabad under sub-section (2) of Sec. 51 of the Act, the State Government first took up the issue with the then Chief Justice R. M. Kantawala in 1977. On 22 March 1978, the State Legislative Assembly passed a unanimous resolution supporting a demand for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the High Court at Aurangabad to the effect :
&quot;With a view to save huge expenses and to reduce the inconvenience of the people of the Marathwada and Pune regions in connection with legal proceedings, this Assembly recommends to the Government to make a request to the President to establish a permanent Bench of the Bombay High Court having jurisdiction in Marathwada and Pune regions, one at Aurangabad and the other at Pune.&quot;

The said demand for the constitution of a permanent Bench of the High Court at Aurangabad was supported by the State Bar Council of Maharashtra, the Advocates&#x27; Association of Western India, several bar associations and people in general. It is necessary here to mention that the resolution as originally moved made a demand for the setting up of a permanent Bench of the High Court of Bombay at Aurangabad for the Marathwada region, and there was, no reference to Pune which was added by way of amendment. Initially, the State Government recommended to the Central Government in 1978 to establish two permanent Benches under sub-sec. (2) of Section 51 of the Act, one at Aurangabad and the other at Pune, but later in 1981 confined its recommendation to Aurangabad alone.

The State Government thereafter took a Cabinet decision in January 1981 to establish a permanent Bench of the High Court at Aurangabad and this was conveyed by the Secretary to the Government of Maharashtra, Law &amp; Judiciary Department, communicated by his letter dated 3 February 1981 to the Registrar and he was requested, with the permission of the Chief Justice, to submit proposals regarding accommodation for the Court and residential bungalows for the Judges, staff, furniture, etc. necessary for setting up the Bench. As a result of this communication, the Chief Justice wrote to the Chief Minister on 26 February 1981 signifying his consent to the establishment of a permanent Bench at Aurangabad. After adverting to the fact that his predecessors had opposed such a move and had indicated, amongst other things, that such a step involved, as it does, breaking up of the integrity of the institution and the Bar, which would necessarily impair the quality and quantity of the disposals.

It, however, became evident by the middle of June 1981 that the Central Government would take time in reaching a decision on the proposal for the establishment of a permanent Bench under sub-sec. (2) of Section 51 of the Act at Aurangabad as the question involved a much larger issue, viz. the principles to be adopted and the criterion laid down for the establishment of permanent Benches of High Courts generally. This meant that there would be an inevitable delay in securing the concurrence of the Central Government and the issuance of a Presidential Notification under sub-sec. (2) of S. 51 of the Act. On 19 June 1981, the State Government accordingly took a Cabinet decision pending the establishment of a permanent Bench under sub-sec. (2) of S. 51 of the Act at Aurangabad for the Marathwada region, resort be had to the provisions of sub-section (3) thereof. On 20 June 1981, the Secretary to the Government of Maharashtra, Law &amp; Judiciary Department wrote to the Registrar stating that there was a possibility of a delay in securing concurrence of the Central Government and the issuance of a notification by the President under subsection (2) of S. 51 of the Act for the establishment of a permanent Bench at Auangabad and in order to tide over the difficulty, the provisions of sub-sec. (3) of Section 51 of the Act may be resorted to and he, therefore, requested the Chief Justice to favour the Government With his views on the matter at an early date. On 5 July 1981, the Law Secretary waited on the Chief Justice in that connection. On 7 July 1981 the Chief Justice wrote a letter to the Chief Minister in which he stated that the Law Secretary had conveyed to him the decision of the State Government to have a Circuit Bench at Auangabad under sub-sec. (3) of Section 51 pending the decision of the Central Government to establish a permanent Bench there under sub-section (2) of S. 51 of the Act. The Chief Justice then added: &quot;I agree that some such step is necessary in view of the preparations made by the Government at huge costs and the mounting expectations of the people there.&quot;

===Formation===
On 20 July 1981, the Law Secretary addressed a letter to the Registrar requesting him to forward, with the permission of the Chief Justice, a proposal as is required under sub-section (3) of S. 51 for the setting up of a Bench at Auangabad . In reply to the same, the Registrar by his letter dated 24 July 1981 conveyed that the Chief Justice agreed with the suggestion of the State Government that action had to be taken under sub-section (3) of S. 51 of the Act for which the approval of the Governor was necessary and he enclosed a copy of the draft order which the Chief Justice proposed to issue under sub-section (3) of S. 51 of the Act. On 10 Aug. 1981, the Law Secretary conveyed to the Registrar the approval of the Governor. On 27 Aug. 1981, the Chief Justice issued an order under sub-section (3) of S. 51 of the Act to the effect: &quot;In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (3) of S. 51 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (No. 37 of 1956) and all other powers enabling him on this behalf, the Hon&#x27;ble the Chief Justice, with the approval of the Governor of Maharashtra, is pleased to appoint Aurangabad as a place at which the Hon&#x27;ble Judges and Division Courts of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay may also sit.&quot; This is the history of how the Aurangabad Bench of the Bombay High Court was constituted. The Constitution of the Bench by The Hon’ble Chief Justice V.S.Deshpande then came to be challenged before the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The Petition filed by the State of Maharashtra was allowed and the people&#x27;s aspirations from Marathwada were recognized. The Judgment is a reported one (State of Maharashtra v. Narain Shyamrao Puranik) in AIR 1983 Supreme Court 46.

==Goa bench==
When the High Court of Bombay constituted a bench in Porvorim, Goa, Justice G.F Couto was appointed its first Goan permanent judge. Justice G.D. Kamath was appointed as judge in 1983 and later in 1996 as Chief Justice of the Gujarat High Court. Justice E.S da Silva was elevated in 1990 and was a judge of this court till his retirement in 1995. Justice R.K. Batta and Justice R.M.S. Khandeparkar were Judges of the Goa bench for 8 and 12 years respectively. Justice F.I Rebello, was appointed Chief Justice of the Allahabad High Court in 2010 and retired in 2011. Justice Nelson Britto was Judge for five years. Justice A.P Lavande, Justice F.M.Reis, and Justice M.S. Sonak, were senior lawyers who practiced in the Goa Bench before their elevation. Presently Goa has one lady judge, Justice Anuja Prabhudesai. Justice A Prabhudesai and retired Justice Nutan Sardesai who were both District Judges.

===History===
Prior to the annexation of Goa, Daman and Diu the highest Court for the then Portuguese State of India was the &quot;Tribunal da Relação de Goa&quot; functioning at Panjim. Originally established in 1554, the &quot;Relação de Goa&quot; used to serve as the high court of appeal for all the Portuguese East Indies territories of the Indian Ocean and the Far East, including what are now Mozambique, Macau and East Timor, besides India itself. The &quot;Relação de Goa&quot; was abolished when a Court of Judicial Commissioner was established w.e.f. 16 December 1963 under Goa-Daman &amp; Diu (Judicial Commissioner Court) Regulation, 1963. In May 1964 an Act was passed by the Parliament which conferred upon the Court of Judicial Commissioner, some powers of the High Court for the purposes of the Constitution of India.

Parliament by an Act extended the jurisdiction of High Court at Bombay to the Union territory of Goa Daman &amp; Diu and established a permanent Bench of that High Court at Panaji on 30.10.1982

From its inception, the Hon&#x27;ble Shri Justice Dr. G.F.Couto who was at that time acting Judicial Commissioner was elevated to the Bench of High Court of Bombay. The Hon&#x27;ble Shri Justice G.D.Kamat was elevated to the Bench on 29.8.1983.

With the passing of Goa, Daman &amp; Re-organization Act, 1987 by the Parliament conferring Statehood to Goa, the High Court of Bombay became the common High Court for the states of Maharashtra and Goa and the Union territories of Dadra &amp; Nagar Haveli and Daman &amp; Diu w.e.f. 30.5.1987.

===First Relocation===
The High Court was shifted from the old building of &quot;Tribunal da Relação&quot; to Lyceum Complex at Altinho, Panaji and started functioning there from 3.11.1997. The main building at the said Complex, constructed in the year 1925 by the Portuguese Government, was renovated by the Goa state government and inaugurated by the Hon&#x27;ble Chief Justice of Bombay High Court Shri M.B.Shah on 2.10.1997.The Hon&#x27;ble Chief Justice of Bombay High Court, Shri Y. K. Sabharwal, inaugurated the 2nd building on 9.9.1999. Both these buildings now house several departments of the Bombay high court – panaji bench.

===Second Relocation===
Due to the space crunch in the lyseum complex, a new building complex is being built in alto – betim porvorim region in Porvorim. The new building was inaugurated on 27 March 2021. The first court hearing in the new building was presided on by the divisional bench composed of Chief Justice of the Bombay high court Dipankar Datta and Justice Mahesh Sonak on 17 August 2021.

==Case information==
The Case Status and Causelists of Bombay High Court is available on its official website at www.bombayhighcourt.nic.in. The Orders and Judgments from the year 2005 are also available on the website.

 the High Court has civil cases and 45,960 criminal cases pending. At the same time, the District and subordinate courts under the Bombay High Court have a total of 3,179,475 pending cases.

==See also==

* High courts of India
* List of chief justices of the Bombay High Court
* List of chief justices of the Supreme Court of Bombay

==References==
==External links==
* Official WebSite
* Bar Association of Bombay
* Case Status System
* Order/Judgments Retrieval System
* High Court Bharti 2024
* List of Designated Senior Advocates[link points to an access-restricted file]</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q695852" start="4" end="24" title="Bombay High Court" label="High Court of Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840882" start="32" end="42" title="High courts of India" label="high court"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="50" end="56" title="States and union territories of India" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="60" end="71" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="76" end="79" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="83" end="88" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q77997266" start="117" end="157" title="Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu" label="Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="185" end="191" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513" start="305" end="311" title="Nagpur" label="Nagpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q200713" start="316" end="326" title="Aurangabad" label="Aurangabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232861" start="346" end="354" title="Porvorim" label="Porvorim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243690" start="367" end="380" title="Chief Justice of India" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520349" start="386" end="402" title="Attorney General of India" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557777" start="411" end="428" title="Solicitor General of India" label="Solicitor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294296" start="432" end="449" title="independent India" label="independent India"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="478" end="503" title="Independence of India" label="India&amp;#x27;s independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="557" end="570" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243690" start="614" end="636" title="Chief Justice of India" label="Chief Justice of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q864400" start="653" end="674" title="original jurisdiction" label="original jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="694" end="716" title="appellate jurisdiction" label="appellate jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="777" end="799" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q16942531" start="917" end="962" title="The Victorian and Art Deco Ensemble of Mumbai" label="The Victorian and Art Deco Ensemble of Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="995" end="1015" title="World Heritage Sites" label="World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="1209" end="1223" title="letters patent" label="letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="1234" end="1248" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020447" start="1298" end="1325" title="Indian High Courts Act 1861" label="Indian High Courts Act 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q817165" start="1447" end="1464" title="Bengal Presidency" label="Bengal Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772596" start="1470" end="1476" title="Madras Presidency" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q96384108" start="1631" end="1646" title="James A. Fuller" label="James A. Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="1656" end="1670" title="Gothic revival architecture" label="Gothic revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q750752" start="1687" end="1700" title="Early English Period" label="Early English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634250" start="1909" end="1921" title="M. C. Chagla" label="M. C. Chagla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854694" start="2111" end="2131" title="Bandra Kurla Complex" label="Bandra Kurla Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283604" start="2346" end="2360" title="Rahul Mehrotra" label="Rahul Mehrotra"/>
<link wikidata="Q25627330" start="2365" end="2380" title="Sharada Dwivedi" label="Sharada Dwivedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="2453" end="2459" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="2463" end="2469" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q960484" start="2651" end="2664" title="Union Council of Ministers" label="Union Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026391" start="2718" end="2737" title="Calcutta High Court" label="Calcutta High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q502531" start="2742" end="2759" title="Madras High Court" label="Madras High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026391" start="2763" end="2781" title="Kolkata High Court" label="Kolkata High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q502531" start="2786" end="2804" title="Chennai High Court" label="Chennai High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="2859" end="2878" title="Parliament of India" label="Parliament of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q16215749" start="3119" end="3131" title="Milind Deora" label="Milind Deora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520217" start="3464" end="3481" title="Prithviraj Chavan" label="Prithviraj Chavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="3537" end="3560" title="Prime Minister of India" label="Prime Minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q41914" start="3566" end="3580" title="Manmohan Singh" label="Manmohan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268914" start="3813" end="3838" title="Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud" label="Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud"/>
<link wikidata="Q312555" start="4060" end="4079" title="Bal Gangadhar Tilak" label="Bal Gangadhar Tilak"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="4172" end="4180" title="sedition" label="sedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q695852" start="4994" end="5011" title="Bombay High Court" label="Bombay High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="5020" end="5026" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q200713" start="5099" end="5109" title="Aurangabad" label="Aurangabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513" start="5114" end="5120" title="Nagpur" label="Nagpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q214681" start="5148" end="5154" title="Panaji" label="Panaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="5470" end="5481" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="5483" end="5486" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q467745" start="5495" end="5512" title="Union Territory" label="Union territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q66710" start="5516" end="5529" title="Daman and Diu" label="Daman and Diu"/>
<link wikidata="Q46107" start="5534" end="5556" title="Dadra and Nagar Haveli" label="Dadra and Nagar Haveli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513" start="5583" end="5589" title="Nagpur" label="Nagpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q200713" start="5591" end="5601" title="Aurangabad, Maharashtra" label="Aurangabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q214681" start="5606" end="5612" title="Panaji" label="Panaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513" start="5632" end="5638" title="Nagpur" label="Nagpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061723" start="5761" end="5775" title="Central Provinces and Berar" label="CP &amp;amp; Berar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="5787" end="5801" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="5848" end="5859" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12458917" start="5949" end="5964" title="Sobha Singh (builder)" label="Sir Sobha Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q108434597" start="6297" end="6311" title="Hyde Gowan" label="Sir Hyde Gowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="7526" end="7540" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q80989" start="7561" end="7567" title="Bhopal" label="Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q200713" start="8716" end="8726" title="Aurangabad" label="Aurangabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="8793" end="8804" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q223517" start="8861" end="8871" title="Ahmednagar" label="Ahmednagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200713" start="8935" end="8945" title="Aurangabad" label="Aurangabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q773603" start="9032" end="9037" title="Dhule" label="Dhule"/>
<link wikidata="Q30771" start="9050" end="9055" title="Jalna (city)" label="Jalna"/>
<link wikidata="Q30951" start="9057" end="9064" title="Jalgaon" label="Jalgaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q814033" start="9066" end="9070" title="Beed" label="Beed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920284" start="9072" end="9080" title="Parbhani" label="Parbhani"/>
<link wikidata="Q61394" start="9082" end="9087" title="Latur" label="Latur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462135" start="9094" end="9103" title="Osmanabad" label="Osmanabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="9141" end="9152" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="9159" end="9162" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903059" start="9383" end="9401" title="Aurangabad Airport" label="Aurangabad Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573064" start="9911" end="9921" title="Marathwada" label="Marathwada"/>
<link wikidata="Q200713" start="9993" end="10003" title="Aurangabad" label="Aurangabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q44884967" start="10122" end="10137" title="R. M. Kantawala" label="R. M. Kantawala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232861" start="16437" end="16445" title="Porvorim" label="Porvorim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918348" start="17326" end="17344" title="Goa, Daman and Diu" label="Goa, Daman and Diu"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="17376" end="17401" title="Portuguese State of India" label="Portuguese State of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q214681" start="17464" end="17470" title="Panjim" label="Panjim"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="17589" end="17611" title="Portuguese East Indies" label="Portuguese East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10317961" start="18967" end="18981" title="Liceu de Goa" label="Lyceum Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232861" start="19639" end="19647" title="Porvorim" label="Porvorim"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="20136" end="20146" title="civil case" label="civil case"/>
<link wikidata="Q146071" start="20159" end="20172" title="criminal case" label="criminal case"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283311" start="20205" end="20236" title="District Courts of India" label="District and subordinate courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840882" start="20323" end="20343" title="High courts of India" label="High courts of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566891" start="20346" end="20393" title="List of chief justices of the Bombay High Court" label="List of chief justices of the Bombay High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069072" start="20396" end="20449" title="List of chief justices of the Supreme Court of Bombay" label="List of chief justices of the Supreme Court of Bombay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426104" wikidata="Q5272018" url="?curid=426104" title="Diary of a Mad Band">
<text>Diary of a Mad Band is the second studio album from American R&amp;B group Jodeci, released December 21, 1993, on Uptown Records and distributed through MCA Records. The album also featured the first-ever album appearances from Timbaland &amp; Magoo, S.B.I, Missy Elliott (credited as Misdemeanor) and Sista, two years before the latter group became known in the music industry. New Jersey rapper Redman also makes a guest appearance on the album. It was Jodeci&#x27;s second album to reach number one on the R&amp;B album chart, where it stayed for two weeks. It spawned the number 1 R&amp;B hit &quot;Cry for You&quot;; the number 2 R&amp;B hit &quot;Feenin&#x27;&quot;, and the Top 15 R&amp;B hit &quot;What About Us&quot;. Despite not being released as a single, the album&#x27;s opening track, &quot;My Heart Belongs To U&quot;, was also an urban radio hit with it peaking at #55 &amp; charting for 20 weeks on the Billboard R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Airplay chart. To date, the album has sold over four million copies in the United States and six million worldwide.

==Release and reception==

Dimitri Ehrlich of &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; wrote that at times bested the group&#x27;s first, stating that the songs on their sophomore effort &quot;often transcend the formulaic histrionics that marred their debut.&quot; AllMusic critic Ron Wynn deemed the record &quot;jarring&quot; and &quot;mismatched&quot;, preferring its sentimental love songs to the sexually explicit, hip hop-influenced &quot;come-on numbers&quot;, which he found to be in poor taste. Rohan B. Preston from the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; found the lyrics clichéd and Jodeci &quot;certainly not as funky as H-Town nor as stirring as Boyz II Men at their best&quot;. Robert Christgau was even less impressed and assigned it a &quot;neither&quot; symbol in his &quot;Consumer Guide&quot; book, indicating an album that &quot;may impress once or twice with consistent craft or an arresting track or two. Then it won&#x27;t.&quot;

==Track listing==

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

===Singles===
&quot;—&quot; denotes releases that did not chart.

==Certifications==


==Personnel==
Information taken from Allmusic.

*arranging – Dalvin DeGrate, Cedric &quot;K-Ci&quot; Hailey, DeVante Swing
*recording engineer – Prince Charles Alexander
*assistant engineer – Steve Fitzmaurice
*creative director – Brett Wright
*scratches - Timbaland
*executive producers – Tim Dawg, Andre Harrell, Jodeci, Steve Lucas
*guitar – Darryl Pearson
*horn – Charles &quot;Prince Charles&quot; Alexander
*mastering – Chris Gehringer
*mixing – Charles &quot;Prince Charles&quot; Alexander, Bob Brockman, Dalvin DeGrate, Steve Fitzmaurice, Tony Maserati, DeVante Swing, John Wydrycs
*multi-instruments – Dalvin DeGrate, DeVante Swing
*talkbox - Mike &quot;Funky Mike&quot; Jackson
*photography – Daniel Hastings
*production – Mr. Dalvin, DeVante Swing
*production coordination – Dean &quot;Mr. Magoo&quot; Moodie
*vocal consultant – Kenny Hicks
*backing vocals – Jodeci
*guest vocals – Redman, Timbaland, Sista, Magoo, S.B.I. and Misdemeanor

==See also==
*List of number-one R&amp;B albums of 1994 (U.S.)

==Notes==

==External links==
* &quot;Diary of a Mad Band&quot; at Discogs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="34" end="46" title="studio album" label="studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="52" end="60" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="61" end="68" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661305" start="75" end="81" title="Jodeci" label="Jodeci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348254" start="114" end="128" title="Uptown Records" label="Uptown Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338889" start="153" end="164" title="MCA Records" label="MCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16741364" start="228" end="249" title="Timbaland &amp;amp; Magoo" label="Timbaland &amp;amp; Magoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="258" end="271" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639023" start="302" end="307" title="Sista (group)" label="Sista"/>
<link wikidata="Q313138" start="397" end="403" title="Redman (rapper)" label="Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="1115" end="1135" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="1321" end="1329" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="1592" end="1607" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627850" start="1682" end="1688" title="H-Town (band)" label="H-Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q651231" start="1708" end="1719" title="Boyz II Men" label="Boyz II Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="1741" end="1757" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="2202" end="2210" title="Allmusic" label="Allmusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243848" start="2310" end="2334" title="Prince Charles Alexander" label="Prince Charles Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q119983263" start="2510" end="2524" title="Darryl Pearson" label="Darryl Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243848" start="2533" end="2577" title="Prince Charles Alexander" label="Charles &amp;quot;Prince Charles&amp;quot; Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822900" start="2712" end="2725" title="Tony Maserati" label="Tony Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631027" start="3129" end="3177" title="List of number-one R&amp;amp;B albums of 1994 (U.S.)" label="List of number-one R&amp;amp;B albums of 1994 (U.S.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q504063" start="3246" end="3253" title="Discogs" label="Discogs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426109" wikidata="Q2991656" url="?curid=426109" title="Conception Harbour">
<text>Conception Harbour is a town on the Avalon Peninsula in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. It is in Division 1 on Conception Bay and can be accessed via Newfoundland and Labrador Route 60.

Conception Harbour includes the former communities of Bacon Cove, Cat&#x27;s Cove, Kitchuses, and Silver Spring. The town has a history of fishing, whaling, ironworking, and tourism as its industries, with ties to the steelworking construction industry in mid-20th-century New York City. In 2022, cephalopod fossils were found in Bacon Cove that potentially moved their evolutionary date back by 30 million years.

== History ==
Prior to 1870, the settlement in the area was known as Cat&#x27;s Cove. Conception Harbour was incorporated as a community in 1972. Throughout its history, the village&#x27;s economy primarily focused around fishing, with a protected harbour nearby, and a lobster factory existed there in the early 1900s. Due to the decline of cod in the area, fishermen traveled to the northeastern United States (primarily Boston and New York City) for work. In New York City, the immigrants (mostly from Kitchuses and Bacon Cove) became known as &quot;fish&quot; who worked as ironworkers in groups of seven, and some of their families followed. Strong ties back to Newfoundland led to the rise of ironworkers in the area, and the town&#x27;s first ironworkers union was chartered in 1955.

Due to the decline of the whaling industry, several whalers were brought to the town to be scuttled in 1959. In 1968, the S.S. Charcot ran aground near the town, leading to the discovery of several wrecks of the scuttled ships, whose parts would continue to wash up onto the beach throughout the next several decades. In 2013, the Shipwreck Preservation Society of Newfoundland and Labrador, the town, and the region&#x27;s Economic Development Board partnered to improve the shipwrecks&#x27; tourism facilities. Oil from one wreck&#x27;s fuel tank had been leaking (with oil sheen visible in the summers), and in 2020, the Canadian Coast Guard drained the tank, a difficult task due to the novelty of the operation, the thickness of the tank&#x27;s steel, and the viscosity of the oil. Over 14,000 liters were removed.

In 2022, cephalopod fossils were found in Bacon Cove in a 522 million year old layer of rock by Heidelberg University researchers Anne Hildenbrand and Gregor Austermann; the fossils potentially backdated the origin of cephalopods by 30 million years to the early Cambrian period, when multicellular organisms first developed.

== Economy, culture, and landmarks ==
Industry in the area includes ironworking, fishing, and tourism.

The town&#x27;s St. Anne’s Roman Catholic Parish Church was built in 1904, replacing a church built between 1857 and 1861.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Conception Harbour had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

=== Absorbed communities ===
Bacon Cove, a fishing and farming settlement south east of Bay Roberts, had a population of 124 in 2012. Kitchuses had a population of 169 in 1940 and 131 in 1956.

== Transportation ==
Newfoundland and Labrador Route 60 runs nearby.

==See also==
* List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2991656" start="0" end="18" title="Conception Harbour" label="Conception Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="24" end="28" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q790092" start="36" end="52" title="Avalon Peninsula" label="Avalon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="56" end="81" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303397" start="100" end="110" title="Division 1, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879752" start="114" end="128" title="Conception Bay" label="Conception Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q13623186" start="153" end="187" title="Newfoundland and Labrador Route 60" label="Newfoundland and Labrador Route 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q128257" start="487" end="497" title="cephalopod" label="cephalopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1028" end="1034" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1039" end="1052" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069732" start="1183" end="1193" title="ironworker" label="ironworker"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="1367" end="1372" title="Trade union" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769492" start="1423" end="1439" title="Whaling in Canada" label="whaling industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q973740" start="1449" end="1455" title="whaler" label="whaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786766" start="1488" end="1496" title="Scuttling" label="scuttled"/>
<link wikidata="Q383520" start="2021" end="2041" title="Canadian Coast Guard" label="Canadian Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q128257" start="2227" end="2237" title="cephalopod" label="cephalopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q151510" start="2314" end="2335" title="Heidelberg University" label="Heidelberg University"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="2481" end="2489" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="2799" end="2824" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="2838" end="2855" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892168" start="3131" end="3142" title="Bay Roberts, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Bay Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13623186" start="3258" end="3292" title="Newfoundland and Labrador Route 60" label="Newfoundland and Labrador Route 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134052" start="3322" end="3375" title="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador" label="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426110" wikidata="Q2471479" url="?curid=426110" title="USS Valley Forge">
<text>USS &quot;Valley Forge&quot; may refer to:

* was the planned name of an , renamed USS &quot;Princeton&quot; prior to launch
* was an &quot;Essex&quot;-class aircraft carrier, commissioned in 1946, converted to an amphibious assault ship (LPH-8) and decommissioned in 1970
* was a guided missile cruiser commissioned in 1986 and decommissioned in 2004</text><links>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426115" wikidata="Q2983392" url="?curid=426115" title="Colliers, Newfoundland and Labrador">
<text>Colliers is a town on the Avalon Peninsula in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. It is in Division 1 on Conception Bay.

According to the 2016 Statistics Canada Census: the area had a population of 654, with 424 dwellings.

Colliers was considered by John Guy and his associates as a preferred place for the first settlement in North America. The area that became known as Cupers Cove (Cupids) was chosen to great tragedy. If Colliers had been chosen, this tragedy might not have occurred. Thus Colliers would have been the first permanent settlement in North America.

Famous residents of Colliers include former Lt. Gov. James A. McGrath, actor John Ryan and musician Terry McDonald.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Colliers had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

==See also==
* List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador

==References==
== External links ==
* Colliers Volunteer Fire Department
* Colliers - Encyclopedia of Newfoundland and Labrador, vol. 1, p. 480-481.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2983392" start="0" end="8" title="Colliers, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Colliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="14" end="18" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q790092" start="26" end="42" title="Avalon Peninsula" label="Avalon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="46" end="71" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303397" start="90" end="100" title="Division 1, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879752" start="104" end="118" title="Conception Bay" label="Conception Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="143" end="160" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007593" start="386" end="392" title="Cupids" label="Cupids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139350" start="614" end="639" title="James McGrath (Canadian politician)" label="Lt. Gov. James A. McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="713" end="738" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="752" end="769" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134052" start="962" end="1015" title="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador" label="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426117" wikidata="Q1948262" url="?curid=426117" title="Mormaer">
<text>In early medieval Scotland, a mormaer was the Gaelic name for a regional or provincial ruler, theoretically second only to the King of Scots, and the senior of a &quot;Toísech&quot; (chieftain). Mormaers were equivalent to English earls or Continental counts, and the term is often translated into English as &#x27;earl&#x27;.

== Name ==
&quot;Mormaer&quot; (pl. &quot;mormaír&quot;) and &quot;earl&quot; were respectively the Gaelic and Scots words used for the position also referred to in Latin as &quot;comes&quot; (pl. &quot;comites&quot;), which originally meant &quot;companion&quot;. That the words &quot;mormaer&quot; and &quot;comes&quot; were equivalent can be seen in the case of Ruadrí, Earl of Mar, who is described as &quot;mormaer&quot; when listed as a witness in a document recorded in the Gaelic language in 1130 or 1131, and as &quot;comes&quot; in a charter recorded in Latin between 1127 and 1131. The word &quot;earl&quot; was increasingly used in place of &quot;mormaer&quot; as Scots replaced Gaelic as the dominant vernacular language between the late 12th and late 13th centuries, and the word &quot;Earl&quot; was exclusively used within Scotland to translate &quot;comes&quot; in the later Middle Ages as Scots became the language of record. This gradual change in language use from Gaelic to Scots did not mean that &quot;earl&quot; was a new title, however, and it was unrelated to changes in the role of the &quot;comes&quot; that took place over the same time-period.

The word &quot;mormaer&quot; may represent a survival of a Pictish compound form, as despite being a Gaelic form it was used only to refer to nobles of the former Pictish areas of the Kingdom of Alba, and was never used to refer to Ireland. As late as the 15th century Irish sources were using the word &quot;mormaer&quot; for Scottish earls, instead of the word &quot;iarla&quot; they used for Irish or English earls.

The second element of &quot;mormaer&quot; comes from the Gaelic or Pictish &quot;maer&quot; meaning &quot;steward&quot;, but the first element could be either &quot;great&quot; (Gaelic &quot;mór&quot; or Pictish &quot;már&quot;), or a genitive form of the word for &quot;sea&quot; (Gaelic &quot;moro&quot; or Pictish &quot;mor&quot;). &quot;Mormaer&quot; could therefore mean either &quot;great steward&quot; or &quot;sea steward&quot;.

==History==
===Origins===
The office of &quot;mormaer&quot; is first mentioned in the context of the Battle of Corbridge in 918, where the &quot;Annals of Ulster&quot; describe how the men of the Kingdom of Alba &quot;did not lose a king or mormaer&quot;. Another three &quot;mormaer&quot;s are named, though without their provinces being specified, in the &quot;Annals of Tigernach&quot;, which listed them as fighting in Ireland in 976. The first individual named &quot;mormaer&quot; was Dubacan of Angus, one of the companions of Amlaib, the son of King Causantín II (Constantine II). Dubacan&#x27;s death at the Battle of Brunanburh in 937 is recorded in the &quot;Chronicle of the Kings of Alba&quot;, where he is described as Mormaer of Angus (Gaelic: &quot;Mormair Oengusa&quot;, or &quot;Mormaer Óengus&quot;), the first &quot;mormaer&quot; to be documented in connection to a specific province. Domnall mac Eimín is described as Mormaer of Mar in the &quot;Annals of Ulster&quot; recording his death at the Battle of Clontarf in 1014.

By the 10th century the &quot;mormaer&quot; was established as the leading figure of each of the provinces of the Kingdom of Alba. This remained their primary role, with military, fiscal and judicial elements, until the late 12th century. The &quot;mormaer&quot; was responsible for raising and leading the army of the province, offered protection to those within the province beyond that afforded by their kin-groups, heard and decided upon accusations of theft, and had the right to collect tribute (&quot;càin&quot;) from settlements within the province as a source of revenue for their activities. Although the &quot;mormaer&quot; was the ultimate head of the provincial community and a focal point of its power, his authority was not absolute and could only be exercised in cooperation with other powerful local figures, including thanes, bishops and &quot;tòiseach&quot;, the leaders of powerful local kin-groups. The role of &quot;mormaer&quot; at this time does not appear to have been hereditary: although sons did sometimes succeed their fathers, often they did not, and the position seems to have been occupied by the most powerful member of the most powerful kin-group within a province, sometimes alternating between different branches of a family or switching between different kin-groups.

The &quot;Leges inter Brettos et Scottos&quot; – a law code reflecting customs in the Kingdom of Alba in the 10th or 11th centuries – lists socio-legal ranks within society and their &quot;cro&quot;, the payments due in kine to the kin of a victim of that rank in the event of a killing. A &quot;mormaer&quot; is listed at 150 kine, behind a king at 1,000 kine and equal to the value of a king&#x27;s son, but only 50% higher than that of a thane at 100 kine. While this implies that a &quot;mormaer&quot; was behind only the King of Scots in rank, it also shows that they were closer in status to a thane than to a king, and that both &quot;mormaer&quot; and thane were considered to be a noble rank, neither were simply royal officials.

Despite being the leading power within their province, the &quot;mormaer&quot; did not necessarily hold a large proportion of the land within the province in their own right: land was also held by the King, was granted out by the King to secular vassals, or was held by large religious foundations or other powerful lords. Land held by a &quot;mormaer&quot; could derive either from their status as &quot;mormaer&quot;, or from their role of leader of their own kin-group. In Latin the &quot;mormaer&#x27;s&quot; &quot;provincia&quot; – the broad regional division of the kingdom that the &quot;mormaer&quot; led – was distinguished from his &quot;comitatus&quot; – the land he controlled directly.

===Territorial earldoms===
The role of the &quot;mormaer&quot; changed dramatically over the course of the late 12th century, and by the early 13th century the position had evolved into one that was inherited, normally through the male line, and whose power was largely limited to a territorial &quot;earldom&quot;, managed and exploited in a manner similar to that of other lords, and not coterminous with the province of the same name. The 13th century also saw the Scots term &quot;earl&quot; increasingly used at the expense of the Gaelic term &quot;mormaer&quot;, as Scots gradually replaced Gaelic as the dominant vernacular language.

By 1221 &quot;mormaers&quot; held their earldom from the King and were not permitted to enter the land of any other lord. An exception was made for the Earl of Fife, but this right was expressly separated from his role as &quot;mormaer&quot;, being held &quot;not as an earl but as the king’s third &quot;maer&quot; of Fife&quot;. The rise of patrilinear inheritance meant that succession to &quot;mormaership&quot; became linear and stable; a &quot;mormaer&#x27;s&quot; estates, previously split between those he controlled as head of a kindred and those controlled in his capacity as &quot;mormaer&quot;, came to be viewed as a single entity; and land rather than kinship became the main determinant of secular power. The proportion of a province directly controlled by a &quot;mormaer&quot; could vary considerably: by 1286 for example, the Earldom of Atholl covered most of Atholl, while the Earldom of Angus covered only a small proportion of Angus.

The earliest &quot;mormaer&quot;s of each province are generally only hazily, if at all, known until the 12th century, by which time &quot;mormaer&quot; is being referred to in Latin documents as &quot;comes&quot;. Prior to the 12th century, there were four &#x27;ancient&#x27; &quot;mormaer&quot; dynasties: Cataidh/Caithness, Charraig/Carrick, Dunbarra/Dunbar and Moireabh/Moray. After the 12th century, eight other dynasties are known to be hereditary, continuous and no longer fragmentary.

==Role==
A mormaerdom was not simply a regional lordship, it was a regional lordship with official comital rank. This is why other lordships, many of them more powerful, such as those of lords of Galloway, Argyll and Innse Gall, are not, and were not, called mormaerdoms or earldoms.

==List of mormaers==
This list does not include Orkney, which was a Norwegian Earldom, and became ruled by Scotland in the 15th century. Sutherland might be included, but it was created only late (circa 1230), and for a possibly foreign family (see Earl of Sutherland)

# Mormaerdom of Angus
# Mormaerdom of Atholl
# Mormaerdom of Buchan
# Mormaerdom of Caithness&quot;, See Earl of Orkney
# For &quot;Mormaerdom of Carrick&quot;, See Earl of Carrick
# For the Anglo-Scottish &quot;Mormaerdom of Dunbar/Lothian&quot;, See Earl of Dunbar
# Mormaerdom of Fife
# Mormaerdom of Lennox
# Mormaerdom of Mar
# ? Mormaerdom of Mearns
# Mormaerdom of Menteith
# Mormaerdom/Kingdom of Moray
# Mormaerdom of Ross
# Mormaerdom of Strathearn

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Anderson, Alan Orr, &quot;Early Sources of Scottish History: AD 500–1286&quot;, 2 Vols, (Edinburgh, 1922)
* Barrow, G.W.S., &quot;The Kingdom of the Scots&quot;, (Edinburgh, 2003)
* Broun, Dauvit, &quot;Mormaer,&quot; in J. Cannon (ed.) &quot;The Oxford Companion to British History&quot;, (Oxford, 1997)
* 
* Roberts, John L., &quot;Lost Kingdoms: Celtic Scotland in the Middle Ages&quot;, (Edinburgh, 1997)
* 

==External links==

* The Complete Peerage, 2nd edition, Volume I, Page 140 &#x27;Earl of Angus&#x27;
* Thanes &amp; Thanages
* Annals of Tigernach
* Annals of Ulster
* Chronicon Scotorum
* Gaelic Notes on the Book of Deer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="9" end="17" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="18" end="26" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948262" start="30" end="37" title="Mormaer" label="mormaer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="46" end="52" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214188" start="127" end="140" title="Kings of Scots" label="King of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q110504974" start="168" end="175" title="Toísech" label="Toísech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="231" end="235" title="earl" label="earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="252" end="257" title="count" label="count"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="395" end="399" title="earl" label="earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="428" end="434" title="Goidelic languages" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="439" end="444" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="493" end="498" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071047" start="508" end="513" title="comes" label="comes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375646" start="693" end="712" title="Ruadrí, Earl of Mar" label="Ruadrí, Earl of Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q856383" start="1562" end="1569" title="Pictish language" label="Pictish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991742" start="1687" end="1702" title="Kingdom of Alba" label="Kingdom of Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="1735" end="1742" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="2158" end="2166" title="genitive" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991963" start="2462" end="2481" title="Battle of Corbridge" label="Battle of Corbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q564325" start="2506" end="2522" title="Annals of Ulster" label="Annals of Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991742" start="2557" end="2572" title="Kingdom of Alba" label="Kingdom of Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q281054" start="2724" end="2743" title="Annals of Tigernach" label="Annals of Tigernach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310488" start="2851" end="2867" title="Dubacan of Angus" label="Dubacan of Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q333748" start="2918" end="2930" title="Constantine II of Scotland" label="Causantín II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246615" start="2977" end="2997" title="Battle of Brunanburh" label="Battle of Brunanburh"/>
<link wikidata="Q576241" start="3030" end="3060" title="Chronicle of the Kings of Alba" label="Chronicle of the Kings of Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277218" start="3093" end="3109" title="Mormaer of Angus" label="Mormaer of Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79535283" start="3265" end="3282" title="Domnall mac Eimín" label="Domnall mac Eimín"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277359" start="3299" end="3313" title="Mormaer of Mar" label="Mormaer of Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q868027" start="3377" end="3395" title="Battle of Clontarf" label="Battle of Clontarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q108392704" start="3503" end="3511" title="Provinces of Scotland" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991742" start="3520" end="3535" title="Kingdom of Alba" label="Kingdom of Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q748289" start="3899" end="3906" title="tribute" label="tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451020" start="4242" end="4248" title="Thane (Scotland)" label="thanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="4250" end="4256" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q110504974" start="4268" end="4276" title="tòiseach" label="tòiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q200303" start="4400" end="4410" title="Inheritance" label="hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518009" start="4721" end="4751" title="Leges inter Brettos et Scottos" label="Leges inter Brettos et Scottos"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="4931" end="4935" title="Cattle" label="kine"/>
<link wikidata="Q108392704" start="6562" end="6570" title="Provinces of Scotland" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="6619" end="6624" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="6687" end="6693" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991018" start="6945" end="6957" title="Earl of Fife" label="Earl of Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="7136" end="7147" title="Patrilineality" label="patrilinear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277207" start="7637" end="7654" title="Earl of Atholl" label="Earldom of Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q331254" start="7671" end="7677" title="Atholl" label="Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277218" start="7689" end="7705" title="Earl of Angus" label="Earldom of Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="7741" end="7746" title="Angus, Scotland" label="Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="7926" end="7931" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680084" start="8431" end="8448" title="lords of Galloway" label="lords of Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680054" start="8450" end="8456" title="lords of Argyll" label="Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869930" start="8461" end="8471" title="lords of the Isles" label="Innse Gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564297" start="8577" end="8583" title="Earl of Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991046" start="8778" end="8796" title="Earl of Sutherland" label="Earl of Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277218" start="8801" end="8820" title="Mormaer of Angus" label="Mormaerdom of Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277207" start="8823" end="8843" title="Mormaer of Atholl" label="Mormaerdom of Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277229" start="8846" end="8866" title="Mormaer of Buchan" label="Mormaerdom of Buchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912585" start="8869" end="8892" title="Mormaerdom of Caithness" label="Mormaerdom of Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564297" start="8904" end="8918" title="Earl of Orkney" label="Earl of Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216038" start="8945" end="8952" title="Carrick, Scotland" label="Carrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q181951" start="8964" end="8979" title="Earl of Carrick" label="Earl of Carrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002133" start="9025" end="9031" title="Dunbar" label="Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q642024" start="9032" end="9039" title="Lothian" label="Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277260" start="9051" end="9065" title="Earl of Dunbar" label="Earl of Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991018" start="9068" end="9086" title="Mormaer of Fife" label="Mormaerdom of Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277334" start="9089" end="9109" title="Mormaer of Lennox" label="Mormaerdom of Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277359" start="9112" end="9129" title="Mormaer of Mar" label="Mormaerdom of Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931295" start="9132" end="9154" title="Mormaer of Mearns" label="? Mormaerdom of Mearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991029" start="9157" end="9179" title="Mormaer of Menteith" label="Mormaerdom of Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q606844" start="9182" end="9209" title="Mormaer of Moray" label="Mormaerdom/Kingdom of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277400" start="9212" end="9230" title="Mormaer of Ross" label="Mormaerdom of Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922653" start="9233" end="9257" title="Mormaer of Strathearn" label="Mormaerdom of Strathearn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426118" wikidata="Q295841" url="?curid=426118" title="Now">
<text>Now most commonly refers 
to the present time.

Now, NOW, or The Now may also refer to:

==Organizations==
* Natal Organisation of Women, a South African women&#x27;s organization
* National Organization for Women, an American feminist organization
* Now! (political party), a liberal political party in Poland
* National Oversight and Whistleblowers (NOW), a Malaysian NGO
* NYSE ticker symbol for ServiceNow, a cloud computing company

==Media==

* Now (streaming service)
* Now Business News Channel, a 24-hour finance news channel
* Now (British TV channel), a British television channel that started broadcasting in 1990 and ceased the same year
* Now TV (Hong Kong), a Hong Kong pay-TV service provider headquartered in Wan Chai North, Victoria City operated by PCCW Media Limited
* Now (Turkish TV channel), a Turkish general entertainment channel owned by The Walt Disney Company, formerly known as TGRT (1993–2007) and Fox (2007–2024)
* NOW.com, an online TV/broadband network, formerly Network of the World owned by PCCW
* NOW News, a Beirut-based Lebanese news website focused on the Middle East published in English and Arabic
* NOWTV, the previous on-air name of CHNU-DT in Surrey, British Columbia
* Now (brand), a brand of electronic devices produced by Hasbro

===Film, episode, or TV series===
* &quot;No Opportunity Wasted&quot;, a Discovery Channel TV series hosted by Phil Keoghan
* &quot;Now&quot; (&quot;The Walking Dead&quot;), an episode of the television series &quot;The Walking Dead&quot;
* &quot;In Time&quot;, formerly titled &quot;Now&quot;, a 2011 American science fiction film
*&quot;Now with Tom Brokaw and Katie Couric&quot;, referred to as &quot;Now&quot;, a 1993–94 news program
* &quot;Now on PBS&quot;, formerly &quot;NOW with Bill Moyers&quot;, a TV newsmagazine which aired from 2002 to 2010
* &quot;Now with Alex Wagner&quot;, an MSNBC news program premiering in 2011
* &quot;The Now&quot;, combination local news/national news program broadcast on E. W. Scripps Company television affiliates

===Printed media===
* &quot;Now&quot; (1940–1947), a political and literary periodical founded by George Woodcock
* &quot;NOW!&quot; (1979–81 magazine), a short-lived UK news magazine
* &quot;Now&quot; (newspaper) (1981–), also known as NOW Magazine, a Canadian alternative newsweekly 
* &quot;The Now&quot; (newspaper) (1984–2017), a Canadian biweekly
* NOW Comics, an American comics publisher, active 1985–2005
* &quot;Now&quot; (1996–2019 magazine), a former British weekly entertainment magazine
* &quot;TV Now&quot; (2000–), an Irish television magazine
* &quot;Now&quot; (manhwa) (2001–2007), a Korean graphic novel weekly, 2001-7
* &quot;Now&quot; (book), a 2017 book about radical leftist politics by anonymous author(s) The Invisible Committee

==Music==
* The Now, an English punk rock group
* The Now, a name used by American rock band Tripsichord Music Box
* NOW Nightmares on Wax, DJ and electronic music composer
* Now That&#x27;s What I Call Music!, a series of various artist compilation albums released in the United Kingdom and Ireland

===Albums===
* &quot;Now&quot; (Anna Abreu album), 2008 album by Finnish singer Anna Abreu
* &quot;Now&quot;, or &quot;Now Fred Astaire&quot;, 1959 album by Fred Astaire
* &quot;Now&quot; (Astrud Gilberto album), 1972 album by Astrud Gilberto
* &quot;Now&quot; (Bibi Zhou album), 2007 album by Chinese singer Bibi Zhou
* &quot;Now&quot; (Black Uhuru album), 1990 album by Jamaican reggae band Black Uhuru
* &quot;Now!&quot; (Bobby Hutcherson album), 1970 album by jazz vibraphonist Bobby Hutcherson
* &quot;Now&quot; (Cara Jones album), 2000 album by Cara Jones
* &quot;Now&quot; (Dionne Warwick album), 2012 album by Dionne Warwick
* &quot;Now&quot; (The Dubliners album), 1975 album by The Dubliners
* &quot;Now&quot; (Eric Kloss album), 1978 album by saxophonist Eric Kloss
* &quot;Now&quot; (Fireflight album), 2012 album released by Christian rock band Fireflight
* &quot;Now!&quot; (France Joli album), 1982 album by singer France Joli
* &quot;Now!&quot; (Other Dimensions In Music album), 1997 album by jazz quartet Other Dimensions In Music
* &quot;Now&quot; (Girugamesh album), 2010 album by Girugämesh
* Now (Graham Nash album), 2023
* &quot;Now&quot; (Jade Warrior album), 2008 album by British band Jade Warrior
* &quot;Now&quot; (Jessica Andrews album), 2003 album by country music singer Jessica Andrews
* &quot;Now&quot; (John Paul Young album), 1996 album by Australian pop singer John Paul Young
* &quot;Now&quot; (Nearly 36), 2003 album by King Creosote
* &quot;Now&quot; (Maxwell album), 2001 album by American R&amp;B singer Maxwell
* &quot;Now&quot; (Mucky Pup album), 1990 album by hardcore band Mucky Pup
* &quot;Now&quot; (MYMP album), 2008 album by M.Y.M.P.
* &quot;Now&quot; (The New Seekers album), 1973 album by British pop group The New Seekers
* &quot;Now&quot; (Patrice Rushen album), 1984 album by American Patrice Rushen
* &quot;Now&quot; (Peter Frampton album), 2003 album by Peter Frampton
* &quot;Now&quot; (Paul Rodgers album), 1997 album by English rock musician Paul Rodger
* &quot;Now&quot; (Shania Twain album), 2017 album by Canadian Shania Twain
* &quot;Now!&quot; (Sonny Stitt album), 1963 album by jazz saxophonist Sonny Stitt
* &quot;Now&quot; (Ten Years After album), 2004 album by blues rock band Ten Years After
* &quot;Now&quot; (Vigleik Storaas album), 2007 album by Vigleik Storaas Trio
* &quot;Now&quot; (The Tubes album), 1977 album by The Tubes
* &quot;Now&quot;, an album by Bhagavan Das
* &quot;Now&quot;, 1972 album by George Baker
* &quot;Now&quot;, 2001 album by Greg Long
* &quot;Now&quot;, 1997 album by Kosmos Express
* &quot;Now&quot;, 1973 album by Lou Sino
* &quot;Now&quot;, 1955 album by Steve Roach
* &quot;Now&quot; (EP), 1992 EP by Band of Susans

===Songs===
* &quot;Now&quot; (Def Leppard song), from the album &quot;X&quot;
* &quot;Now&quot; (Joywave song), from the album &quot;How Do You Feel Now?&quot;
* &quot;Now&quot; (Paramore song), from the album &quot;Paramore&quot;
* &quot;Now&quot; (Staind song), from the album &quot;Staind&quot;
* &quot;Now&quot;, by Avail from the album &quot;Front Porch Stories&quot;
* &quot;Now&quot;, by Brotherhood of Man from the album &quot;Love and Kisses from Brotherhood of Man&quot;
* &quot;Now&quot;, by Carpenters from the album &quot;Voice of the Heart&quot;
* &quot;Now&quot;, by Days of the New from the album &quot;Days of the New&quot;
* &quot;Now&quot;, by Edie Brickell from the album &quot;Shooting Rubberbands at the Stars&quot;
* &quot;Now&quot;, a single by Eyedea &amp; Abilities
* &quot;Now&quot;, a song by Gotthard from the album &quot;Domino Effect&quot;
* &quot;Now&quot;, by Krokus from the album &quot;Change of Address&quot;
* &quot;Now&quot;, by Logic from the deluxe album version &quot;Under Pressure&quot; (album)
* &quot;Now&quot;, by Nomeansno from the album &quot;0 + 2 = 1&quot;
* &quot;Now&quot;, by Prince from the album &quot;The Gold Experience&quot;
* &quot;Now&quot;, by Trouble Maker from the album &quot;Chemistry&quot;
* &quot;Now&quot;, by Yeat from the album &quot;Afterlyfe&quot;
* &quot;Now!&quot;, by Sandra from the album &quot;The Wheel of Time&quot;
* &quot;Now!&quot;, by Scorpions from the album &quot;Blackout&quot;

==Other uses==
* Google Now, a mobile personalized search application by Google
* Negotiable order of withdrawal account, a type of bank account
* Network of Workstations, a computer network
* Northern Ohio and Western Railway, an Ohio railroad

==See also==
* &quot;The Now Show&quot;, a British radio comedy show
* Now, Now, a U.S. rock band
* Now and Forever (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q295841" start="0" end="3" title="Now" label="Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q193168" start="33" end="40" title="present" label="present"/>
<link wikidata="Q295841" start="48" end="51" title="Now" label="Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q295841" start="53" end="56" title="Now" label="NOW"/>
<link wikidata="Q295841" start="61" end="68" title="Now" label="The Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223171" start="109" end="136" title="Natal Organisation of Women" label="Natal Organisation of Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967556" start="182" end="213" title="National Organization for Women" label="National Organization for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q59660462" start="251" end="273" title="Now! (political party)" label="Now! (political party)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24912026" start="313" end="350" title="National Oversight and Whistleblowers" label="National Oversight and Whistleblowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455653" start="399" end="409" title="ServiceNow" label="ServiceNow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065448" start="451" end="474" title="Now (streaming service)" label="Now (streaming service)"/>
<link wikidata="Q307334" start="477" end="502" title="Now Business News Channel" label="Now Business News Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065264" start="537" end="561" title="Now (British TV channel)" label="Now (British TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q307373" start="653" end="671" title="Now TV (Hong Kong)" label="Now TV (Hong Kong)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710305" start="789" end="813" title="Now (Turkish TV channel)" label="Now (Turkish TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954978" start="946" end="953" title="NOW.com" label="NOW.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954989" start="1033" end="1041" title="NOW News" label="NOW News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011244" start="1176" end="1183" title="CHNU-DT" label="CHNU-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q122864348" start="1214" end="1225" title="Now (brand)" label="Now (brand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044717" start="1319" end="1340" title="No Opportunity Wasted" label="No Opportunity Wasted"/>
<link wikidata="Q21441872" start="1403" end="1449" title="Now (The Walking Dead)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Walking Dead&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q628082" start="1524" end="1531" title="In Time" label="In Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065939" start="1616" end="1652" title="Now with Tom Brokaw and Katie Couric" label="Now with Tom Brokaw and Katie Couric"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954991" start="1723" end="1733" title="Now on PBS" label="Now on PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065937" start="1840" end="1860" title="Now with Alex Wagner" label="Now with Alex Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q283457" start="1990" end="2011" title="E. W. Scripps Company" label="E. W. Scripps Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012792" start="2057" end="2084" title="Now (1940–1947)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (1940–1947)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954977" start="2151" end="2186" title="NOW! (1979–81 magazine)" label="&amp;quot;NOW!&amp;quot; (1979–81 magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065275" start="2221" end="2248" title="Now (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (newspaper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754459" start="2323" end="2354" title="The Now (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;The Now&amp;quot; (newspaper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954986" start="2390" end="2400" title="NOW Comics" label="NOW Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954985" start="2451" end="2487" title="Now (1996–2019 magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (1996–2019 magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107144013" start="2544" end="2550" title="TV Now" label="TV Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q626368" start="2597" end="2621" title="NOW (manhwa)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (manhwa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15976343" start="2675" end="2697" title="Now (book)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754458" start="2802" end="2809" title="The Now" label="The Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843777" start="2883" end="2904" title="Tripsichord Music Box" label="Tripsichord Music Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q928905" start="2911" end="2928" title="Nightmares on Wax" label="Nightmares on Wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270600" start="2965" end="2999" title="Now That&amp;#x27;s What I Call Music!" label="Now That&amp;#x27;s What I Call Music!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120483" start="3106" end="3140" title="Now (Anna Abreu album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Anna Abreu album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131603577" start="3210" end="3226" title="Now Fred Astaire" label="Now Fred Astaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16495014" start="3263" end="3302" title="Now (Astrud Gilberto album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Astrud Gilberto album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233454" start="3336" end="3369" title="Now (Bibi Zhou album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Bibi Zhou album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11793346" start="3412" end="3447" title="Now (Black Uhuru album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Black Uhuru album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065180" start="3498" end="3539" title="Now! (Bobby Hutcherson album)" label="&amp;quot;Now!&amp;quot; (Bobby Hutcherson album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065248" start="3592" end="3626" title="Now (Cara Jones album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Cara Jones album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q97933080" start="3655" end="3693" title="Now (Dionne Warwick album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Dionne Warwick album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065266" start="3726" end="3763" title="Now (The Dubliners album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (The Dubliners album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20813803" start="3795" end="3829" title="Now (Eric Kloss album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Eric Kloss album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046082" start="3870" end="3904" title="Now (Fireflight album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Fireflight album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976848" start="3962" end="3998" title="Now! (France Joli album)" label="&amp;quot;Now!&amp;quot; (France Joli album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040303" start="4035" end="4085" title="Now! (Other Dimensions In Music album)" label="&amp;quot;Now!&amp;quot; (Other Dimensions In Music album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065252" start="4142" end="4176" title="Now (Girugamesh album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Girugamesh album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q119130424" start="4205" end="4228" title="Now (Graham Nash album)" label="Now (Graham Nash album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868052" start="4237" end="4273" title="Now (Jade Warrior album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Jade Warrior album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065256" start="4317" end="4356" title="Now (Jessica Andrews album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Jessica Andrews album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599328" start="4411" end="4450" title="Now (John Paul Young album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (John Paul Young album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17508546" start="4506" end="4533" title="Now (Nearly 36)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Nearly 36)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065258" start="4565" end="4596" title="Now (Maxwell album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Maxwell album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065260" start="4646" end="4679" title="Now (Mucky Pup album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Mucky Pup album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9026420" start="4721" end="4749" title="Now (MYMP album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (MYMP album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065265" start="4776" end="4815" title="Now (The New Seekers album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (The New Seekers album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065262" start="4867" end="4905" title="Now (Patrice Rushen album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Patrice Rushen album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817218" start="4947" end="4985" title="Now (Peter Frampton album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Peter Frampton album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465103" start="5018" end="5054" title="Now (Paul Rodgers album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Paul Rodgers album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612164" start="5106" end="5142" title="Now (Shania Twain album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Shania Twain album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065182" start="5182" end="5218" title="Now! (Sonny Stitt album)" label="&amp;quot;Now!&amp;quot; (Sonny Stitt album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487443" start="5265" end="5304" title="Now (Ten Years After album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Ten Years After album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065269" start="5354" end="5393" title="Now (Vigleik Storaas album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Vigleik Storaas album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065267" start="5432" end="5465" title="Now (The Tubes album)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (The Tubes album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900620" start="5522" end="5534" title="Bhagavan Das (yogi)" label="Bhagavan Das"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290781" start="5568" end="5580" title="George Baker (Dutch singer)" label="George Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605931" start="5614" end="5623" title="Greg Long (singer)" label="Greg Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q6433306" start="5657" end="5671" title="Kosmos Express" label="Kosmos Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q27886551" start="5705" end="5713" title="Lou Sino" label="Lou Sino"/>
<link wikidata="Q714470" start="5747" end="5758" title="Steve Roach (musician)" label="Steve Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095993" start="5761" end="5781" title="Now (EP)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7065250" start="5824" end="5858" title="Now (Def Leppard song)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Def Leppard song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21480353" start="5891" end="5921" title="Now (Joywave song)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Joywave song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834083" start="5973" end="6004" title="Now (Paramore song)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Paramore song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865708" start="6044" end="6073" title="Now (Staind song)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;quot; (Staind song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505815" start="6158" end="6177" title="Front Porch Stories" label="Front Porch Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691631" start="6246" end="6285" title="Love and Kisses from Brotherhood of Man" label="Love and Kisses from Brotherhood of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280135" start="6346" end="6364" title="Voice of the Heart" label="Voice of the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243417" start="6430" end="6445" title="Days of the New (1997 album)" label="Days of the New"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959702" start="6509" end="6542" title="Shooting Rubberbands at the Stars" label="Shooting Rubberbands at the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736269" start="6580" end="6602" title="Eyedea &amp;amp; Abilities" label="Eyedea &amp;amp; Abilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638923" start="6662" end="6675" title="Domino Effect (Gotthard album)" label="Domino Effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666210" start="6732" end="6749" title="Change of Address (Krokus album)" label="Change of Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155417" start="6814" end="6848" title="Under Pressure (album)" label="&amp;quot;Under Pressure&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545618" start="6902" end="6911" title="0 + 2 = 1" label="0 + 2 = 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386355" start="6968" end="6987" title="The Gold Experience" label="The Gold Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q15791284" start="7051" end="7060" title="Chemistry (Trouble Maker EP)" label="Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q117032355" start="7115" end="7124" title="Afterlyfe" label="Afterlyfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525334" start="7182" end="7199" title="The Wheel of Time (album)" label="The Wheel of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q170176" start="7260" end="7268" title="Blackout (Scorpions album)" label="Blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q79564" start="7293" end="7303" title="Google Now" label="Google Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045156" start="7358" end="7396" title="Negotiable order of withdrawal account" label="Negotiable order of withdrawal account"/>
<link wikidata="Q206637" start="7423" end="7446" title="Network of Workstations" label="Network of Workstations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058804" start="7469" end="7502" title="Northern Ohio and Western Railway" label="Northern Ohio and Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873600" start="7543" end="7555" title="The Now Show" label="The Now Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848997" start="7593" end="7601" title="Now, Now" label="Now, Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178103" start="7622" end="7654" title="Now and Forever (disambiguation)" label="Now and Forever (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426119" wikidata="Q672023" url="?curid=426119" title="Schwenkfelder Church">
<text>The Schwenkfelder Church () is a small American Christian body rooted in the 16th-century Protestant Reformation teachings of Caspar Schwenkfeld von Ossig (1489–1561).

==History==
Although followers have held the teachings of Schwenckfeld since the 16th century, Schwenkfelder Church was not formed until the 20th century, due in large part to Schwenckfeld&#x27;s emphasis on inner spirituality over outward form. He also labored for a fellowship of all believers and one church.

Originally calling themselves Confessors of the Glory of Christ after Schwenckfeld&#x27;s 1541 book &quot;Great Confession on the Glory of Christ&quot;, the group later became known as Schwenkfelders. These Christians often suffered persecution like slavery, prison, and fines at the hands of the government and state churches in Europe. Most of them lived in southern Germany and Lower Silesia.

By the beginning of the 18th century, the remaining Schwenkfelders lived around Harpersdorf in the Duchy of Silesia, which was part of the Bohemian Crown. As the persecution intensified around 1719–1725, they were given refuge in 1726 by Nicolaus Ludwig von Zinzendorf in Saxony. When the Elector of Saxony died in 1733, Jesuits petitioned the new ruler to return the Schwenkfelders to Harpersdorf. With their freedom in jeopardy, they decided to look to the New World; toleration was also extended to them in Silesia in 1742 by King Frederick II of Prussia.

The immigrant members of the Schwenkfelder Church brought saffron to the Americas. Schwenkfelders may have grown saffron in Europe; there is some record that at least one member of the group traded in the spice. 

In 1731, a group came to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and several migrations continued until 1737. The largest group, 180 Schwenkfelders, arrived in 1734. 

In 1782, the Society of Schwenkfelders was formed, and in 1909 the Schwenkfelder Church was incorporated. Though the Schwenkfelders thereafter remained largely confined to Pennsylvania, a small number later emigrated to Waterloo County in Ontario, Canada. 

Schwenkfelder Church has remained small. , there are four congregations in southeastern Pennsylvania. All of these bodies are within a fifty-mile radius of Philadelphia: one in the city itself, and one each in East Norriton, Palm, and Worcester. The Schwenkfelder Church meets annually at a Spring General Conference. Sometimes Conferences are also held in the fall.

==Characteristics==
The Church teaches that the Bible is the source of Christian theology. Schwenckfeld drew his theology from the Old Testament and New Testament, and it agrees with the Apostles&#x27; Creed, the Nicene Creed, and the Confession of Chalcedon. 

The Church also recognizes the wisdom of church fathers, particularly those from the Eastern Church and Augustine. Schwenckfeld emphasized the inner work of the Holy Spirit, conversion (which he called the rebirth), and the new man.

The Church also continues his belief that the Lord&#x27;s Supper is a spiritual partaking representing the body and blood of Christ in open communion. Adult baptism and both infant baptism and consecration of infants is practiced depending on the church.

Adult members are also received into church membership through transfer of memberships from other churches and denominations. Their ecclesiastical tradition is congregational with an ecumenical focus. The Schwenkfelder churches recognize the right of the individual in decisions such as public service, armed combat, etc. Individual, autonomous congregations select ministers by a self-regulated search process. Ministers and church representatives gather regularly in the Schwenkfelder Ministerium, managing the church through congregational government.

Schwenkfeldian theology fits broadly within the parameters of Reformed theology today. Each congregation remains autonomous in theology and practice. Historic statements of faith inherited by the Christian Church as a whole, including the Apostles&#x27; Creed and other scriptural foundations, remain the best representative statement of Schwenkfeldian theology.

== Society of the Descendants of the Schwenkfeldian Exiles ==
The Society of the Descendants of the Schwenkfeldian Exiles is a lineage society for descendants of the 209 members of the Schwenkfelder Church who arrived near Penn&#x27;s Landing between 1731 and 1737 and settled in what then was the colonial-era Province of Pennsylvania. It was founded in 1921 by William Wagener Porter and had an initial membership of 125 individuals. Publications include &quot;Exile Herald&quot; (1924–1954) and &quot;Der Bericht&quot;.

== Further reading ==
*&quot;Formula for the Government and Discipline of the Schwenkfelder Church: Being a Part of the Church Manual&quot; (1911)
* Balthasar Heebner, &quot;Genealogical Record of the Descendants of the Schwenkfelders: Who Arrived in Pennsylvania in 1733, 1734, 1736, 1737 from the German&quot; (1879)
* Samuel Kriebel Brecht, &quot;Genealogical Record of the Schwenkfelder Families, Seekers of Religious Liberty Who Fled from Silesia to Saxony and thence to Pennsylvania in the Years 1731–1737&quot; (1923)

==References==

* &quot;Encyclopedia of American Religions&quot;, edited by J. Gordon Melton
* &quot;Handbook of Denominations in the United States&quot;, by Frank S. Mead, Samuel S. Hill, and Craig D. Atwood
* &quot;Profiles in Belief: the Religious Bodies of the United States and Canada&quot;, by Arthur Carl Piepkorn

==External links==
* Schwenkfelder Church
* Central Schwenkfelder Church
* Schwenkfelder Library and Heritage Center
* Schwenkfelders – Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online
* Schwenkfelders – An article from the United Church of Christ
* Schwenkfelders – Association of Religion Data Archives</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q672023" start="4" end="24" title="Schwenkfelder Church" label="Schwenkfelder Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="48" end="57" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="90" end="112" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q64137" start="126" end="154" title="Caspar Schwenckfeld" label="Caspar Schwenkfeld von Ossig"/>
<link wikidata="Q46519" start="842" end="858" title="southern Germany" label="southern Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353353" start="863" end="876" title="Lower Silesia" label="Lower Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857426" start="959" end="970" title="Twardocice" label="Harpersdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="987" end="994" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76336" start="1117" end="1147" title="Nicolaus Ludwig Zinzendorf" label="Nicolaus Ludwig von Zinzendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q156199" start="1151" end="1157" title="Electorate of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q53437" start="1168" end="1185" title="Augustus II the Strong" label="Elector of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="1200" end="1207" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q53438" start="1223" end="1232" title="Augustus III of Poland" label="new ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="1338" end="1347" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="1413" end="1436" title="Frederick II of Prussia" label="Frederick II of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="1497" end="1504" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="1508" end="1520" title="the Americas" label="the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1678" end="1690" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="1692" end="1704" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974224" start="2029" end="2044" title="Waterloo County" label="Waterloo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="2048" end="2055" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114457" start="2277" end="2290" title="East Norriton Township, Pennsylvania" label="East Norriton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127957" start="2292" end="2296" title="Palm, Pennsylvania" label="Palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748506" start="2302" end="2311" title="Worcester Township, Pennsylvania" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="2483" end="2488" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="2506" end="2515" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="2566" end="2579" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="2584" end="2597" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q51646" start="2622" end="2642" title="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed" label="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="2648" end="2660" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037472" start="2670" end="2693" title="Confession of Chalcedon" label="Confession of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37302" start="2858" end="2869" title="Holy Spirit" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q814997" start="2871" end="2881" title="Religious conversion" label="conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="2973" end="2995" title="Eucharist" label="the Lord&amp;#x27;s Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="3088" end="3095" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="3805" end="3813" title="Reformed Christianity" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q51646" start="3982" end="4002" title="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed" label="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163122" start="4330" end="4349" title="Penn&amp;#x27;s Landing" label="Penn&amp;#x27;s Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="4405" end="4417" title="Colonial history of the United States" label="colonial-era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475732" start="4418" end="4442" title="Province of Pennsylvania" label="Province of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q21176985" start="4470" end="4492" title="William W. Porter" label="William Wagener Porter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426120" wikidata="Q5284441" url="?curid=426120" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision M, Newfoundland and Labrador">
<text>Division No. 1, Subdivision M is an unorganized subdivision on the Avalon Peninsula in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada in Division 1. It contains the unincorporated communities of Emerald Vale, Goulds Road, Juniper Stump, Mahers and Turks Water. At several times in the past, census enumerating officers have considered Emerald Vale, Turks Water and Juniper Stump - along with other names such as Riverside Mills - to be part of the loosely defined Makinsons/Hodgewater settlement.

==Goulds Road==
Goulds Road was a village located south of Bay Roberts. It had a population of 139 in 1956.

==Mahers==
Mahers is a settlement in Newfoundland and Labrador that has undergone a recent resurgence after nearly being abandoned after the railway was closed down on the Island. Both Mahers and the nearby Ocean Pond settlement have sizable numbers of summer homes, as do several other locations in the area.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5284441" start="0" end="29" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision M, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division No. 1, Subdivision M"/>
<link wikidata="Q790092" start="67" end="83" title="Avalon Peninsula" label="Avalon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="87" end="112" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303397" start="124" end="134" title="Division 1, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284441" start="196" end="207" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision M, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Goulds Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284441" start="224" end="230" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision M, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Mahers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892168" start="544" end="555" title="Bay Roberts, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Bay Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252517" start="617" end="627" title="List of communities in Newfoundland and Labrador" label="settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="631" end="656" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="801" end="811" title="Ocean Pond, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Ocean Pond"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426129" wikidata="Q729157" url="?curid=426129" title="USS Wright">
<text>USS &quot;Wright&quot; may refer to:

*, was launched in 1920 as airship tender AZ-1, then converted twice more during her career for various duties until 1946 when she was scrapped
*&quot;Wright&quot; (CV-47), was an Essex-class carrier laid down in August 1944 and renamed in February 1945, prior to launching
* was a light aircraft carrier commissioned in 1947, converted to a command ship and recommissioned as CC-2 in 1962, and decommissioned in 1970
* is an active Aviation Logistics Support (Roll-on/Roll-off) container ship used by the US Navy Auxiliary</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4232629" start="380" end="392" title="command ship" label="command ship"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426130" wikidata="Q1746791" url="?curid=426130" title="Growth stock">
<text>In finance, a growth stock is a stock of a company that generates substantial and sustainable positive cash flow and whose revenues and earnings are expected to increase at a faster rate than the average company within the same industry. A growth company typically has some sort of competitive advantage (a new product, a breakthrough patent, overseas expansion) that allows it to fend off competitors. Growth stocks usually pay smaller dividends, as the companies typically reinvest most retained earnings in capital-intensive projects.

==Criteria==
Analysts compute return on equity (ROE) by dividing a company&#x27;s net income into average common equity. To be classified as a growth stock, analysts generally expect companies to achieve a 15 percent or higher return on equity. CAN SLIM is a method which identifies growth stocks and was created by William O&#x27;Neil a stock broker and publisher of &quot;Investor&#x27;s Business Daily&quot;. In academic finance, the Fama–French three-factor model relies on book-to-market ratios (B/M ratios) to identify growth vs. value stocks. Some advisors suggest investing half the portfolio using the value approach and other half using the growth approach.

The definition of a &quot;growth stock&quot; differs among some well-known investors. For example, Warren Buffett does not differentiate between value and growth investing. In his 1992 letter to shareholders, he stated that many analysts consider growth and value investing to be opposites which he characterized &quot;fuzzy thinking.&quot; Furthermore, Buffett cautions investors against overpaying for growth stocks, noting that growth projections are often overly optimistic. Instead, he prioritizes companies with a durable competitive advantage and a high return on capital, rather than focusing solely on revenue or earnings growth. 

Peter Lynch classifies stocks into four categories: &quot;Slow Growers,&quot; &quot;Stalwarts,&quot; &quot;Fast Growers,&quot; and &quot;Turnarounds.&quot; He is known for focusing on what he calls &quot;Fast Growers&quot; referring to companies that grow at rates of 20% or higher. However, like Buffett, Lynch also believes in not overpaying for stocks emphasizing that investors should use their &quot;edge&quot; to find companies with high earnings potential that are not yet overvalued. He recommends investing in companies with P/E ratios equal to or lower than their growth rates and suggests holding these investments for three to five years. He is often credited for popularizing the PEG ratio to analyze growth stocks.

==See also==
*Alternate stock categorizations:
** Turnaround stock
** Value stock
* Treatment of growth:
**
**Earnings growth 
**PEG ratio
**PVGO
**Benjamin Graham formula

==References==
==External links==
* How to Find the Ultimate Growth Stock</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43015" start="3" end="10" title="finance" label="finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746791" start="14" end="26" title="Growth stock" label="growth stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q330601" start="32" end="37" title="share capital" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047513" start="103" end="112" title="cash flow" label="cash flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="123" end="130" title="revenue" label="revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326940" start="136" end="144" title="earnings" label="earnings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150207" start="282" end="303" title="competitive advantage" label="competitive advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q181201" start="437" end="445" title="dividend" label="dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q240691" start="489" end="506" title="retained earnings" label="retained earnings"/>
<link wikidata="Q591174" start="569" end="585" title="return on equity" label="return on equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q827451" start="645" end="658" title="Ownership equity" label="common equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008729" start="784" end="792" title="CAN SLIM" label="CAN SLIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340917" start="855" end="874" title="William O&amp;#x27;Neil" label="William O&amp;#x27;Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060911" start="913" end="943" title="Investor&amp;#x27;s Business Daily" label="Investor&amp;#x27;s Business Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395065" start="976" end="1006" title="Fama–French three-factor model" label="Fama–French three-factor model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358047" start="1017" end="1037" title="book-to-market ratio" label="book-to-market ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q47213" start="1307" end="1321" title="Warren Buffett" label="Warren Buffett"/>
<link wikidata="Q245930" start="1769" end="1786" title="return on capital" label="return on capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156395" start="1849" end="1860" title="Peter Lynch" label="Peter Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793202" start="2542" end="2551" title="PEG ratio" label="PEG ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855818" start="2629" end="2645" title="Turnaround stock" label="Turnaround stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361817" start="2649" end="2660" title="Value stock" label="Value stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326945" start="2689" end="2704" title="Earnings growth" label="Earnings growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793202" start="2708" end="2717" title="PEG ratio" label="PEG ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q105833546" start="2720" end="2724" title="PVGO" label="PVGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888723" start="2727" end="2750" title="Benjamin Graham formula" label="Benjamin Graham formula"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426131" wikidata="Q6817526" url="?curid=426131" title="Menteith">
<text>Menteith or Monteith (), a district of south Perthshire, Scotland, roughly comprises the territory between the Teith and the Forth. Earlier forms of its name include &quot;Meneted&quot;, &quot;Maneteth&quot; and &quot;Meneteth&quot;. (Historically, the area between Callander and Dunblane was known in English by the similar name of the “Vale of Menteith”.)

Menteith encompasses the parishes of Callander, Aberfoyle, Port of Menteith, Kippen, Kilmadock, Kincardine, Lecropt and Dunblane.

==Etymology==
The name &quot;Menteith&quot; may be derived from the Brittonic cognate of Welsh &quot;mynydd&quot; (borrowed into Gaelic as &quot;monadh&quot;), meaning &quot;mountain, muir&quot;, combined with river-name &quot;Teith&quot; (of obscure origin).
Alternatively, given the topography of the area the name is possibly derived from the Gaelic word &quot;moine&quot;, meaning Moss or Marsh, cognate with &quot;Teith&quot;. Much more likely it has a Brittonic basis reflecting two Welsh words &quot;mign&quot; meaning &quot;bog, morass&quot; and &quot;tuth&quot;/&quot;tith&quot; meaning &quot;to trot&quot; so conveying the meaning &quot;(the river which) flows steadily through the marsh&quot;.

Because the name includes the River Teith rather than the River Forth, the name must have been given to it by people living to the north of it rather than the south or west.

==History==
In medieval Scotland, Menteith was a stewartry, and later an earldom, ruled by the earls of Menteith. Gilchrist is the first known earl. In Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Macbeth&quot;, Menteth (&quot;sic&quot;) is one of the &quot;noblemen of Scotland&quot; appearing in Act V who allies himself with Malcolm and others to oppose Macbeth&#x27;s usurpation.

The lands and the earldom passed to Walter Comyn (d. 1258) in right of his wife Isabella; then, through Isabella&#x27;s sister Mary, to the Stewarts; and finally to the Grahams. One notorious relative of the earls of Menteith was John de Menteith who betrayed William Wallace to the English. The earldom became extinct in 1694, but because sheriffdoms had previously been introduced into Scotland, sheriffs were a ready-made alternative source of authority: Menteith was covered by the sheriffdom based at Perth.

When local government reforms in the mid-19th century replaced the ancient provinces with new counties (&quot;shires&quot;) that were coextensive with the sheriffdom boundaries, Menteith became the south-western portion of the newly created county, &quot;Perthshire&quot;.

==Lake of Menteith==
The Loch or Lake of Menteith, situated south of Loch Venachar, measures long by broad, and contains three islands. On Inchmahome (&quot;&quot;, island of St Colmaig) stand the ruins of Inchmahome Priory, an Augustinian priory founded in 1238 by Walter Comyn, and built in the Early English style, with an ornate western doorway. Mary, Queen of Scots, when a child of four, lived on the island for a few weeks in 1548 before leaving for Dumbarton Castle on her way to France. On Inch Talla stands the ruined tower, dating from 1428, that belonged to the estate of the earls of Menteith. The village of the Port of Menteith lies on the north shore of the loch.

==In literature==
The landscapes, history and folklore of Menteith feature in a number of the sketches of the writer, politician and adventurer R.B. Cunninghame Graham, whose ancestral home was at Gartmore.

==References==

*Watson, William J., &quot;The Celtic Place-names of Scotland.&quot; Revised with introduction by Simon Taylor. Edinburgh: Birlinn, 2004. 

==External links==
*Historic map showing Menteith beside Stirling &amp; Lennox
*Historic map showing Menteith in Scotland
*Historic map showing Menteith in Scotland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6817526" start="0" end="8" title="Menteith" label="Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817526" start="12" end="20" title="Menteith" label="Monteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247411" start="45" end="55" title="Perthshire" label="Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="57" end="65" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637976" start="111" end="116" title="River Teith" label="Teith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421" start="125" end="130" title="River Forth" label="Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014066" start="266" end="275" title="Callander" label="Callander"/>
<link wikidata="Q614314" start="280" end="288" title="Dunblane" label="Dunblane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014066" start="396" end="405" title="Callander" label="Callander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746326" start="407" end="416" title="Aberfoyle, Stirling" label="Aberfoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231194" start="418" end="434" title="Port of Menteith" label="Port of Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020227" start="436" end="442" title="Kippen" label="Kippen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407953" start="444" end="453" title="Kilmadock" label="Kilmadock"/>
<link wikidata="Q68815858" start="455" end="465" title="Kincardine-in-Menteith" label="Kincardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242180" start="467" end="474" title="Lecropt" label="Lecropt"/>
<link wikidata="Q614314" start="479" end="487" title="Dunblane" label="Dunblane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="558" end="567" title="Common Brittonic" label="Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="579" end="584" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="619" end="625" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q932103" start="700" end="710" title="Hydronym" label="river-name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637976" start="717" end="722" title="River Teith" label="Teith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="836" end="842" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637976" start="909" end="914" title="River Teith" label="Teith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="948" end="957" title="Common Brittonic" label="Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="979" end="984" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616001" start="1420" end="1429" title="stewartry" label="stewartry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="1444" end="1448" title="earl" label="earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991029" start="1466" end="1483" title="earls of Menteith" label="earls of Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561992" start="1485" end="1494" title="Gille Críst, Earl of Menteith" label="Gilchrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1523" end="1534" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="1548" end="1555" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543918" start="1772" end="1784" title="Walter Comyn" label="Walter Comyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198269" start="1816" end="1824" title="Isabella, Countess of Menteith" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779820" start="1863" end="1867" title="Mary I, Countess of Menteith" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="1876" end="1884" title="House of Stuart" label="Stewarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648872" start="1905" end="1912" title="Clan Graham" label="Grahams"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858658" start="1966" end="1982" title="John de Menteith" label="John de Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494999" start="2076" end="2086" title="sheriffdom" label="sheriffdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q203000" start="2242" end="2247" title="Perth, Scotland" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="2340" end="2352" title="Counties of Scotland" label="new counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247411" start="2505" end="2515" title="Perthshire" label="Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801121" start="2557" end="2573" title="Lake of Menteith" label="Lake of Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q547772" start="2593" end="2606" title="Loch Venachar" label="Loch Venachar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1912023" start="2730" end="2747" title="Inchmahome Priory" label="Inchmahome Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q214528" start="2752" end="2763" title="Augustinians" label="Augustinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750108" start="2764" end="2770" title="priory" label="priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2821" end="2834" title="Middle Ages" label="Early English"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="2874" end="2894" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177200" start="2981" end="2997" title="Dumbarton Castle" label="Dumbarton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228629" start="3023" end="3033" title="Inch Talla" label="Inch Talla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231194" start="3150" end="3166" title="Port of Menteith" label="Port of Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q334633" start="3349" end="3372" title="R.B. Cunninghame Graham" label="R.B. Cunninghame Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524422" start="3402" end="3410" title="Gartmore" label="Gartmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200853" start="3430" end="3448" title="William J. Watson" label="Watson, William J."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426136" wikidata="Q5284444" url="?curid=426136" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision Y, Newfoundland and Labrador">
<text>Division No. 1, Subdivision Y is an unorganized subdivision on the Avalon Peninsula in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. It is in Division 1 on Trinity Bay.

According to the 2016 Statistics Canada Census:
*Population: 1,118
*% Change (2011 to 2016): -4.9
*Dwellings: 857
*Area: 190.87 km2
*Density: 5.9 people/km2

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5284444" start="0" end="29" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision Y, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division No. 1, Subdivision Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q790092" start="67" end="83" title="Avalon Peninsula" label="Avalon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="87" end="112" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303397" start="131" end="141" title="Division 1, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274444" start="145" end="156" title="Trinity Bay, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Trinity Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="181" end="198" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426137" wikidata="Q932423" url="?curid=426137" title="China, Kagoshima">
<text>is a town located on Okinoerabujima, in Ōshima District, Kagoshima Prefecture, Japan.

As of October 2020, the town has an estimated population of 5,750 and a population density of 108 persons per km² (280 people/sq mi). The total area is 53.29 km² (20.6 sq mi).

==Geography==
China is located on the southern end of Okinoerabujima. The town&#x27;s Yakomo Beach is about five minutes from the harbor by bus. NHK describes it as one of the most beautiful beaches on the island. Other natural seaside attractions include Ushishi Beach (ウシシ海岸) and Tamina Cape (田皆岬).

Another tourist attraction in the town is the 3,500-meter (11483 ft; 2.2 mi) long Shōryū Caves (昇竜洞). They were discovered in 1963 and partially opened to the public that same year.

==Climate==
The climate is classified as humid subtropical (Köppen climate classification &quot;Cfa&quot;) with very warm summers and mild winters. Precipitation is high throughout the year, but is highest in the months of May, June and September. The area is subject to frequent typhoons.

===Surrounding municipalities===
*Wadomari

==History==
China Village was founded in 1888. As with all of Okinoerabujima, the village came under the administration of the United States from 1 July 1946 to 25 December 1953. It was promoted from village to town status in 1946.

==Economy==
Sugar cane, sweet potato, and peanut farming are popular. Floriculture is also practiced. A total of 1,958 hectares (4,838 acres; 7.6 sq mi) of land are under cultivation in the town. However, due to the lack of local jobs, there has been an outflow of residents.

==Transportation==
China is located on Kagoshima Prefectural Route 84. The only airport serving the area, the Okinoerabu Airport, is about 80 minutes away in neighboring Wadomari. There also is a ferry to the prefectural capital Kagoshima from China Port. It takes between 17 and 18 hours.

==Education==
Primary and junior high school education in China is controlled by the five members of the Education Committee, whose members serve four year terms.
The town has five kindergartens, five primary schools, two middle schools, and one senior high school. The high school, , controlled by Kagoshima Prefecture, was formed in 1949 through the merger of China High School and Wadomari High School. It initially had separate campuses in China and Wadomari.

There is also a municipal library.

==Public facilities==
There are two medical clinics, four dental clinics, and one hospital in the town. There are also two nursing homes.

The Ōyama Japan Self-Defense Forces base is located about 10 minutes from the center of town by bus, near the Ōyama Camping Grounds.

==Culture==
China has a distinctive form of lion dance, believed to have been transmitted from Okinawa in the 18th century. Another local traditional dance is the , consisting of a snake puppet suspended in mid-air from a frame and manipulated by strings. It is performed to a &quot;taiko&quot; drum and &quot;sanshin&quot; (Okinawan three-stringed banjo) accompaniment.

Popular local dishes include the traditional &quot;tofu-misozuke&quot;, prepared by drying tofu in the sun and then adding miso. A more recent innovation adds kimchi to the dish.

==Notes==
==External links==
*Official website in Japanese</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48103755" start="5" end="9" title="List of towns in Japan" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q94736" start="21" end="35" title="Okinoerabujima" label="Okinoerabujima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132452" start="40" end="55" title="Ōshima District, Kagoshima" label="Ōshima District"/>
<link wikidata="Q15701" start="57" end="77" title="Kagoshima Prefecture" label="Kagoshima Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="79" end="84" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="133" end="143" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="159" end="177" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q212128" start="409" end="412" title="NHK" label="NHK"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="790" end="807" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="809" end="838" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205996" start="1074" end="1082" title="Wadomari, Kagoshima" label="Wadomari"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="1329" end="1339" title="Sugar cane" label="Sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q199169" start="1387" end="1399" title="Floriculture" label="Floriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="1436" end="1443" title="hectare" label="hectare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901234" start="1704" end="1722" title="Okinoerabu Airport" label="Okinoerabu Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15674" start="1823" end="1832" title="Kagoshima, Kagoshima" label="Kagoshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q275488" start="2535" end="2560" title="Japan Self-Defense Forces" label="Japan Self-Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q713866" start="2703" end="2713" title="lion dance" label="lion dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="2754" end="2761" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q221769" start="2942" end="2947" title="taiko" label="taiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709639" start="2969" end="2976" title="sanshin" label="sanshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="2984" end="2991" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q177378" start="3122" end="3126" title="tofu" label="tofu"/>
<link wikidata="Q235169" start="3154" end="3158" title="miso" label="miso"/>
<link wikidata="Q141898" start="3190" end="3196" title="kimchi" label="kimchi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426142" wikidata="Q3308746" url="?curid=426142" title="Whitbourne, Newfoundland and Labrador">
<text>Whitbourne is a town on the Avalon Peninsula in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada in Division 1.

==History==
Whitbourne, Newfoundland&#x27;s first inland town, is named after Sir Richard Whitbourne, one of the most colourful early settlers of Newfoundland and Labrador who wrote a book about Newfoundland that was published in 1620. Sir Richard was appointed by the High Court of the Admiralty to set up the first English law court in the New World in 1615 in Trinity. He was kidnapped and held by the notorious Pirate Peter Easton in Harbour Grace. He also described a mermaid that he saw in St. John&#x27;s harbour. Later, he became governor of Renews on the Southern Shore.

Whitbourne, unlike most communities on the Island of Newfoundland is inland. It was founded in about 1880 during the construction of the Newfoundland Railway. The railway continued to be an important employer in the Town until its abandonment in 1988, although its economic significance declined gradually throughout the twentieth century.

Sir Robert Bond, the prime minister from 1900 to 1909, played a role in the expansion and planning of the Town and developed an elaborate country home, the &quot;Grange&quot;, there. The house is no longer in existence, but part of the estate is now Sir Robert Bond Park, which is noted for an unusual abundance of northern lichens including the relatively rare Degelia plumbea or blue felt lichen Degelia.

==Present day==
The town of Whitbourne is located just off the Trans-Canada Highway on Route 81. It is located at the centre of three possible routes to visit the Avalon Peninsula. Route 80 is one of the two entrances to the Baccalieu Trail, Route 100 and Route 81 lead to the Marine Atlantic Ferry Service in Argentia and other parts of Placentia and St. Mary&#x27;s Bays, and Route 1, the Trans Canada leads towards the second entrance to the Baccalieu Trail and the capital city of St. John&#x27;s. As a result, there is a Provincial Visitor Information Centre on the Trans Canada near the town.

Whitbourne has many of the amenities of a small town that has traditionally been a regional service centre. The town&#x27;s Wetlands Conservation Trail is of interest to many visitors.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Whitbourne had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

==Notable people==
*Shannon Tweed

==See also==
* Long Harbour Nickel Processing Plant
* List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador

== References ==

* &quot;Towns of Trinity Bay&quot; The Baccalieu Trail Tourism Association, with permission from Webmaster.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3308746" start="0" end="10" title="Whitbourne, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Whitbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="16" end="20" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q790092" start="28" end="44" title="Avalon Peninsula" label="Avalon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="48" end="73" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303397" start="85" end="95" title="Division 1, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329934" start="180" end="198" title="Richard Whitbourne" label="Richard Whitbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818899" start="232" end="240" title="settlers" label="settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="244" end="269" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="367" end="394" title="High Court of the Admiralty" label="High Court of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842531" start="461" end="468" title="Trinity, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="513" end="519" title="Pirate" label="Pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376555" start="520" end="532" title="Peter Easton" label="Peter Easton"/>
<link wikidata="Q182559" start="571" end="578" title="mermaid" label="mermaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082" start="594" end="609" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313145" start="648" end="654" title="Renews, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Renews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017848" start="816" end="836" title="Newfoundland Railway" label="Newfoundland Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q176075" start="1024" end="1035" title="Robert Bond" label="Robert Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="1041" end="1055" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q10431614" start="1382" end="1397" title="Degelia plumbea" label="Degelia plumbea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251766" start="1418" end="1425" title="Degelia" label="Degelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061576" start="1491" end="1511" title="Trans-Canada Highway" label="Trans-Canada Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q790092" start="1591" end="1607" title="Avalon Peninsula" label="Avalon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q16673628" start="1873" end="1888" title="Baccalieu Trail" label="Baccalieu Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="2152" end="2160" title="Wetlands" label="Wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="2240" end="2265" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="2279" end="2296" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q236409" start="2496" end="2509" title="Shannon Tweed" label="Shannon Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242760" start="2526" end="2562" title="Long Harbour Nickel Processing Plant" label="Long Harbour Nickel Processing Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134052" start="2565" end="2618" title="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador" label="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426143" wikidata="Q716774" url="?curid=426143" title="Exploration of Mars">
<text>The planet Mars has been explored remotely by spacecraft. Probes sent from Earth, beginning in the late 20th century, have yielded a large increase in knowledge about the Martian system, focused primarily on understanding its geology and habitability potential. Engineering interplanetary journeys is complicated and the exploration of Mars has experienced a high failure rate, especially the early attempts. Roughly sixty percent of all spacecraft destined for Mars failed before completing their missions, with some failing before their observations could begin. Some missions have been met with unexpected success, such as the twin Mars Exploration Rovers, &quot;Spirit&quot; and &quot;Opportunity&quot;, which operated for years beyond their specification.
==Current status==
There are two functional rovers on the surface of Mars, the &quot;Curiosity&quot; and &quot;Perseverance&quot; rovers, both operated by the American space agency NASA. &quot;Perseverance&quot; was accompanied by the &quot;Ingenuity&quot; helicopter, which scouted sites for &quot;Perseverance&quot; to study before the helicopter&#x27;s mission ended in 2024. The &quot;Zhurong&quot; rover, part of the &quot;Tianwen-1&quot; mission by the China National Space Administration (CNSA) was active until 20 May 2022 when it went into hibernation due to approaching sandstorms and Martian winter; the rover was expected to awaken from hibernation in December 2022, but as of April 2023 it has not moved and is presumed to be permanently inactive.

There are seven orbiters surveying the planet: &quot;Mars Odyssey&quot;, &quot;Mars Express&quot;, &quot;Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter&quot;, MAVEN, the Trace Gas Orbiter, the Hope Mars Mission, and the &quot;Tianwen-1&quot; orbiter, which have contributed massive amounts of information about Mars. Thus there are nine total vehicles currently exploring Mars: 2 rovers and 7 orbiters.

Various Mars sample return missions are being planned like NASA-ESA Mars Sample Return that will pick up the samples currently being collected by the &quot;Perseverance&quot; rover.

In April 2024, NASA selected several companies to begin studies on providing commercial services to further enable robotic science on Mars.

==Martian system==

Mars has long been the subject of human interest. Early telescopic observations revealed color changes on the surface that were attributed to seasonal vegetation and apparent linear features were ascribed to intelligent design. Further telescopic observations found two moons, Phobos and Deimos, polar ice caps and the feature now known as Olympus Mons, the Solar System&#x27;s tallest mountain. The discoveries piqued further interest in the study and exploration of the red planet. Mars is a rocky planet, like Earth, that formed around the same time, yet with only half the diameter of Earth, and a thin atmosphere; it has a cold and desert-like surface.

One way the surface of Mars has been categorized, is by thirty &quot;quadrangles&quot;, with each quadrangle named for a prominent physiographic feature within that quadrangle.


==Launch windows==

The minimum-energy launch windows for a Martian expedition occur at intervals of approximately two years and two months (specifically 780 days, the planet&#x27;s synodic period with respect to Earth). In addition, the lowest available transfer energy varies on a roughly 16-year cycle. For example, a minimum occurred in the 1969 and 1971 launch windows, rising to a peak in the late 1970s, and hitting another low in 1986 and 1988.


== Past missions ==
Starting in 1960, the Soviet space program launched a series of probes to Mars including the first intended (but unsuccessful) flybys and hard (impact) landing (Mars 1962B), and the first successful soft landing (Mars 3). The first successful flyby of Mars was on 14–15 July 1965, by NASA&#x27;s Mariner 4. On November 14, 1971, Mariner 9 became the first space probe to orbit another planet when it entered into orbit around Mars. The amount of data returned by probes increased substantially as technology improved.

The first to contact the surface were two Soviet probes: Mars 2 lander on November 27 and Mars 3 lander on December 2, 1971Mars 2 failed during descent and Mars 3 failed about twenty seconds after the first Martian soft landing. Mars 6 failed during descent but did return some corrupted atmospheric data in 1974. The 1975 NASA launches of the Viking program consisted of two orbiters, each with a lander that successfully soft landed in 1976. &quot;Viking 1&quot; remained operational for six years, &quot;Viking 2&quot; for three years. The Viking landers relayed the first color panoramas of Mars.

The Soviet probes Phobos 1 and 2 were sent to Mars in 1988 to study Mars and its two moons, with a focus on Phobos. Phobos 1 lost contact on the way to Mars. Phobos 2, while successfully photographing Mars and Phobos, failed before it was set to release two landers to the surface of Phobos.

Missions that ended prematurely after Phobos 1 and 2 (1988) include (see Probe difficulties section for more details):
*&quot;Mars Observer&quot; (launched in 1992)
*Mars 96 (1996)
*&quot;Mars Climate Orbiter&quot; (1999)
*Mars Polar Lander with Deep Space 2 (1999)
*&quot;Nozomi&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Beagle 2&quot; (2003)
*Fobos-Grunt with Yinghuo-1 (2011)
*&quot;Schiaparelli&quot; lander (2016)

Following the 1993 failure of the Mars Observer orbiter, the NASA Mars Global Surveyor achieved Mars orbit in 1997. This mission was a complete success, having finished its primary mapping mission in early 2001. Contact was lost with the probe in November 2006 during its third extended program, spending exactly 10 operational years in space. The NASA Mars Pathfinder, carrying a robotic exploration vehicle &quot;Sojourner&quot;, landed in the Ares Vallis on Mars in July 1997, returning many images.

NASA&#x27;s &quot;Mars Odyssey&quot; orbiter entered Mars orbit in 2001. &quot;Odyssey&quot; Gamma Ray Spectrometer detected significant amounts of hydrogen in the upper metre or so of regolith on Mars. This hydrogen is thought to be contained in large deposits of water ice.

The &quot;Mars Express&quot; mission of the European Space Agency (ESA) reached Mars in 2003. It carried the &quot;Beagle 2&quot; lander, which was not heard from after being released and was declared lost in February 2004. &quot;Beagle 2&quot; was located in January 2015 by the HiRise camera on NASA&#x27;s &quot;Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter&quot; (MRO) having landed safely but failed to fully deploy its solar panels and antenna. In early 2004, the &quot;Mars Express&quot; Planetary Fourier Spectrometer team announced the orbiter had detected methane in the Martian atmosphere, a potential biosignature. ESA announced in June 2006 the discovery of aurorae on Mars by the &quot;Mars Express&quot;.

In January 2004, the NASA twin Mars Exploration Rovers named &quot;Spirit&quot; (MER-A) and &quot;Opportunity&quot; (MER-B) landed on the surface of Mars. Both have met and exceeded all their science objectives. Among the most significant scientific returns has been conclusive evidence that liquid water existed at some time in the past at both landing sites. Martian dust devils and windstorms have occasionally cleaned both rovers&#x27; solar panels, and thus increased their lifespan. &quot;Spirit&quot; rover (MER-A) was active until 2010, when it stopped sending data because it got stuck in a sand dune and was unable to reorient itself to recharge its batteries.

&quot;Rosetta&quot; came within 250 km of Mars during its 2007 flyby. &quot;Dawn&quot; flew by Mars in February 2009 for a gravity assist on its way to investigate Vesta and Ceres.

&quot;Phoenix&quot; landed on the north polar region of Mars on May 25, 2008. Its robotic arm dug into the Martian soil and the presence of water ice was confirmed on June 20, 2008. The mission concluded on November 10, 2008, after contact was lost. In 2008, the price of transporting material from the surface of Earth to the surface of Mars was approximately US$309,000 per kilogram.

The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) launched their &quot;Mars Orbiter Mission&quot; (MOM) on November 5, 2013, and it was inserted into Mars orbit on September 24, 2014. India&#x27;s ISRO is the fourth space agency to reach Mars, after the Soviet space program, NASA and ESA. India successfully placed a spacecraft into Mars orbit, and became the first country to do so in its maiden attempt.

===Overview of missions===
The following entails a brief overview of previous missions to Mars, oriented towards orbiters and flybys; see also Mars landing and Mars rover.

====Early Soviet missions====
=====1960s=====
Between 1960 and 1969, the Soviet Union launched nine probes intended to reach Mars. They all failed: three at launch; three failed to reach near-Earth orbit; one during the burn to put the spacecraft into trans-Mars trajectory; and two during the interplanetary orbit.

The Mars 1M programs (sometimes dubbed Marsnik in Western media) was the first Soviet uncrewed spacecraft interplanetary exploration program, which consisted of two flyby probes launched towards Mars in October 1960, Mars 1960A and Mars 1960B (also known as &quot;Korabl 4&quot; and &quot;Korabl 5&quot; respectively). After launch, the third stage pumps on both launchers were unable to develop enough pressure to commence ignition, so Earth parking orbit was not achieved. The spacecraft reached an altitude of 120 km before reentry.

Mars 1962A was a Mars flyby mission, launched on October 24, 1962, and Mars 1962B an intended first Mars lander mission, launched in late December of the same year (1962). Both failed from either breaking up as they were going into Earth orbit or having the upper stage explode in orbit during the burn to put the spacecraft into trans-Mars trajectory.

======The first success======
Mars 1 (1962 Beta Nu 1), an automatic interplanetary spacecraft launched to Mars on November 1, 1962, was the first probe of the Soviet Mars probe program to achieve interplanetary orbit. Mars 1 was intended to fly by the planet at a distance of about 11,000 km and take images of the surface as well as send back data on cosmic radiation, micrometeoroid impacts and Mars&#x27; magnetic field, radiation environment, atmospheric structure, and possible organic compounds. Sixty-one radio transmissions were held, initially at 2-day intervals and later at 5-day intervals, from which a large amount of interplanetary data was collected. On 21 March 1963, when the spacecraft was at a distance of 106,760,000 km from Earth, on its way to Mars, communications ceased due to failure of its antenna orientation system.

In 1964, both Soviet probe launches, of Zond 1964A on June 4, and Zond 2 on November 30, (part of the Zond program), resulted in failures. Zond 1964A had a failure at launch, while communication was lost with Zond 2 en route to Mars after a mid-course maneuver, in early May 1965.

In 1969, and as part of the Mars probe program, the Soviet Union prepared two identical 5-ton orbiters called M-69, dubbed by NASA as Mars 1969A and Mars 1969B. Both probes were lost in launch-related complications with the newly developed Proton rocket.

=====1970s=====
The USSR intended to have the first artificial satellite of Mars beating the planned American Mariner 8 and Mariner 9 Mars orbiters. In May 1971, one day after Mariner 8 malfunctioned at launch and failed to reach orbit, Cosmos 419 (Mars 1971C), a heavy probe of the Soviet Mars program M-71, also failed to launch. This spacecraft was designed as an orbiter only, while the next two probes of project M-71, Mars 2 and Mars 3, were multipurpose combinations of an orbiter and a lander with small skis-walking rovers, PrOP-M, that would be the first planet rovers outside the Moon. They were successfully launched in mid-May 1971 and reached Mars about seven months later. On November 27, 1971, the lander of Mars 2 crash-landed due to an on-board computer malfunction and became the first man-made object to reach the surface of Mars. On 2 December 1971, the Mars 3 lander became the first spacecraft to achieve a soft landing, but its transmission was interrupted after 14.5 seconds.

The Mars 2 and 3 orbiters sent back a relatively large volume of data covering the period from December 1971 to March 1972, although transmissions continued through to August. By 22 August 1972, after sending back data and a total of 60 pictures, Mars 2 and 3 concluded their missions. The images and data enabled creation of surface relief maps, and gave information on the Martian gravity and magnetic fields.

In 1973, the Soviet Union sent four more probes to Mars: the Mars 4 and Mars 5 orbiters and the Mars 6 and Mars 7 flyby/lander combinations. All missions except Mars 7 sent back data, with Mars 5 being most successful. Mars 5 transmitted just 60 images before a loss of pressurization in the transmitter housing ended the mission. Mars 6 lander transmitted data during descent, but failed upon impact. Mars 4 flew by the planet at a range of 2200 km returning one swath of pictures and radio occultation data, which constituted the first detection of the nightside ionosphere on Mars. Mars 7 probe separated prematurely from the carrying vehicle due to a problem in the operation of one of the onboard systems (attitude control or retro-rockets) and missed the planet by .

====Mariner program====

In 1964, NASA&#x27;s Jet Propulsion Laboratory made two attempts at reaching Mars. Mariner 3 and Mariner 4 were identical spacecraft designed to carry out the first flybys of Mars. Mariner 3 was launched on November 5, 1964, but the shroud encasing the spacecraft atop its rocket failed to open properly, dooming the mission. Three weeks later, on November 28, 1964, Mariner 4 was launched successfully on a 7-month voyage to Mars.

Mariner 4 flew past Mars on July 14, 1965, providing the first close-up photographs of another planet. The pictures, gradually played back to Earth from a small tape recorder on the probe, showed impact craters. It provided radically more accurate data about the planet; a surface atmospheric pressure of about 1% of Earth&#x27;s and daytime temperatures of −100 °C (−148 °F) were estimated. No magnetic field or Martian radiation belts were detected. The new data meant redesigns for then planned Martian landers, and showed life would have a more difficult time surviving there than previously anticipated.
NASA continued the Mariner program with another pair of Mars flyby probes, Mariner 6 and 7. They were sent at the next launch window, and reached the planet in 1969. During the following launch window the Mariner program again suffered the loss of one of a pair of probes. Mariner 9 successfully entered orbit about Mars, the first spacecraft ever to do so, after the launch time failure of its sister ship, Mariner 8. When Mariner 9 reached Mars in 1971, it and two Soviet orbiters (Mars 2 and Mars 3) found that a planet-wide dust storm was in progress. The mission controllers used the time spent waiting for the storm to clear to have the probe rendezvous with, and photograph, Phobos. When the storm cleared sufficiently for Mars&#x27; surface to be photographed by Mariner 9, the pictures returned represented a substantial advance over previous missions. These pictures were the first to offer more detailed evidence that liquid water might at one time have flowed on the planetary surface. They also finally discerned the true nature of many Martian albedo features. For example, Nix Olympica was one of only a few features that could be seen during the planetary duststorm, revealing it to be the highest mountain (volcano, to be exact) on any planet in the entire Solar System, and leading to its reclassification as Olympus Mons.

====Viking program====

The Viking program launched &quot;Viking 1&quot; and &quot;Viking 2&quot; spacecraft to Mars in 1975; The program consisted of two orbiters and two landers – these were the second and third spacecraft to successfully land on Mars. In 1976, Viking 1 and Viking 2 touched down on the Martian surface. These landers were significantly larger than the Soviet Mars 3 lander (Viking 1 was 3,527 kilograms compared to the 358 kg Mars 3 lander). They were able to take the first photographs from the surface of Mars.

Viking 1 operated on the surface of Mars for around six years (On Nov 11, 1982 the Lander stopped operating after getting a faulty command) and Viking 2 for over three years (mission ended in early 1980). Both landers were equipped with a robotic sampler arm which successfully scooped up soil samples and tested them with instruments such as a Gas chromatography–mass spectrometer. The landers measured temperatures ranging from negative 86 degrees Celsius before dawn to negative 33 degrees Celsius in the afternoon. Both landers had issues obtaining accurate results from their seismometers.

Photographs from the landers and orbiters surpassed expectations in quality and quantity. The total exceeded 4,500 from the landers and 52,000 from the orbiters.

The Viking landers recorded atmospheric pressures ranging from below 7 millibars (0.0068 bars) to over 10 millibars (0.0108 bars) over the Martian year, leading to the conclusion that atmospheric pressure varies by 30 percent during the Martian year because carbon dioxide condenses and sublimes at the polar caps. Martian winds generally blow more slowly than expected, scientists had expected them to reach speeds of several hundred miles an hour from observing global dust storms, but neither lander recorded gusts over 120 kilometers (74 miles) an hour, and average velocities were considerably lower. Nevertheless, the orbiters observed more than a dozen small dust storms. The Viking landers detected nitrogen in the atmosphere for the first time, and that it was a significant component of the Martian atmosphere. There was speculation from the atmospheric analysis that the atmosphere of Mars used to be much denser.

The primary scientific objectives of the lander mission were to search for biosignatures and observe meteorologic, seismic and magnetic properties of Mars. The results of the biological experiments on board the Viking landers remain inconclusive, with a reanalysis of the Viking data published in 2012 suggesting signs of microbial life on Mars.
The Viking orbiters revealed that large floods of water carved deep valleys, eroded grooves into bedrock, and traveled thousands of kilometers. Areas of branched streams, in the southern hemisphere, suggest that rain once fell.

====&quot;Mars Pathfinder&quot;, &quot;Sojourner&quot; rover====
&quot;Mars Pathfinder&quot; was a U.S. spacecraft that landed a base station with a roving probe on Mars on July 4, 1997. It consisted of a lander and a small wheeled robotic rover named &quot;Sojourner&quot;, which was the first rover to operate on the surface of Mars. In addition to scientific objectives, the Mars Pathfinder mission was also a &quot;proof-of-concept&quot; for various technologies, such as an airbag landing system and automated obstacle avoidance, both later exploited by the Mars Exploration Rovers.

====&quot;Mars Global Surveyor&quot;====
After the 1992 failure of NASA&#x27;s &quot;Mars Observer&quot; orbiter, NASA retooled and launched &quot;Mars Global Surveyor&quot; (MGS). &quot;Mars Global Surveyor&quot; launched on November 7, 1996, and entered orbit on September 12, 1997. After a year and a half trimming its orbit from a looping ellipse to a circular track around the planet, the spacecraft began its primary mapping mission in March 1999. It observed the planet from a low-altitude, nearly polar orbit over the course of one complete Martian year, the equivalent of nearly two Earth years. &quot;Mars Global Surveyor&quot; completed its primary mission on January 31, 2001, and completed several extended mission phases until communication was lost in 2007.

The mission studied the entire Martian surface, atmosphere, and interior, and returned more data about the red planet than all previous Mars missions combined. The data has been archived and remains available publicly.

Among key scientific findings, &quot;Global Surveyor&quot; took pictures of gullies and debris flow features that suggest there may be current sources of liquid water, similar to an aquifer, at or near the surface of the planet. Similar channels on Earth are formed by flowing water, but on Mars the temperature is normally too cold and the atmosphere too thin to sustain liquid water. Nevertheless, many scientists hypothesize that liquid groundwater can sometimes surface on Mars, erode gullies and channels, and pool at the bottom before freezing and evaporating.

Magnetometer readings showed that the planet&#x27;s magnetic field is not globally generated in the planet&#x27;s core, but is localized in particular areas of the crust. New temperature data and closeup images of the Martian moon Phobos showed that its surface is composed of powdery material at least 1 metre (3 feet) thick, caused by millions of years of meteoroid impacts. Data from the spacecraft&#x27;s laser altimeter gave scientists their first 3-D views of Mars&#x27; north polar ice cap in January 1999.

Faulty software uploaded to the vehicle in June 2006 caused the spacecraft to orient its solar panels incorrectly several months later, resulting in battery overheating and subsequent failure. On November 5, 2006, MGS lost contact with Earth. NASA ended efforts to restore communication on January 28, 2007.

====&quot;Mars Odyssey&quot; and &quot;Mars Express&quot;====

In 2001, NASA&#x27;s &quot;Mars Odyssey&quot; orbiter arrived at Mars. Its mission is to use spectrometers and imagers to hunt for evidence of past or present water and volcanic activity on Mars. In 2002, it was announced that the probe&#x27;s gamma-ray spectrometer and neutron spectrometer had detected large amounts of hydrogen, indicating that there are vast deposits of water ice in the upper three meters of Mars&#x27; soil within 60° latitude of the south pole.

On June 2, 2003, the European Space Agency&#x27;s &quot;Mars Express&quot; set off from Baikonur Cosmodrome to Mars. The Mars Express craft consists of the Mars Express Orbiter and the stationary lander Beagle 2. The lander carried a digging device and the smallest mass spectrometer created to date, as well as a range of other devices, on a robotic arm in order to accurately analyze soil beneath the dusty surface to look for biosignatures and biomolecules.

The orbiter entered Mars orbit on December 25, 2003, and Beagle 2 entered Mars&#x27; atmosphere the same day. However, attempts to contact the lander failed. Communications attempts continued throughout January, but Beagle 2 was declared lost in mid-February, and a joint inquiry was launched by the UK and ESA. The Mars Express Orbiter confirmed the presence of water ice and carbon dioxide ice at the planet&#x27;s south pole, while NASA had previously confirmed their presence at the north pole of Mars.

The lander&#x27;s fate remained a mystery until it was located intact on the surface of Mars in a series of images from the &quot;Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter&quot;. The images suggest that two of the spacecraft&#x27;s four solar panels failed to deploy, blocking the spacecraft&#x27;s communications antenna. &quot;Beagle 2&quot; is the first British and first European probe to achieve a soft landing on Mars.

====MER, &quot;Opportunity&quot; rover, &quot;Spirit&quot; rover, &quot;Phoenix&quot; lander====

NASA&#x27;s Mars Exploration Rover Mission (MER), started in 2003, was a robotic space mission involving two rovers, &quot;Spirit&quot; (MER-A) and &quot;Opportunity&quot;, (MER-B) that explored the Martian surface geology. The mission&#x27;s scientific objective was to search for and characterize a wide range of rocks and soils that hold clues to past water activity on Mars. The mission was part of NASA&#x27;s Mars Exploration Program, which includes three previous successful landers: the two Viking program landers in 1976; and Mars Pathfinder probe in 1997.

====&quot;Rosetta&quot; and &quot;Dawn&quot; swingbys====

The ESA &quot;Rosetta&quot; space probe mission to the comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko flew within 250 km of Mars on February 25, 2007, in a gravitational slingshot designed to slow and redirect the spacecraft.

The NASA &quot;Dawn&quot; spacecraft used the gravity of Mars in 2009 to change direction and velocity on its way to Vesta, and tested out &quot;Dawn&quot; cameras and other instruments on Mars.

==== Fobos-Grunt ====
On November 8, 2011, Russia&#x27;s Roscosmos launched an ambitious mission called Fobos-Grunt. It consisted of a lander aimed to retrieve a sample back to Earth from Mars&#x27; moon Phobos, and place the Chinese Yinghuo-1 probe in Mars&#x27; orbit. The Fobos-Grunt mission suffered a complete control and communications failure shortly after launch and was left stranded in low Earth orbit, later falling back to Earth. The Yinghuo-1 satellite and Fobos-Grunt underwent destructive re-entry on January 15, 2012, finally disintegrating over the Pacific Ocean.

====Mars Orbiter Mission====
The Mars Orbiter Mission, also called &quot;Mangalyaan&quot;, was launched on 5 November 2013 by the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO). It was successfully inserted into Martian orbit on 24 September 2014. The mission is a technology demonstrator, and as secondary objective, it will also study the Martian atmosphere. This is India&#x27;s first mission to Mars, and with it, ISRO became the fourth space agency to successfully reach Mars after the Soviet Union, NASA (USA) and ESA (Europe). It was completed in a record low budget of $71 million, making it the least-expensive Mars mission to date. The mission concluded on September 27, 2022, after contact was lost.

====&quot;InSight&quot; and &quot;MarCO&quot;====

In August 2012, NASA selected &quot;InSight&quot;, a $425 million lander mission with a heat flow probe and seismometer, to determine the deep interior structure of Mars. &quot;InSight&quot; landed successfully on Mars on 26 November 2018. Valuable data on the atmosphere, surface and the planet&#x27;s interior were gathered by Insight. Insight&#x27;s mission was declared as ended on 21 December 2022.

Two flyby CubeSats called MarCO were launched with &quot;InSight&quot; on 5 May 2018 to provide real-time telemetry during the entry and landing of &quot;InSight&quot;. The CubeSats separated from the Atlas V booster 1.5 hours after launch and traveled their own trajectories to Mars.

== Current missions ==

On 10 March 2006, NASA&#x27;s &quot;Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter&quot; (MRO) probe arrived in orbit to conduct a two-year science survey. The orbiter began mapping the Martian terrain and weather to find suitable landing sites for upcoming lander missions. The MRO captured the first image of a series of active avalanches near the planet&#x27;s north pole in 2008.

The Mars Science Laboratory mission was launched on November 26, 2011, and delivered the &quot;Curiosity&quot; rover on the surface of Mars on August 6, 2012 UTC. It is larger and more advanced than the Mars Exploration Rovers, with a velocity of up to 90 meters per hour (295 feet per hour). Experiments include a laser chemical sampler that can deduce the composition of rocks at a distance of 7 meters.

MAVEN orbiter was launched on 18 November 2013, and on 22 September 2014, it was injected into an areocentric elliptic orbit 6,200 km (3,900 mi) by 150 km (93 mi) above the planet&#x27;s surface to study its atmosphere. Mission goals include determining how the planet&#x27;s atmosphere and water, presumed to have once been substantial, were lost over time.

The &quot;ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter&quot; arrived at Mars in 2016 and deployed the Schiaparelli EDM lander, a test lander. Schiaparelli crashed on surface, but it transmitted key data during its parachute descent, so the test was declared a partial success.

=== Overview of missions ===
====&quot;Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter&quot;====
The &quot;Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter&quot; (MRO) is a multipurpose spacecraft designed to conduct reconnaissance and exploration of Mars from orbit. The US$720 million spacecraft was built by Lockheed Martin under the supervision of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, launched August 12, 2005, and entered Mars orbit on March 10, 2006.

The MRO contains a host of scientific instruments such as the HiRISE camera, CTX camera, CRISM, and SHARAD. The HiRISE camera is used to analyze Martian landforms, whereas CRISM and SHARAD can detect water, ice, and minerals on and below the surface. Additionally, MRO is paving the way for upcoming generations of spacecraft through daily monitoring of Martian weather and surface conditions, searching for future landing sites, and testing a new telecommunications system that enable it to send and receive information at an unprecedented bitrate, compared to previous Mars spacecraft. Data transfer to and from the spacecraft occurs faster than all previous interplanetary missions combined and allows it to serve as an important relay satellite for other missions.

==== &quot;Curiosity&quot; rover ====
The NASA Mars Science Laboratory mission with its rover named &quot;Curiosity&quot;, was launched on November 26, 2011, and landed on Mars on August 6, 2012, on Aeolis Palus in Gale Crater. The rover carries instruments designed to look for past or present conditions relevant to the past or present habitability of Mars.

====MAVEN====
NASA&#x27;s MAVEN is an orbiter mission to study the upper atmosphere of Mars. It also serves as a communications relay satellite for robotic landers and rovers on the surface of Mars. MAVEN was launched 18 November 2013 and reached Mars on 22 September 2014.

====Trace Gas Orbiter and EDM====

The ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter is an atmospheric research orbiter built in collaboration between ESA and Roscosmos. It was injected into Mars orbit on 19 October 2016 to gain a better understanding of methane () and other trace gases present in the Martian atmosphere that could be evidence for possible biological or geological activity. The Schiaparelli EDM lander was destroyed when trying to land on the surface of Mars.

====&quot;Hope&quot;====
The United Arab Emirates launched the Hope Mars Mission, in July 2020 on the Japanese H-IIA booster. It was successfully placed into orbit on 9 February 2021. It is studying the Martian atmosphere and weather.

====Tianwen-1 and &quot;Zhurong&quot; rover====

Tianwen-1 was a Chinese mission launched on 23 July 2020 which included an orbiter, a lander, and a rover along with a package of deployable and remote cameras. Tianwen-1 entered orbit on 10 February 2021 and the &quot;Zhurong&quot; rover successfully landed on 14 May 2021 and deployed on 22 May 2021. Zhurong had been in operation for 347 Martian days and traveled 1,921 meters across Mars before entering hibernation state in May 22. The rover has never been awaken since then, but the orbiter continued to work.

====Mars 2020, &quot;Perseverance&quot; rover, &quot;Ingenuity&quot; helicopter====

The Mars 2020 mission by NASA was launched on 30 July 2020 on a United Launch Alliance Atlas V rocket from Cape Canaveral. It is based on the Mars Science Laboratory design. The scientific payload is focused on astrobiology. It includes the &quot;Perseverance&quot; rover and the retired &quot;Ingenuity&quot; helicopter. Unlike older rovers that relied on solar power, &quot;Perseverance&quot; is nuclear powered, to survive longer than its predecessors in this harsh, dusty environment. The car-size rover weighs about 1 ton, with a robotic arm that reaches about , zoom cameras, a chemical analyzer and a rock drill.

After traveling 293 million miles (471 million km) to reach Mars over the course of more than six months, &quot;Perseverance&quot; successfully landed on February 18, 2021. Its initial mission is set for at least one Martian year, or 687 Earth days. It will search for signs of ancient life and explore the red planet&#x27;s surface.

As of October 19, 2021, &quot;Perseverance&quot; had captured the first sounds from Mars. Recordings consisted of five hours of Martian wind gusts, rover wheels crunching over gravel, and motors whirring as the spacecraft moves its arm. The sounds give researchers clues about the atmosphere, such as how far sound travels on the planet.

====Europa Clipper, Hera and Psyche====
The NASA Europa Clipper to Jupiter and Europa, NASA &quot;Psyche&quot; space probe mission to the metal-rich asteroid 16 Psyche and ESA &quot;Hera&quot; to Didymos will undertake flybys of Mars on March 1, 2025, March 2025, and May 2026 respectively, in a gravitational slingshot designed to slow and redirect the spacecraft.

== Future missions ==

* EscaPADE (Escape and Plasma Acceleration and Dynamics Explorers) by the University of California, Berkeley, is a planned twin-spacecraft NASA Mars orbiter mission to study the structure, composition, variability and dynamics of Mars&#x27; magnetosphere and atmospheric escape processes. The EscaPADE orbiters were originally to be launched in 2022 as secondary payloads on a Falcon Heavy together with the Psyche and Janus missions, but will now be launched on a New Glenn. The mission is scheduled to launch in Q2 for 2025.
* India&#x27;s ISRO plans to send a follow-up mission to its Mars Orbiter Mission in 2026; it is called Mars Lander Mission and it will consist of an orbiter and a lander.
* As part of the ExoMars program, ESA and the Roscosmos planned to send the &quot;Rosalind Franklin&quot; rover in 2022 to search for evidence of past or present microscopic life on Mars. The lander that was planned to deliver the rover is called &quot;Kazachok&quot;, and it would have performed scientific studies for about 2 years. This mission had been delayed indefinitely as a result of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. in 2024, the mission received additional funding and is now planned for launch in 2028.

===Proposals===
* Tianwen-3 is a Chinese mission to return samples of Martian soil to Earth. The mission would launch in late 2028, with a lander and ascent vehicle and an orbiter and return module launched separately on two rockets. The samples would be returned to Earth by July 2031.
* NASA-ESA Mars Sample Return is a three-launch architecture concept for a sample return mission, which uses a rover to cache small samples, a Mars ascent stage to send it into orbit, and an orbiter to rendezvous with it above Mars and take it to Earth. Solar-electric propulsion could allow a one launch sample return instead of three.
* The Mars-Grunt is a Russian mission concept to bring a sample of Martian soil to Earth.
* Mars Aerial and Ground Global Intelligent Explorer (MAGGIE) – is a proposed compact fixed wing electric aircraft powered by solar energy to fly in the Martian atmosphere with vertical take-off/landing (VTOL) capability.

Other future mission concepts include polar probes, Martian aircraft and a network of small meteorological stations. Longterm areas of study may include Martian lava tubes, resource utilization, and electronic charge carriers in rocks.

==Human mission proposals==
The human exploration of Mars has been an aspiration since the earliest days of modern rocketry; Robert H. Goddard credits the idea of reaching Mars as his own inspiration to study the physics and engineering of space flight. Proposals for human exploration of Mars have been made throughout the history of space exploration. Currently there are multiple active plans and programs to put humans on Mars within the next ten to thirty years, both governmental and private, some of which are listed below.

===NASA===
Human exploration by the United States was identified as a long-term goal in the Vision for Space Exploration announced in 2004 by then US President George W. Bush. The planned &quot;Orion&quot; spacecraft would be used to send a human expedition to Earth&#x27;s moon by 2020 as a stepping stone to a Mars expedition. On September 28, 2007, NASA administrator Michael D. Griffin stated that NASA aims to put a person on Mars by 2037.

On December 2, 2014, NASA&#x27;s Advanced Human Exploration Systems and Operations Mission Director Jason Crusan and Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs James Reuthner announced tentative support for the Boeing &quot;Affordable Mars Mission Design&quot; including radiation shielding, centrifugal artificial gravity, in-transit consumable resupply, and a lander which can return. Reuthner suggested that if adequate funding was forthcoming, the proposed mission would be expected in the early 2030s.
On October 8, 2015, NASA published its official plan for human exploration and colonization of Mars. They called it &quot;Journey to Mars&quot;. The plan operates through three distinct phases leading to fully sustained colonization.
* The first stage, already underway, is the &quot;Earth Reliant&quot; phase. This phase continues using the International Space Station until 2024; validating deep space technologies and studying the effects of long-duration space missions on the human body. 
* The second stage, &quot;Proving Ground,&quot; moves away from Earth reliance and ventures into cislunar space for most of its tasks. This is when NASA plans to capture an asteroid, test deep space habitation facilities, and validate the capabilities required for human exploration of Mars.
* The last stage, the &quot;Earth Independent&quot; phase, includes long-term missions on the lunar surface which leverage surface habitats that only require routine maintenance, and the harvesting of Martian resources for fuel, water, and building materials. NASA is still aiming for human missions to Mars in the 2030s, though Earth independence could take decades longer.

On August 28, 2015, NASA funded a year-long simulation to study the effects of a year-long Mars mission on six scientists. The scientists lived in a biodome on a Mauna Loa mountain in Hawaii with limited connection to the outside world and were only allowed outside if they were wearing spacesuits.

NASA&#x27;s human Mars exploration plans have evolved through the NASA Mars Design Reference Missions, a series of design studies for human exploration of Mars.

In 2017, the focus of NASA shifted to a return to the Moon by 2024 with the Artemis program, a flight to Mars could follow after this project.

===SpaceX===
The long-term goal of the private corporation SpaceX is the establishment of routine flights to Mars to enable colonization. To this end, the company is developing Starship, a spacecraft capable of crew transportation to Mars and other celestial bodies, along with its booster Super Heavy. In 2016 SpaceX announced plans to send two uncrewed Starships to Mars by 2022, followed by two more uncrewed flights and two crewed flights in 2024. SpaceX is currently targeting the first uncrewed launches NET 2026, with the first crewed flights happening NET 2028.

Starship is planned to have a payload of at least 100 tonnes and is designed to use a combination of aerobraking and propulsive descent, using fuel produced from a Mars (in situ resource utilization) facility. As of 2024, the Starship development program has seen multiple integrated test flights and is progressing towards full reusability. SpaceX’s plans involve the mass manufacturing of Starship and initially sustained by resupply from Earth, and in situ resource utilization on Mars, until the Mars colony reaches full self sustainability. Any future human mission to Mars will likely take place within the optimal Mars launch window, which occurs every 26 months.

===Zubrin===
Mars Direct, a low-cost human mission proposed by Robert Zubrin, founder of the Mars Society, would use heavy-lift Saturn V class rockets, such as the Ares V, to skip orbital construction, LEO rendezvous, and lunar fuel depots. A modified proposal, called &quot;Mars to Stay&quot;, involves not returning the first immigrant explorers immediately, if ever (see Colonization of Mars).

==Probe difficulties==

The challenge, complexity and length of Mars missions have led to many mission failures. The high failure rate of missions attempting to explore Mars is informally called the &quot;Mars Curse&quot; or &quot;Martian Curse&quot;. The phrase &quot;Galactic Ghoul&quot; or &quot;Great Galactic Ghoul&quot; refers to a fictitious space monster that subsists on a diet of Mars probes, and is sometimes facetiously used to &quot;explain&quot; the recurring difficulties.

Two Soviet probes were sent to Mars in 1988 as part of the Phobos program. Phobos 1 operated normally until an expected communications session on 2 September 1988 failed to occur. The problem was traced to a software error, which deactivated Phobos 1&#x27;s attitude thrusters, causing the spacecraft&#x27;s solar arrays to no longer point at the Sun, depleting Phobos 1&#x27;s batteries. &quot;Phobos 2&quot; operated normally throughout its cruise and Mars orbital insertion phases on January 29, 1989, gathering data on the Sun, interplanetary medium, Mars, and Phobos. Shortly before the final phase of the mission – during which the spacecraft was to approach within 50 m of Phobos&#x27; surface and release two landers, one a mobile &#x27;hopper&#x27;, the other a stationary platform – contact with &quot;Phobos 2&quot; was lost. The mission ended when the spacecraft signal failed to be successfully reacquired on March 27, 1989. The cause of the failure was determined to be a malfunction of the on-board computer.

Just a few years later in 1992, &quot;Mars Observer&quot;, launched by NASA, failed as it approached Mars. Mars 96, an orbiter launched on November 16, 1996, by Russia failed, when the planned second burn of the Block D-2 fourth stage did not occur.

Following the success of Global Surveyor and Pathfinder, another spate of failures occurred in 1998 and 1999, with the Japanese Nozomi orbiter and NASA&#x27;s Mars Climate Orbiter, &quot;Mars Polar Lander&quot;, and Deep Space 2 penetrators all suffering various fatal errors. The Mars Climate Orbiter was noted for mixing up U.S. customary units with metric units, causing the orbiter to burn up while entering Mars&#x27; atmosphere.

The European Space Agency has also attempted to land two probes on the Martian surface; &quot;Beagle 2&quot;, a British-built lander that failed to deploy its solar arrays properly after touchdown in December 2003, and &quot;Schiaparelli&quot;, which was flown along the ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter. Contact with the &quot;Schiaparelli&quot; EDM lander was lost 50 seconds before touchdown. It was later confirmed that the lander struck the surface at a high velocity, possibly exploding.
==See also==

;Mars

* Colonization of Mars 
* Human mission to Mars 
* Life on Mars
* List of artificial objects on Mars
* List of missions to Mars
* Mars landing 
* Mars race
* Mars rover 
* Mars Scout Program
* Mars Society

;General

* Observations and explorations of Venus
* Space colonization
* Space exploration
* Space weather
* Timeline of Solar System exploration
*Crew Health and Performance Exploration Analog
==Notes==
: The diagram includes missions that are active on the surface, such as operational rovers and landers, as well as probes in Mars orbit. The diagram does not include missions that are en route to Mars, or probes that performed a fly-by of Mars and moved on.

==References==
==Bibliography==
* &quot;Mars – A Warmer, Wetter Planet&quot; by Jeffrey S. Kargel (published July 2004; )
* &quot;The Compact NASA Atlas of the Solar System&quot; by Ronald Greeley and Raymond Batson (published January 2002; )
* &quot;Mars: The NASA Mission Reports&quot; / edited by Robert Godwin (2000) 

==External links==

*NASA Mars exploration website
*Mars Exploration Scientific American Maps and Articles
*Next on Mars (Bruce Moomaw, Space Daily, 9 March 2005): An extensive overview of NASA&#x27;s Mars exploration plans
*Catalog of Soviet Mars images Collection of Russian Mars probes&#x27; images
*Simplified study of orbits to land on Mars and return to Earth (High School level)
*Planetary Society Mars page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="11" end="15" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528166" start="58" end="64" title="Uncrewed spacecraft" label="Probes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466" start="222" end="233" title="Geology of Mars" label="its geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q846030" start="238" end="250" title="Planetary habitability" label="habitability"/>
<link wikidata="Q834235" start="274" end="297" title="Interplanetary spaceflight" label="interplanetary journeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q716774" start="321" end="340" title="Exploration of Mars" label="exploration of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q220827" start="635" end="657" title="Mars Exploration Rover" label="Mars Exploration Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q176276" start="666" end="672" title="Spirit (rover)" label="Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q193538" start="689" end="700" title="Opportunity (rover)" label="Opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q48485" start="840" end="861" title="Curiosity (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Curiosity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q87749354" start="866" end="890" title="Perseverance (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Perseverance&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="942" end="946" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814715" start="1002" end="1011" title="Ingenuity (helicopter)" label="Ingenuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q106614244" start="1144" end="1169" title="Zhurong (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Zhurong&amp;quot; rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q23580572" start="1189" end="1198" title="Tianwen-1" label="Tianwen-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q320644" start="1220" end="1255" title="China National Space Administration" label="China National Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q207164" start="1576" end="1588" title="2001 Mars Odyssey" label="Mars Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q205672" start="1602" end="1614" title="Mars Express" label="Mars Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q183160" start="1628" end="1655" title="Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter" label="Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q327075" start="1663" end="1668" title="MAVEN" label="MAVEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090722" start="1674" end="1691" title="Trace Gas Orbiter" label="Trace Gas Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q21027958" start="1697" end="1714" title="Emirates Mars Mission" label="Hope Mars Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q23580572" start="1730" end="1739" title="Tianwen-1" label="Tianwen-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q899317" start="1916" end="1942" title="Mars sample return mission" label="Mars sample return mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q115898894" start="1967" end="1994" title="NASA-ESA Mars Sample Return" label="NASA-ESA Mars Sample Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q875660" start="2427" end="2442" title="Martian canals" label="linear features"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547" start="2529" end="2535" title="Phobos (moon)" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548" start="2540" end="2546" title="Deimos (moon)" label="Deimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q520" start="2592" end="2604" title="Olympus Mons" label="Olympus Mons"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="2610" end="2622" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="2765" end="2770" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q218860" start="2859" end="2869" title="Atmosphere of Mars" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268308" start="2980" end="2991" title="Quadrangle (geography)" label="quadrangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q855377" start="3129" end="3142" title="launch window" label="launch window"/>
<link wikidata="Q37640" start="3272" end="3286" title="synodic period" label="synodic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q849730" start="3587" end="3607" title="Soviet space program" label="Soviet space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115667" start="3709" end="3715" title="impact (mechanics)" label="impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q18775" start="3726" end="3736" title="Mars 1962B" label="Mars 1962B"/>
<link wikidata="Q718908" start="3778" end="3784" title="Mars 3" label="Mars 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q203805" start="3861" end="3870" title="Mariner 4" label="Mariner 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q203801" start="3894" end="3903" title="Mariner 9" label="Mariner 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q247305" start="4141" end="4147" title="Mars 2" label="Mars 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q763288" start="4148" end="4154" title="Lander (spacecraft)" label="lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q718908" start="4174" end="4180" title="Mars 3" label="Mars 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044984" start="4299" end="4311" title="soft landing (rocketry)" label="soft landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q909664" start="4313" end="4319" title="Mars 6" label="Mars 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q233708" start="4428" end="4442" title="Viking program" label="Viking program"/>
<link wikidata="Q210199" start="4534" end="4542" title="Viking 1" label="Viking 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q212131" start="4591" end="4599" title="Viking 2" label="Viking 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q94927" start="4704" end="4718" title="Phobos program" label="Phobos 1 and 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5052" end="5070" title="#Probe difficulties" label="Probe difficulties"/>
<link wikidata="Q634772" start="5105" end="5118" title="Mars Observer" label="Mars Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q656260" start="5145" end="5152" title="Mars 96" label="Mars 96"/>
<link wikidata="Q574464" start="5167" end="5187" title="Mars Climate Orbiter" label="Mars Climate Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q575922" start="5202" end="5219" title="Mars Polar Lander" label="Mars Polar Lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q575934" start="5225" end="5237" title="Deep Space 2" label="Deep Space 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q849074" start="5246" end="5264" title="Nozomi (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Nozomi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q559463" start="5279" end="5287" title="Beagle 2" label="Beagle 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q210020" start="5302" end="5313" title="Fobos-Grunt" label="Fobos-Grunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q177852" start="5319" end="5328" title="Yinghuo-1" label="Yinghuo-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061991" start="5337" end="5368" title="Schiaparelli EDM" label="&amp;quot;Schiaparelli&amp;quot; lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q634772" start="5411" end="5424" title="Mars Observer" label="Mars Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q206300" start="5443" end="5463" title="Mars Global Surveyor" label="Mars Global Surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q201771" start="5730" end="5745" title="Mars Pathfinder" label="Mars Pathfinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770537" start="5792" end="5801" title="Sojourner (rover)" label="Sojourner"/>
<link wikidata="Q784395" start="5823" end="5834" title="Ares Vallis" label="Ares Vallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207164" start="5899" end="5911" title="Mars Odyssey" label="Mars Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520301" start="5974" end="5996" title="Gamma Ray Spectrometer (2001 Mars Odyssey)" label="Gamma Ray Spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q106551" start="6066" end="6074" title="regolith" label="regolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985733" start="6146" end="6151" title="Water on Mars" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q205672" start="6168" end="6180" title="Mars Express" label="Mars Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="6202" end="6223" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q559463" start="6273" end="6281" title="Beagle 2" label="Beagle 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q375038" start="6635" end="6665" title="Planetary Fourier Spectrometer" label="Planetary Fourier Spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q65047472" start="6706" end="6713" title="Methane on Mars" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912794" start="6753" end="6765" title="biosignature" label="biosignature"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="6811" end="6818" title="aurora (astronomy)" label="aurorae"/>
<link wikidata="Q220827" start="6892" end="6915" title="Mars Exploration Rovers" label="Mars Exploration Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q176276" start="6928" end="6934" title="Spirit rover" label="Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q193538" start="6959" end="6970" title="Opportunity rover" label="Opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7222" end="7241" title="Dust devils#Martian dust devils" label="Martian dust devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q48572" start="7539" end="7546" title="Rosetta (spacecraft)" label="Rosetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q48558" start="7609" end="7613" title="Dawn Mission" label="Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="7697" end="7702" title="4 Vesta" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="7707" end="7712" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q129091" start="7721" end="7728" title="Phoenix (spacecraft)" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="8076" end="8079" title="US$" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="8091" end="8099" title="kilogram" label="kilogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q229058" start="8106" end="8140" title="Indian Space Research Organisation" label="Indian Space Research Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156739" start="8169" end="8189" title="Mars Orbiter Mission" label="Mars Orbiter Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773188" start="8649" end="8661" title="Mars landing" label="Mars landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q389459" start="8666" end="8676" title="Mars rover" label="Mars rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349176" start="9000" end="9007" title="Mars 1M" label="Mars 1M"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349176" start="9213" end="9223" title="Mars 1960A" label="Mars 1960A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349176" start="9228" end="9238" title="Mars 1960B" label="Mars 1960B"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316001" start="9533" end="9543" title="Sputnik 22" label="Mars 1962A"/>
<link wikidata="Q18775" start="9604" end="9614" title="Sputnik 24" label="Mars 1962B"/>
<link wikidata="Q678689" start="9917" end="9923" title="Mars 1" label="Mars 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q31316" start="10053" end="10071" title="Mars probe program" label="Mars probe program"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="10239" end="10255" title="cosmic radiation" label="cosmic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q589534" start="10257" end="10271" title="micrometeoroid" label="micrometeoroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="10295" end="10309" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q85817145" start="10772" end="10782" title="Zond 1964A" label="Zond 1964A"/>
<link wikidata="Q917929" start="10798" end="10804" title="Zond 2" label="Zond 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q219857" start="10834" end="10846" title="Zond program" label="Zond program"/>
<link wikidata="Q31316" start="11042" end="11060" title="Mars probe program" label="Mars probe program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503162" start="11148" end="11158" title="Mars 1969A" label="Mars 1969A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625667" start="11163" end="11173" title="Mars 1969B" label="Mars 1969B"/>
<link wikidata="Q746536" start="11380" end="11389" title="Mariner 8" label="Mariner 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q203801" start="11394" end="11403" title="Mariner 9" label="Mariner 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503206" start="11507" end="11530" title="Kosmos 419" label="Cosmos 419 (Mars 1971C)"/>
<link wikidata="Q247305" start="11694" end="11700" title="Mars 2" label="Mars 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q718908" start="11705" end="11711" title="Mars 3" label="Mars 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q643962" start="11795" end="11800" title="rover (space exploration)" label="rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197862" start="11803" end="11809" title="PrOP-M" label="PrOP-M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074121" start="12001" end="12013" title="Emergency landing" label="crash-landed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044984" start="12200" end="12212" title="Soft landing (rocketry)" label="soft landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="12655" end="12662" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="12667" end="12682" title="magnetic fields" label="magnetic fields"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12746" end="12752" title="Mars program#Mars 4" label="Mars 4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12757" end="12763" title="Mars program#Mars 5" label="Mars 5"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12781" end="12787" title="Mars program#Mars 6" label="Mars 6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12792" end="12798" title="Mars program#Mars 7" label="Mars 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q202746" start="13177" end="13188" title="occultation" label="occultation"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="13250" end="13260" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="13396" end="13412" title="Spacecraft attitude control" label="attitude control"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="13493" end="13497" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q189325" start="13505" end="13530" title="Jet Propulsion Laboratory" label="Jet Propulsion Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q719652" start="13567" end="13576" title="Mariner 3" label="Mariner 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q203805" start="13581" end="13590" title="Mariner 4" label="Mariner 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="14198" end="14218" title="atmospheric pressure" label="atmospheric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="14312" end="14326" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q188533" start="14330" end="14353" title="Van Allen radiation belt" label="Martian radiation belts"/>
<link wikidata="Q719710" start="14601" end="14616" title="Mariner 6 and 7" label="Mariner 6 and 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q203801" start="14799" end="14808" title="Mariner 9" label="Mariner 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q746536" start="14934" end="14943" title="Mariner 8" label="Mariner 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547" start="15208" end="15214" title="Phobos (moon)" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642384" start="15732" end="15748" title="List of tallest mountains in the Solar System" label="highest mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="15750" end="15757" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="15800" end="15812" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q520" start="15853" end="15865" title="Olympus Mons" label="Olympus Mons"/>
<link wikidata="Q210199" start="16132" end="16140" title="Viking 1" label="Viking 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q212131" start="16145" end="16153" title="Viking 2" label="Viking 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q873009" start="16747" end="16783" title="Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry" label="Gas chromatography–mass spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="16983" end="16995" title="Seismometer" label="seismometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="17868" end="17876" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912794" start="18162" end="18174" title="biosignature" label="biosignature"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="18188" end="18200" title="meteorology" label="meteorologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83371" start="18202" end="18209" title="seismology" label="seismic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="18214" end="18222" title="magnetism" label="magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929497" start="18262" end="18312" title="Viking biological experiments" label="biological experiments on board the Viking landers"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="18409" end="18418" title="Microbe" label="microbial"/>
<link wikidata="Q643962" start="18811" end="18823" title="rover (space exploration)" label="roving probe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19141" end="19162" title="Airbag#Aircraft airbag landing systems" label="airbag landing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q220827" start="19225" end="19248" title="Mars Exploration Rovers" label="Mars Exploration Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q634772" start="19336" end="19349" title="Mars Observer" label="Mars Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q206300" start="19398" end="19418" title="Mars Global Surveyor" label="Mars Global Surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q746711" start="19756" end="19767" title="polar orbit" label="polar orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="20427" end="20434" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q333921" start="20813" end="20825" title="Magnetometer" label="Magnetometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="20865" end="20879" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="21222" end="21227" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q216197" start="21228" end="21237" title="altimeter" label="altimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207164" start="21727" end="21739" title="Mars Odyssey" label="Mars Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q188463" start="21793" end="21805" title="spectrometer" label="spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="21859" end="21864" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520325" start="21944" end="21966" title="gamma-ray spectrometer" label="gamma-ray spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="21971" end="21978" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="22022" end="22030" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="22191" end="22212" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q205672" start="22226" end="22238" title="Mars Express" label="Mars Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q177477" start="22258" end="22277" title="Baikonur Cosmodrome" label="Baikonur Cosmodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q205672" start="22326" end="22346" title="Mars Express Orbiter" label="Mars Express Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q559463" start="22373" end="22381" title="Beagle 2" label="Beagle 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q188463" start="22441" end="22453" title="spectrometer" label="spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912794" start="22599" end="22611" title="biosignature" label="biosignature"/>
<link wikidata="Q206229" start="22617" end="22628" title="biomolecule" label="biomolecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q183160" start="23270" end="23297" title="Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter" label="Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q774583" start="23363" end="23374" title="solar panel" label="solar panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="24280" end="24283" title="ESA" label="ESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q48572" start="24284" end="24303" title="Rosetta (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Rosetta&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q844672" start="24337" end="24362" title="67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko" label="67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q223776" start="24417" end="24440" title="gravitational slingshot" label="gravitational slingshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q48558" start="24497" end="24513" title="Dawn Mission" label="&amp;quot;Dawn&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="24605" end="24610" title="4 Vesta" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q190795" start="24741" end="24750" title="Roscosmos" label="Roscosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q210020" start="24788" end="24799" title="Fobos-Grunt" label="Fobos-Grunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093833" start="24835" end="24852" title="sample return" label="retrieve a sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547" start="24888" end="24894" title="Phobos (moon)" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q177852" start="24918" end="24927" title="Yinghuo-1" label="Yinghuo-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="25080" end="25095" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156739" start="25299" end="25319" title="Mars Orbiter Mission" label="Mars Orbiter Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q229058" start="25396" end="25430" title="Indian Space Research Organisation" label="Indian Space Research Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="25766" end="25770" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="25781" end="25784" title="ESA" label="ESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660590" start="26060" end="26067" title="InSight" label="InSight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142930" start="26439" end="26446" title="CubeSat" label="CubeSat"/>
<link wikidata="Q21027957" start="26455" end="26460" title="Mars Cube One" label="MarCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q183160" start="26775" end="26802" title="Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter" label="Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935" start="27050" end="27059" title="avalanche" label="avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q48496" start="27109" end="27132" title="Mars Science Laboratory" label="Mars Science Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q48485" start="27194" end="27221" title="Curiosity rover" label="&amp;quot;Curiosity&amp;quot; rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="27263" end="27266" title="UTC" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17093295" start="27361" end="27376" title="Metre per hour" label="meters per hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q327075" start="27512" end="27517" title="MAVEN" label="MAVEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090722" start="27882" end="27907" title="ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter" label="ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061991" start="27955" end="27978" title="Schiaparelli EDM lander" label="Schiaparelli EDM lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="28307" end="28321" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="28401" end="28416" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189325" start="28446" end="28471" title="Jet Propulsion Laboratory" label="Jet Propulsion Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036092" start="28604" end="28610" title="HiRISE" label="HiRISE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943611" start="28642" end="28648" title="SHARAD" label="SHARAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="28742" end="28747" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q23392" start="28749" end="28752" title="ice" label="ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="28758" end="28766" title="minerals" label="minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q194158" start="29083" end="29090" title="bitrate" label="bitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q389772" start="29130" end="29143" title="Data transfer" label="Data transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48496" start="29359" end="29382" title="Mars Science Laboratory" label="Mars Science Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q48485" start="29418" end="29427" title="Curiosity rover" label="Curiosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q857312" start="29511" end="29523" title="Aeolis Palus" label="Aeolis Palus"/>
<link wikidata="Q622221" start="29527" end="29538" title="Gale (crater)" label="Gale Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q846030" start="29650" end="29662" title="Planetary habitability" label="habitability"/>
<link wikidata="Q327075" start="29699" end="29704" title="MAVEN" label="MAVEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090722" start="29995" end="30012" title="Trace Gas Orbiter" label="Trace Gas Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q65047472" start="30183" end="30190" title="Methane on Mars" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="30437" end="30457" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q21027958" start="30471" end="30488" title="Hope Mars Mission" label="Hope Mars Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q60599" start="30519" end="30524" title="H-IIA" label="H-IIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q23580572" start="30693" end="30702" title="Tianwen-1" label="Tianwen-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q106614244" start="30906" end="30931" title="Zhurong (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Zhurong&amp;quot; rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526343" start="31299" end="31308" title="Mars 2020" label="Mars 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q23625" start="31382" end="31396" title="Atlas V rocket" label="Atlas V rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q193401" start="31402" end="31416" title="Cape Canaveral" label="Cape Canaveral"/>
<link wikidata="Q48496" start="31437" end="31460" title="Mars Science Laboratory" label="Mars Science Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q411" start="31506" end="31518" title="astrobiology" label="astrobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q87749354" start="31536" end="31560" title="Perseverance (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Perseverance&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814715" start="31583" end="31604" title="Ingenuity (helicopter)" label="&amp;quot;Ingenuity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="32634" end="32638" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637513" start="32639" end="32653" title="Europa Clipper" label="Europa Clipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="32657" end="32664" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143" start="32669" end="32675" title="Europa (moon)" label="Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="32677" end="32681" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q21079313" start="32682" end="32700" title="Psyche (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Psyche&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q107517" start="32748" end="32757" title="16 Psyche" label="16 Psyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="32762" end="32765" title="ESA" label="ESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q60965184" start="32766" end="32782" title="Hera (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Hera&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265762" start="32786" end="32793" title="65803 Didymos" label="Didymos"/>
<link wikidata="Q223776" start="32886" end="32909" title="gravitational slingshot" label="gravitational slingshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q109024021" start="32982" end="33046" title="EscaPADE" label="EscaPADE (Escape and Plasma Acceleration and Dynamics Explorers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="33119" end="33123" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093627" start="33357" end="33369" title="Falcon Heavy" label="Falcon Heavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21079313" start="33388" end="33394" title="Psyche (spacecraft)" label="Psyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869616" start="33445" end="33454" title="New Glenn" label="New Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q229058" start="33522" end="33526" title="ISRO" label="ISRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156739" start="33568" end="33588" title="Mars Orbiter Mission" label="Mars Orbiter Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q21027956" start="33611" end="33630" title="Mars Lander Mission" label="Mars Lander Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q672135" start="33696" end="33703" title="ExoMars" label="ExoMars"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="33713" end="33716" title="ESA" label="ESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q190795" start="33725" end="33734" title="Roscosmos" label="Roscosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445540" start="33755" end="33790" title="Rosalind Franklin (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Rosalind Franklin&amp;quot; rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q601319" start="33853" end="33865" title="life on Mars" label="life on Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q23199640" start="33932" end="33940" title="Kazachok" label="Kazachok"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="34076" end="34108" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111904802" start="34217" end="34226" title="Tianwen-3" label="Tianwen-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q115898894" start="34488" end="34515" title="NASA-ESA Mars Sample Return" label="NASA-ESA Mars Sample Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773074" start="34829" end="34839" title="Mars-Grunt" label="Mars-Grunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774744" start="34890" end="34902" title="Martian soil" label="Martian soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q124372667" start="34915" end="34974" title="Mars Aerial and Ground Global Intelligent Explorer (MAGGIE)" label="Mars Aerial and Ground Global Intelligent Explorer (MAGGIE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q519302" start="35010" end="35027" title="electric aircraft" label="electric aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q40015" start="35039" end="35051" title="solar energy" label="solar energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q320599" start="35090" end="35115" title="VTOL" label="vertical take-off/landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q320599" start="35117" end="35121" title="VTOL" label="VTOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q182546" start="35498" end="35515" title="Robert H. Goddard" label="Robert H. Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35682" end="35725" title="Human mission to Mars#20th century" label="throughout the history of space exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q540204" start="35997" end="36025" title="Vision for Space Exploration" label="Vision for Space Exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="36065" end="36079" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q211727" start="36099" end="36104" title="Orion (Constellation program)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q357956" start="36276" end="36294" title="Michael D. Griffin" label="Michael D. Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="36563" end="36569" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="36879" end="36883" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="37201" end="37228" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="37450" end="37464" title="cislunar space" label="cislunar space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264292" start="38392" end="38421" title="Mars Design Reference Mission" label="Mars Design Reference Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q63819987" start="38559" end="38574" title="Artemis program" label="Artemis program"/>
<link wikidata="Q193701" start="38686" end="38692" title="SpaceX" label="SpaceX"/>
<link wikidata="Q62833385" start="38804" end="38812" title="SpaceX Starship" label="Starship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38917" end="38928" title="SpaceX Starship#Super Heavy booster" label="Super Heavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915971" start="39368" end="39396" title="in situ resource utilization" label="in situ resource utilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q62833385" start="39424" end="39452" title="Starship development history" label="Starship development program"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="39567" end="39585" title="mass manufacturing" label="mass manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q606734" start="39883" end="39894" title="Mars Direct" label="Mars Direct"/>
<link wikidata="Q504677" start="39933" end="39946" title="Robert Zubrin" label="Robert Zubrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427829" start="39963" end="39975" title="Mars Society" label="Mars Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q54363" start="39998" end="40006" title="Saturn V" label="Saturn V"/>
<link wikidata="Q622839" start="40034" end="40040" title="Ares V" label="Ares V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860969" start="40145" end="40157" title="Mars to Stay" label="Mars to Stay"/>
<link wikidata="Q838950" start="40244" end="40264" title="Colonization of Mars" label="Colonization of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40406" end="40414" title="#Timeline of Mars exploration" label="missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916" start="40663" end="40668" title="uncrewed space mission" label="probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q94927" start="40816" end="40830" title="Phobos program" label="Phobos program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912121" start="40832" end="40840" title="Phobos 1" label="Phobos 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147975" start="41152" end="41160" title="Phobos 2" label="Phobos 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q634772" start="41820" end="41833" title="Mars Observer" label="Mars Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q656260" start="41889" end="41896" title="Mars 96" label="Mars 96"/>
<link wikidata="Q849074" start="42161" end="42167" title="Nozomi (probe)" label="Nozomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q574464" start="42192" end="42212" title="Mars Climate Orbiter" label="Mars Climate Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q575922" start="42220" end="42237" title="Mars Polar Lander" label="Mars Polar Lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q575934" start="42249" end="42261" title="Deep Space 2" label="Deep Space 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116609" start="42359" end="42379" title="U.S. customary units" label="U.S. customary units"/>
<link wikidata="Q232405" start="42385" end="42397" title="metric system" label="metric units"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="42473" end="42494" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q559463" start="42563" end="42571" title="Beagle 2" label="Beagle 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061991" start="42688" end="42712" title="Schiaparelli EDM lander" label="&amp;quot;Schiaparelli&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090722" start="42740" end="42765" title="ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter" label="ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q838950" start="42979" end="42999" title="Colonization of Mars" label="Colonization of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q51075" start="43003" end="43024" title="Human mission to Mars" label="Human mission to Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q601319" start="43028" end="43040" title="Life on Mars" label="Life on Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323708" start="43043" end="43077" title="List of artificial objects on Mars" label="List of artificial objects on Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164101" start="43080" end="43104" title="List of missions to Mars" label="List of missions to Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773188" start="43107" end="43119" title="Mars landing" label="Mars landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324028" start="43123" end="43132" title="Mars race" label="Mars race"/>
<link wikidata="Q389459" start="43135" end="43145" title="Mars rover" label="Mars rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773121" start="43149" end="43167" title="Mars Scout Program" label="Mars Scout Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427829" start="43170" end="43182" title="Mars Society" label="Mars Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707053" start="43196" end="43234" title="Observations and explorations of Venus" label="Observations and explorations of Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q686876" start="43237" end="43255" title="Space colonization" label="Space colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q180046" start="43258" end="43275" title="Space exploration" label="Space exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q584093" start="43278" end="43291" title="Space weather" label="Space weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368937" start="43294" end="43330" title="Timeline of Solar System exploration" label="Timeline of Solar System exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q117824268" start="43332" end="43378" title="Crew Health and Performance Exploration Analog" label="Crew Health and Performance Exploration Analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="44040" end="44059" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426149" wikidata="Q225182" url="?curid=426149" title="OD">
<text>OD or Od may refer to:
==Education==
* Old Diocesan, a former pupil of Diocesan College
* Old Dunelmian, a former pupil of Durham School

==Medicine==
* OD or o.d., an abbreviation used in medical prescriptions for or &quot;once daily&quot; both meaning &quot;take once every day&quot;
* Doctor of Optometry (O.D.)
* , , or , meaning &quot;right eye&quot; in general ophthalmologic or optometric usage, particularly in eyeglass prescriptions
* Osteochondritis dissecans, a medical disease affecting the joints of both humans and animals
* Overdose, the inadvertent drug effects of the user rendered unresponsive or fatally succumbed due to unsophistication of self-medicating being unaccustomed to quantities greater than recommended

==Music==
* Oblivion Dust, a Japanese rock band
* Old Dominion (band), an American country music band
* One Direction, a British/Irish pop music band
* Orphei Drängar, a Swedish male choir
* &quot;The OD EP&quot;, a 2012 extended play by Danny Brown
* &quot;Overly Dedicated&quot;, a 2010 mixtape by Kendrick Lamar
* &quot;O.D&quot;, a song by Sunna from the album &quot;One Minute Science&quot; (2000)
* &quot;OD&quot;, an alternative name for the song &quot;Diamond Boy (DTM)&quot; by SZA from &quot;Lana&quot; (2024)

==Organizations==
* Batik Air Malaysia (IATA airline code OD)
* &quot;Ordnungsdienst&quot;, Jewish order service in ghettos during the war
* Organization development

==People and characters==
* Super OD, a Ghanaian actor
* O.D (&quot;Gatchaman Crowds&quot;), a character in the anime series &quot;Gatchaman Crowds&quot;
* Ód or Óðr, a Nordic god

==Places==
* Odisha, India
* Stormarn (district), Germany (vehicle plate code OD)

==Science and technology==
* Optical density
* Outside diameter (also: &quot;O.D.&quot;), cylinder or pipe external diameter
* Ordnance datum, in Britain, an Ordnance Survey data point
* od (Unix), a Unix program
* Object Desktop, a suite of skinning and customization programs by Stardock, or &quot;ObjectDock&quot;, another program by the same company
* Optical disc
* Organization development, the study of organizational change and performance
* Ordinal definable set, a set requiring only finitely-many ordinals to define under first-order logic.

== Other uses ==
* OD (video game), an upcoming video game developed by Kojima Productions and published by Xbox Game Studios
* Od language, an Indo-Aryan language of Pakistan
* Odic force or Od, a life force
* &quot;Occupation Double&quot;, a Quebec reality show that started in 2003
* Official Declaration, part of Latter-day Saint scripture
* Olive drab, a color, particularly of some United States Army uniforms
* Online dating
* Original dance, the second part of an ice dancing competition
* Order of Distinction, a civil honour of Jamaica

==See also==
* ODS (disambiguation)
* Oder (disambiguation)
* Odor (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225182" start="0" end="2" title="OD" label="OD"/>
<link wikidata="Q225182" start="6" end="8" title="OD" label="Od"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108862" start="39" end="51" title="Old Diocesan" label="Old Diocesan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592809" start="90" end="103" title="Old Dunelmian" label="Old Dunelmian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604728" start="168" end="210" title="List of abbreviations used in medical prescriptions" label="abbreviation used in medical prescriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q618211" start="288" end="307" title="Doctor of Optometry" label="Doctor of Optometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340387" start="419" end="441" title="Eyeglass prescription" label="eyeglass prescriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q127556" start="444" end="469" title="Osteochondritis dissecans" label="Osteochondritis dissecans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="539" end="547" title="Drug overdose" label="Overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q927409" start="747" end="760" title="Oblivion Dust" label="Oblivion Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q20685018" start="785" end="804" title="Old Dominion (band)" label="Old Dominion (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q146027" start="839" end="852" title="One Direction" label="One Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103957" start="887" end="901" title="Orphei Drängar" label="Orphei Drängar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337999" start="973" end="984" title="Danny Brown (rapper)" label="Danny Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q15891344" start="993" end="1009" title="Overly Dedicated" label="Overly Dedicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092913" start="1106" end="1124" title="One Minute Science" label="One Minute Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q124706975" start="1195" end="1212" title="Diamond Boy (DTM)" label="Diamond Boy (DTM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743729" start="1276" end="1294" title="Batik Air Malaysia" label="Batik Air Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q707517" start="1326" end="1340" title="Jewish Ghetto Police" label="Ordnungsdienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q650472" start="1397" end="1421" title="Organization development" label="Organization development"/>
<link wikidata="Q70932364" start="1451" end="1459" title="Super OD" label="Super OD"/>
<link wikidata="Q13828292" start="1480" end="1514" title="O.D (Gatchaman Crowds)" label="O.D (&amp;quot;Gatchaman Crowds&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q293560" start="1579" end="1581" title="Ód" label="Ód"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="1617" end="1623" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003" start="1633" end="1652" title="Stormarn (district)" label="Stormarn (district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q907315" start="1716" end="1731" title="Optical density" label="Optical density"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621541" start="1734" end="1750" title="Outside diameter" label="Outside diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336080" start="1814" end="1828" title="Ordnance datum" label="Ordnance datum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566585" start="1874" end="1883" title="od (Unix)" label="od (Unix)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075037" start="1902" end="1916" title="Object Desktop" label="Object Desktop"/>
<link wikidata="Q234870" start="2043" end="2055" title="Optical disc" label="Optical disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q650472" start="2058" end="2082" title="Organization development" label="Organization development"/>
<link wikidata="Q384699" start="2137" end="2158" title="Ordinal definable set" label="Ordinal definable set"/>
<link wikidata="Q123699004" start="2259" end="2274" title="OD (video game)" label="OD (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22123955" start="2312" end="2330" title="Kojima Productions" label="Kojima Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q73801" start="2348" end="2365" title="Xbox Game Studios" label="Xbox Game Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077191" start="2368" end="2379" title="Od language" label="Od language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748897" start="2418" end="2428" title="Odic force" label="Odic force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348636" start="2457" end="2474" title="Occupation Double" label="Occupation Double"/>
<link wikidata="Q97358819" start="2527" end="2547" title="Official Declaration" label="Official Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q864152" start="2586" end="2596" title="Olive drab" label="Olive drab"/>
<link wikidata="Q612825" start="2658" end="2671" title="Online dating" label="Online dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336440" start="2674" end="2688" title="Original dance" label="Original dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873505" start="2738" end="2758" title="Order of Distinction" label="Order of Distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q345484" start="2802" end="2822" title="ODS (disambiguation)" label="ODS (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223983" start="2825" end="2846" title="Oder (disambiguation)" label="Oder (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q112220816" start="2849" end="2870" title="Odor (disambiguation)" label="Odor (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426150" wikidata="Q225043" url="?curid=426150" title="OT">
<text>OT or Ot may refer to:
==Arts and entertainment==
* OT (band), a Serbian pop/rock band
* Ot, stage name of Anupong Prathompatama, a member of the Thai rock band Carabao
* &quot;Operation Transformation&quot; (TV series), an Irish health and fitness programme
* &quot;&quot;, a 2002 documentary film about a high school in Compton, California that stages Thornton Wilder&#x27;s &quot;Our Town&quot;
* &quot;Operación Triunfo&quot; (Spanish TV series), a Spanish reality television talent show
* Ot, the title character of &quot;Ot el bruixot&quot;, a Spanish comic strip
* Ot, one of the two main characters of Ot en Sien, a Dutch children&#x27;s book series

==Businesses and organizations==
* Oakville Transit, the bus company serving Oakville, Ontario, Canada
* Obsession Telescopes, an American telescope maker
* Organisation Todt, a civil and military engineering group of Nazi Germany
* Oyu Tolgoi, a mine in Mongolia

==Religion==
* Old Testament, the first part of the Christian Bible
* Operating Thetan, a spiritual state in Scientology
* Ot Ene, the Mongolian goddess of marriage

==Science and technology==
===Medicine===
* Occupational therapy
* Occupational therapist
* Oxytocin, a mammalian hormone

===Other uses in science and technology===
* Oblivious transfer, a type of cryptography protocol
* Operational technology, hardware/software technology dedicated to physical assets in an enterprise
* Operational transformation, an optimistic concurrency control method for group editing
* Optimality theory, a linguistic model
* Oxygenated treatment, used to reduce corrosion in a boiler

==People==
* Ot of Urgell (c. 1065–1122), Catholic saint and bishop of Urgell
* Ot de Montcada, 11th century Catalan troubadour
* Ot Pi Isern (), Spanish bike-trials rider
* Ot Louw (1946–2021), Dutch film editor
* Oswald Tschirtner (1920–2007), Austrian artist also known as O.T.

==Acronym==
* Offensive tackle, either of two football positions
* Overtime (sports), a sports game past regulation because of a tie game
* Off topic
* Overtime, a designation indicating working past normal work hours

==Other uses==
* Ot (Cyrillic) (Ѿ, ѿ), a letter of the early Cyrillic alphabet
* &quot;The OT&quot;, a television postgame show of NFL on Fox
* Oakville Trafalgar High School, Oakville, Ontario, Canada
* Otmoor or Ot Moor, an area of wetland and wet grassland in Oxfordshire, England
* Aeropelican Air Services, IATA airline designator OT
* O-T map, a type of medieval world map

== See also ==
* Ott (disambiguation)
* O. T. Fagbenle (born 1981), also referred to as O-T Fagbenle, British actor, writer and director</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225043" start="0" end="2" title="OT" label="OT"/>
<link wikidata="Q225043" start="6" end="8" title="OT" label="Ot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073116" start="52" end="61" title="OT (band)" label="OT (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035286" start="161" end="168" title="Carabao (band)" label="Carabao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097654" start="171" end="219" title="Operation Transformation (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Operation Transformation&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3663706" start="400" end="449" title="Operación Triunfo (Spanish TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Operación Triunfo&amp;quot; (Spanish TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479675" start="527" end="540" title="Ot el bruixot" label="Ot el bruixot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410598" start="610" end="620" title="Ot en Sien" label="Ot en Sien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074262" start="694" end="710" title="Oakville Transit" label="Oakville Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075511" start="764" end="784" title="Obsession Telescopes" label="Obsession Telescopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q155433" start="816" end="833" title="Organisation Todt" label="Organisation Todt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059067" start="892" end="902" title="Oyu Tolgoi" label="Oyu Tolgoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="939" end="952" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424416" start="994" end="1010" title="Operating Thetan" label="Operating Thetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583052" start="1047" end="1053" title="Ot Ene" label="Ot Ene"/>
<link wikidata="Q380141" start="1134" end="1154" title="Occupational therapy" label="Occupational therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q631193" start="1157" end="1179" title="Occupational therapist" label="Occupational therapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q169960" start="1182" end="1190" title="Oxytocin" label="Oxytocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915383" start="1258" end="1276" title="Oblivious transfer" label="Oblivious transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q21877595" start="1312" end="1334" title="Operational technology" label="Operational technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335231" start="1413" end="1439" title="Operational transformation" label="Operational transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207598" start="1502" end="1519" title="Optimality theory" label="Optimality theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17073707" start="1542" end="1562" title="Oxygenated treatment" label="Oxygenated treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894767" start="1615" end="1627" title="Ot of Urgell" label="Ot of Urgell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887034" start="1682" end="1696" title="Ot de Montcada" label="Ot de Montcada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888143" start="1732" end="1737" title="Ot Pi" label="Ot Pi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1776" end="1783" title="Ot Louw" label="Ot Louw"/>
<link wikidata="Q87632" start="1817" end="1834" title="Oswald Tschirtner" label="Oswald Tschirtner"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976" start="1898" end="1914" title="Offensive tackle" label="Offensive tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q186982" start="1951" end="1968" title="Overtime (sports)" label="Overtime (sports)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072314" start="2024" end="2033" title="Off topic" label="Off topic"/>
<link wikidata="Q667022" start="2036" end="2044" title="Overtime" label="Overtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q340162" start="2120" end="2133" title="Ot (Cyrillic)" label="Ot (Cyrillic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953774" start="2190" end="2196" title="The OT" label="The OT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074261" start="2247" end="2277" title="Oakville Trafalgar High School" label="Oakville Trafalgar High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108900" start="2307" end="2313" title="Otmoor" label="Otmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q381606" start="2389" end="2413" title="Aeropelican Air Services" label="Aeropelican Air Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061420" start="2444" end="2451" title="O-T map" label="O-T map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515076" start="2500" end="2520" title="Ott (disambiguation)" label="Ott (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072174" start="2523" end="2537" title="O. T. Fagbenle" label="O. T. Fagbenle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426151" wikidata="Q232367" url="?curid=426151" title="Symphony No. 41 (Mozart)">
<text>Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart completed his Symphony No. 41 in C major, K. 551, on 10 August 1788. The longest and last symphony that he composed, it is regarded by many critics as among the greatest symphonies in classical music. The work is nicknamed the &quot;Jupiter&quot; Symphony, probably coined by the impresario Johann Peter Salomon.

The autograph manuscript of the symphony is preserved in the Berlin State Library.

==Instrumentation==

The symphony is scored for flute, 2 oboes, 2 bassoons, 2 horns in C and F, 2 trumpets in C, timpani in C and G, and strings.

==Composition and premiere==

Symphony No. 41 is the last of a set of three that Mozart composed in rapid succession during the summer of 1788. No. 39 was completed on 26 June and No. 40 on 25 July. Nikolaus Harnoncourt argues that Mozart composed the three symphonies as a unified work, pointing, among other things, to the fact that the Symphony No. 41, as the final work, has no introduction (unlike No. 39) but has a grand finale.

Around the same time as he composed the three symphonies, Mozart was writing his piano trios in E major (K. 542) and C major (K. 548), his piano sonata No. 16 in C (K. 545)—the so-called &quot;Sonata facile&quot;, and a violin sonatina (K. 547).

It is not known for certain whether Symphony No. 41 was ever performed in the composer&#x27;s lifetime. According to Otto Erich Deutsch, Mozart was preparing to hold a series of &quot;Concerts in the Casino&quot; around this time in a new casino in the Spiegelgasse owned by Philipp Otto. Mozart even sent a pair of tickets for this series to his friend Michael Puchberg. Historians have not determined whether the concert series was held or was cancelled for lack of interest. However, the new symphony in C was performed at the Gewandhaus in Leipzig in 1789—at least according to its concert program.

==Movements==

The four movements are arranged in the traditional symphonic form of the Classical era:

The symphony typically has a duration of about 33 minutes.

=== I. Allegro vivace ===
The sonata form first movement&#x27;s main theme begins with contrasting motifs: a threefold tutti outburst on the fundamental tone (respectively, by an ascending motion leading in a triplet from the dominant tone underneath to the fundamental one), followed by a more lyrical response.

:&lt;score sound&gt;
\new Staff \with { instrumentName = #&quot;Fl.&quot;} \relative c&quot; {
 \key c \major
 \set Score.tempoHideNote = ##t
 \tempo &quot;Allegro vivace&quot; 4 = 140
 \time 4/4
 \set Staff.midiInstrument = &quot;flute&quot;
 c&#x27;4\f r8 \times 2/3 { g16( a b } c4) r8 \times 2/3 { g16( a b } |
 c4) r r2 | R1 | R1 |
 g4\f r8 \times 2/3 { d16( e fis } g4) r8 \times 2/3 { d16( e fis } |
 g4) r4 r2 | R1 | R1 |
 c4 c8. c16 c4 c |
 a4 a8. a16 a4 a |
 b4 b8. b16 b4 b |
\new Staff \with { instrumentName = #&quot;Vl. 1 &quot;} \relative c&quot; {
 \key c \major
 \time 4/4
 \set Staff.midiInstrument = &quot;violin&quot;
 c,4\f r8 \times 2/3 { g16( a b } c4) r8 \times 2/3 { g16( a b } |
 c4) r r r8 c&#x27;-.\p |
 c4.( b8 d4. c8) |
 g&#x27;2( f4) r |
 &lt;g, g,&gt;4\f r8 \times 2/3 { d16( e fis } g4) r8 \times 2/3 { d16( e fis } |
 g4) r r r8 d&#x27;-.\p |
 d4.( c8 g&#x27;4. f!8) |
 a2( g4) r |
 &lt;g, e&#x27; c&#x27;&gt;\f r8 g32^&quot;Vl. 2&quot;( f e d c4) &lt;g&#x27; e&#x27; c&#x27; &gt; |
 &lt;f c&#x27; a&#x27;&gt; r8 c&#x27;32^&quot;Vl. 2&quot;( bes a g f4) &lt;a f&#x27;&gt; |
 r8 d&quot;32^&quot;Vl. 2&quot;( c b! a g4) &lt;d b&#x27; g&#x27;&gt; |
»
&lt;/score&gt;

This exchange is heard twice and then followed by an extended series of fanfares. What follows is a transitional passage where the two contrasting motifs are expanded and developed. From there, the second theme group begins with a lyrical section in G major which ends suspended on a seventh chord and is followed by a stormy section in C minor. Following a full stop, the expositional coda begins which quotes Mozart&#x27;s insertion aria &quot;Un bacio di mano&quot;, K. 541 and then ends the exposition on a series of fanfares.

The development begins with a modulation from G major to E major where the insertion-aria theme is then repeated and extensively developed. A false recapitulation then occurs where the movement&#x27;s opening theme returns but softly and in F major. The first theme group&#x27;s final flourishes then are extensively developed against a chromatically falling bass followed by a restatement of the end of the insertion aria then leading to C major for the true recapitulation. With the exception of the usual key transpositions and some expansion of the minor key sections, the recapitulation proceeds in a regular fashion.

=== II. Andante cantabile ===
:&lt;score sound&gt;
\relative c&quot; {
 \key f \major
 \time 3/4
 \set Staff.midiInstrument = &quot;string ensemble 2&quot;
 \tempo &quot;Andante cantabile&quot;
 \tempo 4 = 70
 f,8.\p^\markup { \italic {con sordini}} (c16) a&#x27;4.. g32 (f
 e8) r8 bes&#x27;8-.\f r8 r4
 g8.\p (c,16) bes&#x27;4.. (a32 g
 f8) r8 c&#x27;8-.\f r8 r4
 f8.\p (c16) a&#x27;8. (\tuplet 3/2 {g32 f e} g16 f e d)
 c8 (b bes4 a)
&lt;/score&gt;

The second movement, also in sonata form, is a sarabande of the French type in F major (the subdominant key of C major) similar to those found in the keyboard suites of J.S. Bach. This is the only symphonic slow movement of Mozart&#x27;s to bear the indication &quot;cantabile.&quot; The opening melody, played by muted violins, is never allowed to conclude without interruption. After a development section, the recapitulation begins in the subdominant key of B major, though a secondary development section disrupts the recapitulation with rhythmic figures before the return to F.

=== III. Menuetto: Allegretto – Trio ===
:&lt;score sound&gt;
\relative c&quot; {
 \key c \major
 \time 3/4
 \set Staff.midiInstrument = &quot;string ensemble 1&quot;
 \tempo &quot;Menuetto: Allegretto&quot;
 \tempo 4 = 130
 g&#x27;2\p (fis4 f! e d c8) r8 b8-. r8 c-. r8
 e2 (d8) r8
 a&#x27;2 (g4 fis f e d8) r8 c8-. r8 d-. r8
 f2 (e8) r8
 d&#x27;2\f (cis4 c!8) r8 a-. r8 fis-. r8
 d&#x27;2 (cis4 c!8) r8 a-. r8 fis-. r8
 d&#x27;-. r8 d-. r8 d-. r8
 e2 c8 (a)
 c2 a8 (fis)
 g4 r4 r4 \bar &quot;:|.&quot;
&lt;/score&gt;

The third movement, a &quot;menuetto&quot; marked &quot;allegretto&quot; is similar to a Ländler, a popular Austrian folk dance form. Midway through the movement, there is a chromatic progression in which sparse imitative textures are presented by the woodwinds (bars 43–51) before the full orchestra returns. In the trio section of the movement, the four-note figure that will form the main theme of the last movement appears prominently (bars 68–71), but on the seventh degree of the scale rather than the first, and in a minor key rather than a major, giving it a very different character.

=== IV. Molto allegro ===
:&lt;score sound&gt;
\relative c&quot; {
 \key c \major
 \time 2/2
 \set Staff.midiInstrument = &quot;string ensemble 2&quot;
 \tempo &quot;Molto allegro&quot;
 \tempo 4 = 210
 c1\p ( d f e)
 r4 a4-. a-. a-.
 g2. (f16 e d c)
 f4-. f-. e-. e-.
 cis8 (d e d) c (b a g)
 c1-.\f d-. f-. e-.
 r4 a4-. a-. a-.
 a2. (g16 f e d c4)
&lt;/score&gt;

Finally, a distinctive characteristic of this symphony is the five-voice quintuple fugato (representing the five major themes) at the end of the fourth movement. But there are fugal sections throughout the movement either by developing one specific theme or by combining two or more themes together, as seen in the interplay between the woodwinds. The main theme consists of four notes:

Four additional themes are heard in the symphony&#x27;s finale (which is in sonata form) and all five motifs are combined in the fugal coda.

In an article about the &quot;Jupiter&quot; Symphony, Sir George Grove wrote that &quot;it is for the finale that Mozart has reserved all the resources of his science, and all the power, which no one seems to have possessed to the same degree with himself, of concealing that science, and making it the vehicle for music as pleasing as it is learned. Nowhere has he achieved more&quot;. Of the piece as a whole, he wrote that &quot;It is the greatest orchestral work of the world which preceded the French Revolution&quot;.

The four-note theme is a common plainchant motif which can be traced back at least as far as Thomas Aquinas&#x27;s &quot;Pange lingua gloriosi corporis mysterium&quot; from the 13th century. It was very popular with Mozart. It makes a brief appearance as early as his Symphony No. 1 in 1764. Later, he used it in the Credo of an early &quot;Missa Brevis&quot; in F major, the first movement of his Symphony No. 33 and trio of the minuet of this symphony. It also appears in the first movement of the violin sonata K481 as the basis for the development section.

Scholars are certain Mozart studied Michael Haydn&#x27;s Symphony No. 28 in C major, which also has a fugato in its finale and whose coda he very closely paraphrases for his own coda. Charles Sherman speculates that Mozart also studied Michael Haydn&#x27;s Symphony No. 23 in D major because he &quot;often requested his father Leopold to send him the latest fugue that Haydn had written&quot;. The Michael Haydn Symphony No. 39, written only a few weeks before Mozart&#x27;s, also has a fugato in the finale, the theme of which begins with two whole notes. Sherman has pointed out other similarities between the two almost perfectly contemporaneous works. The four-note motif is also the main theme of the contrapuntal finale of Michael&#x27;s elder brother Joseph&#x27;s Symphony No. 13 in D major (1764).

==Origin of the nickname==
According to Franz Mozart, Wolfgang&#x27;s younger son, the symphony was given the name &quot;Jupiter&quot; by Johann Peter Salomon, who had settled in London in around 1781. The name Adagio &amp; Fugue in C minor, K. 546 has also been attributed to Johann Baptist Cramer, an English music publisher. Reportedly, from the first chords, Mozart&#x27;s Symphony No. 41 reminded Cramer of Jupiter and his thunderbolts.

&quot;The Times&quot; of Thursday, May 8, 1817, carries an advertisement for a concert to be given in the Hanover Square Rooms on &quot;Friday next, May 9&quot; to include &quot;Grand Sinfonie (Jupiter), Mozart&quot;. &quot;The Morning Post&quot; of Tuesday, June 3, 1817, carries an advertisement for printed music that includes: &quot;The celebrated movement from Mozart&#x27;s sympathy [sic], called &#x27;Jupiter&#x27;, arranged as a Duet, by J. Wilkins, 4s. [4 shillings]&quot;.

== Responses and reception ==
In a phrase ascribed to musicologist Elaine Sisman in her book &quot;Mozart: The &#x27;Jupiter&#x27; Symphony&quot;, most responses ranged &quot;from admiring to adulatory, a gamut from A to A&quot;.

As summarized below, the symphony garnered approbation from critics, theorists, composers, and biographers and came to be viewed as a canonized masterwork known for its fugue and its overall structure that exuded clarity.

* E. L. Gerber in &quot;Neues Historisch-biographisches Lexicon der Tonkünstler&quot; (1812–1814): &quot;...overpoweringly great, fiery, artistic, pathetic, sublime, Symphony in C ... we would already have to perceive him as one of the first[-ranked] geniuses of modern times and the century just past&quot;.
* A review in the &quot;Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung&quot; (1846): &quot;How pure and clear are all the images within! No more and no less than that which each requires according to its nature. ... Here is revealed how the master first collects his material separately, then explores how everything can proceed from it, and finally builds and elaborates upon it. That even Beethoven worked this way is revealed in his sketchbooks&quot;.
* Brahms remarked in 1896: &quot;I am able to understand too that Beethoven&#x27;s first symphony did impress people colossally. But the last three symphonies by Mozart are much more important. Some people are beginning to feel that now&quot;.

== First recording ==

The first known recording of the &quot;Jupiter&quot; Symphony is from around the beginning of World War I, issued by the Victor Talking Machine Company in its black label series, making it one of the first symphonies to be recorded using the acoustic recording technology.

The record labels list the Victor Concert Orchestra as the performers; they omit the conductor, who according to company ledgers was Walter B. Rogers.

The music was heavily abridged and issued on two records: 10-inch 17707 and 12-inch 35430. Victor published two widely separated takes of each of the first two movements under the same catalogue numbers. The distribution, recording dates, and approximate timings were as follows (data from corresponding matrix pages in the Discography of American Historical Recordings as indicated and physical copies of the records):

*1st movement (17707-A, 10&quot;), 8/5/1913 (if take 1) or 1/27/1915 (if take 6), 2:45

*2nd movement (35430-A, 12&quot;), 8/5/1913 (if take 1) or 1/18/1915 (if take 7), 3:32

*3rd movement (17707-B, 10&quot;), 12/22/1914, 2:40

*4th movement (35430-B, 12&quot;), 12/22/1914, 3:41

==See also==
*&quot;Beim Auszug in das Feld&quot; – Elaine Sisman theorised that the &quot;Jupiter&quot; Symphony may be patriotic music prompted by the Austro-Turkish War of 1788–1791.

==References==
Sources
*
*

==Further reading==

== External links ==
* Symphony in C Major, K. 551. Mozart&#x27;s autograph in the Berlin State Library
*
*Analysis of the last movement of the symphony</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="0" end="23" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q232367" start="38" end="53" title="Symphony No. 41 (Mozart)" label="Symphony No. 41"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022293" start="57" end="64" title="C major" label="C major"/>
<link wikidata="Q162478" start="66" end="68" title="Köchel catalogue" label="K."/>
<link wikidata="Q9734" start="114" end="122" title="symphony" label="symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q232367" start="251" end="279" title="Symphony No. 41 (Mozart)" label="&amp;quot;Jupiter&amp;quot; Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q943995" start="304" end="314" title="impresario" label="impresario"/>
<link wikidata="Q63490" start="315" end="335" title="Johann Peter Salomon" label="Johann Peter Salomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170109" start="399" end="419" title="Berlin State Library" label="Berlin State Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q209554" start="470" end="475" title="Western concert flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q8377" start="479" end="484" title="oboes" label="oboes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159998" start="488" end="495" title="bassoon" label="bassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757829" start="500" end="505" title="Natural horn" label="horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="520" end="527" title="trumpet" label="trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q189737" start="535" end="542" title="timpani" label="timpani"/>
<link wikidata="Q228732" start="713" end="719" title="Symphony No. 39 (Mozart)" label="No. 39"/>
<link wikidata="Q231390" start="749" end="755" title="Symphony No. 40 (Mozart)" label="No. 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q78526" start="768" end="788" title="Nikolaus Harnoncourt" label="Nikolaus Harnoncourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414262" start="1086" end="1096" title="piano trio" label="piano trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125102" start="1101" end="1108" title="E major" label="E major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022293" start="1122" end="1129" title="C major" label="C major"/>
<link wikidata="Q131269" start="1150" end="1156" title="sonata" label="sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q991701" start="1198" end="1211" title="Piano Sonata No. 16 (Mozart)" label="Sonata facile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045984" start="1232" end="1240" title="sonatina" label="sonatina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977811" start="1242" end="1248" title="Violin Sonata No. 36 (Mozart)" label="K. 547"/>
<link wikidata="Q78559" start="1369" end="1387" title="Otto Erich Deutsch" label="Otto Erich Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q88744" start="1606" end="1622" title="Michael Puchberg" label="Michael Puchberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q519613" start="1782" end="1792" title="Gewandhaus" label="Gewandhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="1796" end="1803" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q929848" start="1880" end="1888" title="movement (music)" label="movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q17723" start="1944" end="1953" title="Classical music era" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q212044" start="2050" end="2061" title="sonata form" label="sonata form"/>
<link wikidata="Q833053" start="2084" end="2094" title="theme (music)" label="main theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q908349" start="2119" end="2124" title="Motif (music)" label="motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q665214" start="2139" end="2144" title="tutti" label="tutti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331774" start="2161" end="2177" title="fundamental tone" label="fundamental tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092296" start="2229" end="2236" title="Triplet (music)" label="triplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q899391" start="2246" end="2259" title="Dominant (music)" label="dominant tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q638569" start="3604" end="3611" title="fanfare" label="fanfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834396" start="3632" end="3644" title="Transition (music)" label="transitional"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728362" start="3782" end="3789" title="G major" label="G major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021249" start="3816" end="3829" title="seventh chord" label="seventh chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q309994" start="3869" end="3876" title="C minor" label="C minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384742" start="3905" end="3917" title="Exposition (music)" label="expositional"/>
<link wikidata="Q852466" start="3918" end="3922" title="coda (music)" label="coda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037387" start="3957" end="3971" title="insertion aria" label="insertion aria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3972" end="4008" title="List of concert arias, songs and canons by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart#Bass" label="&amp;quot;Un bacio di mano&amp;quot;, K. 541"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266967" start="4068" end="4079" title="Development (music)" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q750240" start="4094" end="4104" title="Modulation (music)" label="modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q934895" start="4121" end="4128" title="E-flat major" label="E major"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393508" start="4212" end="4226" title="Recapitulation (music)" label="recapitulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q913790" start="4305" end="4312" title="F major" label="F major"/>
<link wikidata="Q202021" start="4401" end="4414" title="Chromatic scale" label="chromatically"/>
<link wikidata="Q810540" start="4423" end="4427" title="Bassline" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022293" start="4503" end="4510" title="C major" label="C major"/>
<link wikidata="Q534932" start="4572" end="4575" title="Key (music)" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q815323" start="4576" end="4589" title="Transposition (music)" label="transposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q212044" start="5169" end="5180" title="sonata form" label="sonata form"/>
<link wikidata="Q208593" start="5187" end="5196" title="sarabande" label="sarabande"/>
<link wikidata="Q913790" start="5219" end="5226" title="F major" label="F major"/>
<link wikidata="Q536541" start="5232" end="5243" title="subdominant" label="subdominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q203005" start="5299" end="5304" title="Suite (music)" label="suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="5309" end="5318" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="J.S. Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q795134" start="5601" end="5608" title="B flat major" label="B major"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393508" start="5662" end="5676" title="Recapitulation (music)" label="recapitulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q205734" start="6266" end="6286" title="Minuet" label="&amp;quot;menuetto&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="6300" end="6310" title="allegretto" label="allegretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q166705" start="6333" end="6340" title="Ländler" label="Ländler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11221917" start="6418" end="6427" title="chromatic" label="chromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049742" start="6456" end="6465" title="Imitation (music)" label="imitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q181247" start="6496" end="6505" title="Woodwind instrument" label="woodwinds"/>
<link wikidata="Q181014" start="7287" end="7293" title="fugato" label="fugato"/>
<link wikidata="Q708101" start="7788" end="7804" title="Sir George Grove" label="Sir George Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="8233" end="8250" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707688" start="8291" end="8301" title="plainchant" label="plainchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="8352" end="8366" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q371617" start="8380" end="8420" title="Pange lingua gloriosi corporis mysterium" label="Pange lingua gloriosi corporis mysterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q163568" start="8527" end="8541" title="Symphony No. 1 (Mozart)" label="Symphony No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139456" start="8576" end="8581" title="Credo" label="Credo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069040" start="8594" end="8629" title="Missa Brevis No. 3 (Mozart)" label="&amp;quot;Missa Brevis&amp;quot; in F major"/>
<link wikidata="Q225718" start="8657" end="8672" title="Symphony No. 33 (Mozart)" label="Symphony No. 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069033" start="8759" end="8777" title="Violin Sonata No. 33 (Mozart)" label="violin sonata K481"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266967" start="8799" end="8818" title="Development (music)" label="development section"/>
<link wikidata="Q490381" start="8857" end="8870" title="Michael Haydn" label="Michael Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507694" start="8878" end="8904" title="Symphony No. 28 (Michael Haydn)" label="Symphony No. 28 in C major"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507628" start="9078" end="9104" title="Symphony No. 23 (Michael Haydn)" label="Symphony No. 23 in D major"/>
<link wikidata="Q156280" start="9149" end="9156" title="Leopold Mozart" label="Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q178099" start="9220" end="9249" title="Symphony No. 39 (Michael Haydn)" label="Michael Haydn Symphony No. 39"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="9528" end="9540" title="counterpoint" label="contrapuntal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346054" start="9541" end="9547" title="Finale (music)" label="finale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="9580" end="9593" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Joseph&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q175537" start="9594" end="9627" title="Symphony No. 13 (Haydn)" label="Symphony No. 13 in D major (1764)"/>
<link wikidata="Q156023" start="9670" end="9682" title="Franz Xaver Wolfgang Mozart" label="Franz Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q63490" start="9768" end="9788" title="Johann Peter Salomon" label="Johann Peter Salomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q455212" start="9907" end="9928" title="Johann Baptist Cramer" label="Johann Baptist Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170439" start="9985" end="9990" title="Chord (music)" label="chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="10042" end="10049" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="10079" end="10088" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q10951144" start="10179" end="10199" title="Hanover Square Rooms" label="Hanover Square Rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750567" start="10297" end="10313" title="The Morning Post" label="The Morning Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="10612" end="10624" title="Musicology" label="musicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353289" start="10625" end="10638" title="Elaine Sisman" label="Elaine Sisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q68863" start="11014" end="11026" title="Ernst Ludwig Gerber" label="E. L. Gerber"/>
<link wikidata="Q463387" start="11345" end="11376" title="Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung" label="Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="11763" end="11769" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="12123" end="12134" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470329" start="12150" end="12180" title="Victor Talking Machine Company" label="Victor Talking Machine Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463404" start="12436" end="12452" title="Walter B. Rogers" label="Walter B. Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997780" start="13178" end="13201" title="Beim Auszug in das Feld" label="Beim Auszug in das Feld"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353289" start="13210" end="13223" title="Elaine Sisman" label="Elaine Sisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542740" start="13311" end="13342" title="Austro-Turkish War (1788–1791)" label="Austro-Turkish War of 1788–1791"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426153" wikidata="Q5284442" url="?curid=426153" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision A, Newfoundland and Labrador">
<text>Division No. 1, Subdivision A is an unorganized subdivision on the Avalon Peninsula in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. It is in Division No. 1, and lies between Trinity Bay and Placentia Bay.

It contains the unincorporated communities of Arnold&#x27;s Cove Station, Bellevue, Fair Haven, Goobies, Little Harbour East, Rantem, Thornlea and Trinny Cove.

==Arnold&#x27;s Cove Station==
Arnold&#x27;s Cove Station is a tiny rural community located on Newfoundland&#x27;s Avalon Peninsula in the province of Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada

It is situated approximately two kilometers from the town of Arnold&#x27;s Cove, from which it derived its name.

The community was established in the 1890s when Robert Gillespie Reid&#x27;s Newfoundland Railway was constructed through the area, bypassing Arnold&#x27;s Cove proper.

Most of the settlers worked for the Reid Newfoundland Railway and in later years the Canadian National Railway.

Members of the United States Army were stationed in the community during World War II.

==Bellevue==
Bellevue is a small community located in Trinity Bay, Newfoundland and Labrador. It was known as Tickle Harbour and appeared on early French maps of Trinity Bay. It is unknown exactly when the community was first settled, but a Thomas Lynch was recorded at Tickle Harbour in 1817, and Benjamin Lester, a merchant of Trinity had business operations there in the 1700s. The community name was changed to Bellevue on December 11, 1896. It has a population of about 200 people, 415 including the communities of Thornlea and Bellevue Beach. It has two stores, one of which is a gas bar. The gas bar (Connie&#x27;s) has cabins for rent on the side, and is close to a community playground. The wharf once hosted many fishing boats but the local fishermen, for the most part, now dock at the larger wharf in nearby Long Cove. This is convenient because there is a fish plant there. Bellevue is about 110 kilometres (sixty-eight miles) away from St. John&#x27;s.

In 1911 it had two stores and a church. The first Postmistress was Margaret Lynch in 1894. It had a population of 140 in 1911 and 285 in 1956. Local legend says that Bellevue got its name from a local priest by the name of Father Browne. He travelled to Tickle Harbour on foot from the railway station at Tickle Harbour crossing. When viewing the community on his way down the hill from what is now the transcanada, he renamed the community Bellevue, meaning; beautiful sight or view. The path down the hill to broad lake was always called Father Browne&#x27;s road by the older people. Folklore says that at the same time that he renamed the community, he blessed a small brook that he drank from, which was also referred to by the older folk as the blessed brook or Father Brown&#x27;s well.

Bellevue is approximately a ten-minute drive from the neighbouring community of Bellevue Beach (mentioned above). In the years following World War Two, Augustus Whitten (Gus) of St. John&#x27;s became interested in the area, originally intending to have quiet land for a cottage. Mr Whitten saw business potential as the former highway was paved and passed directly through the area. He sold his store on the South side of St. John&#x27;s and moved to &#x27;Bellevue Beach,&#x27; where he started a local restaurant. As time passed, more families moved to the area and the community gained and lost two stores, a hairdressing shop, built a business of cabins- Fiddler&#x27;s Green- which is still standing today, and is home to a previously provincial campground. The original restaurant has since also become a club as well as a gas bar and is now being renovated into rooms for rent.

==Fair Haven==
Fair Haven is a village located southeast of Swift Current. It had a population of 112 in 1951, but the population has been in steady decline since the closure of the fishery in 1993. Fair Haven had 85 people as of the 2011 Canadian Census. The town was known as Famish Gut until the early 1900s.

==Goobies==

Goobies is a village located northeast of Swift Current. It had a population of 98 in 1956, however its population has grown to 194 according to 2007 census estimate. Its main feature is a large statue of a moose at the ubiquitously province-known Irving gas station just outside the main part of the village. Goobies is an unincorporated community. It is mostly known as a rest stop along the Trans-Canada Highway, with a selection of gas stations and places to eat. Route 210 descends from Goobies down the Burin Peninsula.

==Rantem==
Rantem was a small settlement located south east of Swift Current, Newfoundland and Labrador.

==Thornlea==
Thornlea is a village located west of Bay Roberts in the province of Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. The population was 99 in 1951; 140 in 1956.

==Trinny Cove==
Trinny Cove was a settlement located North-west of Long Harbour in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada.

Trinny Cove was first shown in a 1706 French map of Placentia Bay, it was then named Tinny Cove. It was settled in the early 1800s with the 1835 census showing 12 people living in the community. A Rev. Wix visited the area around this time, mistakenly calling it Tilley Cove. Rev. Wix visited from Great Placentia on a punt of Joseph Dicks&#x27;, son of Christopher Dicks, a planter, who lived there at the time. At this time many settlers had winter houses in &quot;The Bottom&quot; at Long Harbour. By 1845 the population had grown to its height of 32 people. By 1884 the population had dropped to a low of 6 people. At the start of the 20th Century in 1921 the population had again grown to 23 people in 4 households. The two family names of the community at the time were Thorne and Crann. By 1935 the community had been abandoned, with most people moving to nearby Long Harbour.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5284442" start="0" end="29" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision A, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division No. 1, Subdivision A"/>
<link wikidata="Q790092" start="67" end="83" title="Avalon Peninsula" label="Avalon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="87" end="112" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303397" start="131" end="145" title="Division No. 1, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274444" start="164" end="175" title="Trinity Bay, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Trinity Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321555" start="180" end="193" title="Placentia Bay" label="Placentia Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284442" start="242" end="268" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision A, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Arnold&amp;#x27;s Cove Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284442" start="270" end="278" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision A, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Bellevue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284442" start="280" end="290" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision A, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Fair Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284442" start="292" end="299" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision A, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Goobies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284442" start="322" end="328" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision A, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Rantem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284442" start="330" end="338" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision A, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Thornlea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284442" start="343" end="354" title="Division No. 1, Subdivision A, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Trinny Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q48335" start="452" end="464" title="Newfoundland (island)" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q790092" start="472" end="488" title="Avalon Peninsula" label="Avalon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="508" end="533" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q696976" start="604" end="622" title="Arnold&amp;#x27;s Cove, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Arnold&amp;#x27;s Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q579732" start="705" end="726" title="Robert Gillespie Reid" label="Robert Gillespie Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017848" start="734" end="754" title="Newfoundland Railway" label="Newfoundland Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="955" end="973" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1013" end="1025" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274444" start="1082" end="1120" title="Trinity Bay, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Trinity Bay, Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082" start="1978" end="1993" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506575" start="4046" end="4059" title="Swift Current, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Swift Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="4211" end="4216" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061576" start="4398" end="4418" title="Trans-Canada Highway" label="Trans-Canada Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q935901" start="4472" end="4481" title="Newfoundland and Labrador Route 210" label="Route 210"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016312" start="4513" end="4528" title="Burin Peninsula" label="Burin Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506575" start="4594" end="4634" title="Swift Current, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Swift Current, Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892168" start="4688" end="4699" title="Bay Roberts, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Bay Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="4719" end="4744" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q15068805" start="4866" end="4878" title="Long Harbour, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Long Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="4882" end="4907" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321555" start="4970" end="4983" title="Placentia Bay" label="Placentia Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16884653" start="5694" end="5700" title="Thorne (surname)" label="Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5705" end="5710" title="Crann" label="Crann"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426154" wikidata="Q173997" url="?curid=426154" title="SN">
<text>SN, Sn, sn, .sn, or s.n. may refer to:
==Businesses and organizations==
*Brussels Airlines (IATA code SN)
**Sabena 
**SN Brussels Airlines (IATA code SN)
*Servant of the People (Sluha Narodu)
*Slovaks Forward (&quot;Slovaci napred&quot;), a political party in Serbia
*Standards Norway, the main standards organization of Norway
* (National Party), a Polish political party
*Supreme Court of Poland (&quot;Sąd Najwyższy&quot;), the court of last resort for non-administrative matters

==Places==
*Senegal (ISO country code SN)
*Shaanxi, a province of China (Guobiao abbreviation SN)
*South Sulawesi, a province of Indonesia (ISO 3166-2:ID code)
*Saxony, a state of Germany
*SN postcode area, the UK postcode district containing Swindon and much of North Wiltshire

==Religion==
*Samyutta Nikaya or SN, a Buddhist scripture
*Sutta Nipata or Sn, a Buddhist scripture

==Science, technology, and mathematics==
===Computing===
*.sn, the country-code top level domain of Senegal
*sn, the &quot;surname&quot; attribute of the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol

===Mathematics===
*Symmetric group or S&quot;n&quot;
*&quot;n&quot;-sphere or &quot;Sn&quot;
*sn (elliptic function), one of Jacobi&#x27;s elliptic functions

===Meteorology===
*SN, METAR code for snow
*Spotter Network, a system for reporting location and severe weather observations of storm spotters and chasers

===Other uses in science and technology===
*Savin–Norov machine gun
*Space Network, a NASA relay satellite system
* Stereospecific numbering in compounds such as glycerophospholipids
*Sthene, an obsolete unit of force or thrust in the metre-tonne-second system of units
*Substantia nigra, a brain structure
*Supernova, a stellar explosion, in astronomy and cosmology
*Tin, symbol Sn, a chemical element

==Other uses==
* Seaman, abbreviation for the United States Navy rank
*Serial number, in component tracking
*Shona language (ISO 639 alpha-2 code &quot;sn&quot;)
* or s.n., a Latin term for &quot;without a name&quot;
*Spanish Navy
*Abbreviation for Sportsnet, a Canadian sports specialty channel

==See also== 
*S/n (disambiguation)
*ΣΝ or Sigma Nu, a fraternity</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173997" start="0" end="2" title="SN" label="SN"/>
<link wikidata="Q173997" start="4" end="6" title="SN" label="Sn"/>
<link wikidata="Q173997" start="8" end="10" title="SN" label="sn"/>
<link wikidata="Q173997" start="12" end="15" title="SN" label=".sn"/>
<link wikidata="Q173997" start="20" end="24" title="SN" label="s.n."/>
<link wikidata="Q153571" start="73" end="90" title="Brussels Airlines" label="Brussels Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q141146" start="108" end="114" title="Sabena" label="Sabena"/>
<link wikidata="Q638450" start="118" end="138" title="SN Brussels Airlines" label="SN Brussels Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q52292915" start="155" end="176" title="Servant of the People" label="Servant of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q105638203" start="193" end="208" title="Slovaks Forward" label="Slovaks Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783683" start="268" end="284" title="Standards Norway" label="Standards Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q600231" start="374" end="397" title="Supreme Court of Poland" label="Supreme Court of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="496" end="503" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="527" end="534" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078" start="583" end="597" title="South Sulawesi" label="South Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="645" end="651" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391959" start="673" end="689" title="SN postcode area" label="SN postcode area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475652" start="778" end="793" title="Samyutta Nikaya" label="Samyutta Nikaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q910068" start="823" end="835" title="Sutta Nipata" label="Sutta Nipata"/>
<link wikidata="Q60117" start="923" end="926" title=".sn" label=".sn"/>
<link wikidata="Q188816" start="1019" end="1056" title="Lightweight Directory Access Protocol" label="Lightweight Directory Access Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q849512" start="1077" end="1092" title="Symmetric group" label="Symmetric group"/>
<link wikidata="Q306610" start="1112" end="1132" title="n-sphere" label="&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;-sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473526" start="1152" end="1174" title="sn (elliptic function)" label="sn (elliptic function)"/>
<link wikidata="Q476773" start="1240" end="1245" title="METAR" label="METAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580135" start="1261" end="1276" title="Spotter Network" label="Spotter Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428325" start="1417" end="1440" title="Savin–Norov machine gun" label="Savin–Norov machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572439" start="1442" end="1455" title="Space Network" label="Space Network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1535" end="1555" title="Glycerophospholipid#Nomenclature and stereochemistry" label="glycerophospholipids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793863" start="1557" end="1563" title="Sthene" label="Sthene"/>
<link wikidata="Q753278" start="1644" end="1660" title="Substantia nigra" label="Substantia nigra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="1681" end="1690" title="Supernova" label="Supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="1741" end="1744" title="Tin" label="Tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601886" start="1823" end="1846" title="List of United States Navy enlisted rates" label="United States Navy rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198578" start="1848" end="1861" title="Serial number" label="Serial number"/>
<link wikidata="Q34004" start="1886" end="1900" title="Shona language" label="Shona language"/>
<link wikidata="Q676404" start="1995" end="2007" title="Spanish Navy" label="Spanish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629768" start="2026" end="2035" title="Sportsnet" label="Sportsnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388144" start="2089" end="2109" title="S/n (disambiguation)" label="S/n (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483553" start="2111" end="2113" title="ΣΝ" label="ΣΝ"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426155" wikidata="Q3881496" url="?curid=426155" title="Old 97's">
<text>Old 97&#x27;s is an American rock band from Dallas, Texas. Formed in 1992, they have released thirteen studio albums, two full extended plays, shared split duty on another, and they have one live album. Their most recent release is titled &quot;American Primitive&quot;. 

Old 97&#x27;s were pioneers of the alt-country movement during the mid-to-late 1990s, then they developed more of a power pop style in the 2000s. Lead vocalist and primary songwriter Rhett Miller has described the band&#x27;s style as &quot;loud folk&quot;. The band&#x27;s name is in reference to the Wreck of the Old 97.

==Career==
Initially a popular Dallas bar band, Old 97&#x27;s toured the country after releasing their first album, 1994&#x27;s &quot;Hitchhike to Rhome&quot; and 1995&#x27;s split EP release &quot;Stoned / Garage Sale&quot; with fellow Dallas band Funland on Idol Records. In Chicago, they caught the attention of Bloodshot Records and were signed to record their next album. 1995&#x27;s &quot;Wreck Your Life&quot; brought them to the attention of Elektra Records, who hoped that alt-country could be a new post-grunge trend. Lead singer Rhett Miller, born in Austin, later lived in New York City and Los Angeles. Many of the band&#x27;s songs include local Texas references, with references to New York City, Los Angeles, and Chicago appearing as well.

Most songs are written and sung by Miller, with bassist Murry Hammond picking up the vocals on one or two tracks per album. Hammond also handled a number of country covers, especially in the band&#x27;s earlier years. Hammond also performs gospel at his local church. The band&#x27;s 2004 album &quot;Drag It Up&quot; also includes a song written and sung by guitarist Ken Bethea, &quot;Coahuila.&quot;

In 2005, &quot;Blender&quot; magazine ranked the band&#x27;s then most successful single, 1999&#x27;s &quot;Murder (Or a Heart Attack)&quot;, as the 176th greatest song &quot;since you were born.&quot; 

Their music has been featured in a number of films and TV series, including &quot;The Break-Up&quot; (&quot;Salome&quot;, &quot;Melt Show&quot;, &quot;Timebomb&quot;), &quot;Clay Pigeons&quot; (&quot;Timebomb&quot;), &quot;Slither&quot; (&quot;The New Kid&quot;), &quot;Ned&#x27;s Declassified School Survival Guide&quot; (&quot;Big Brown Eyes&quot;), &quot;Ed&quot; (&quot;Question&quot;, &quot;King of All the World&quot;), &quot;Scrubs&quot; (&quot;Question&quot;), &quot;Veronica Mars&quot; (&quot;Adelaide&quot;, &quot;Four-Leaf Clover&quot;, &quot;The New Kid&quot;) and &quot;Scorpion&quot; (&quot;Question&quot;). With respect to &quot;The Break-Up&quot;, a key scene toward the end of the film takes place at an Old 97&#x27;s concert. 

Rhett Miller has recorded seven solo studio albums and one live album, with 2002&#x27;s &quot;The Instigator&quot; receiving substantial airplay on alternative-oriented radio stations. He toured with Neil Finn in 2004. Miller&#x27;s second major commercial album, &quot;The Believer&quot;, was released in February 2006. Murry Hammond&#x27;s solo album, &quot;I Don&#x27;t Know Where I&#x27;m Going But I&#x27;m on My Way&quot;, was released April 21, 2008.

Old 97&#x27;s have been heralded as a great live band, although they claim never to rehearse their act. They included five live songs as a bonus disc on &quot;Satellite Rides&quot;, and released a live double CD set recorded at historic Gruene Hall in 2005, &quot;Alive &amp; Wired&quot;.

Rhino Entertainment released &quot;Hit by a Train: The Best of Old 97&#x27;s&quot;, an eighteen-track compilation of songs from the band&#x27;s beginnings through 2001, featuring liner notes and an essay by rock critic Robert Christgau.

Satellite Riders is a faux &quot;tribute band&quot;—it is actually an alias the band performs under when contractual obligations prevent them from using the Old 97&#x27;s name. The Ranchero Brothers is the name used when only Rhett and Murry Hammond perform. The recording of &quot;Timebomb&quot; from the live album &quot;Alive &amp; Wired&quot; was made available for download along with other alt-country songs for the music video games &quot;Rock Band&quot; and &quot;Rock Band 2&quot;.

Their next studio project, &quot;The Grand Theatre&quot;, was released in two volumes. The first, &quot;The Grand Theatre, Volume One&quot;, was released on October 12, 2010. The second, &quot;The Grand Theatre, Volume Two&quot;, was released on July 5, 2011.

In 2013, the band released an EP containing two tracks with vocals by country music legend Waylon Jennings entitled &quot;Old 97&#x27;s &amp; Waylon Jennings&quot;. Rhett Miller called the previously unreleased tunes with Jennings &quot;the band&#x27;s &#x27;holy grail.&#x27;&quot;

The band&#x27;s tenth studio album, &quot;Most Messed Up&quot;, was released April 29, 2014, by ATO Records and was their best-selling album to date, reaching #30 on the Billboard 200.

Their next two releases on ATO Records were &quot;Graveyard Whistling&quot;, their 11th studio album, released February 24, 2017, and &quot;Love the Holidays&quot;, an album of mostly original Christmas songs, released November 16, 2018.

ATO Records released the band&#x27;s next studio album, aptly named &quot;Twelfth&quot;, on August 21, 2020. The twelve tracks were produced by Vance Powell, who produced &quot;Graveyard Whistling&quot;. Old 97&#x27;s noted that the recording sessions in Nashville started on the night of a deadly tornado outbreak and right before the COVID-19 pandemic hit.

The band members portrayed the alien rock band Bzermikitokolok and the Knowheremen in &quot;The Guardians of the Galaxy Holiday Special&quot;, singing the original song &quot;I Don&#x27;t Know What Christmas Is (But Christmastime Is Here)&quot; and their 2018 song &quot;Here It Is Christmastime,&quot; the latter with Kevin Bacon singing lead.

==Band members==
Current members
* Rhett Miller – lead vocals, rhythm guitar 
* Murry Hammond – bass guitar, backing and lead vocals, acoustic guitar 
* Ken Bethea – lead guitar, backing and lead vocals 
* Philip Peeples – drums, backing vocals 

Studio substitutes
* Clark Vogeler – lead guitar 
* Alan Wooley – lead guitar 

Touring substitutes
* Fred Armisen – drums 
* Jason Garner – drums 

==Discography==

===Albums===
===Singles===
==DVDs==
* 2005: &quot;Old 97&#x27;s Live&quot; (New West Records)

==References==
==External links==

*Old 97&#x27;s Official web site
*Official Rhett Miller Website
*Hit By A Train, Fansite
*July 2009 Interview with &quot;L.A.Record&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3881496" start="0" end="13" title="Old 97&amp;#x27;s" label="Old 97&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="29" end="33" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="44" end="50" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="52" end="57" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="127" end="140" title="extended play" label="extended play"/>
<link wikidata="Q438476" start="308" end="319" title="alt-country" label="alt-country"/>
<link wikidata="Q837837" start="389" end="398" title="power pop" label="power pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q602951" start="456" end="468" title="Rhett Miller" label="Rhett Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="519" end="523" title="folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312009" start="575" end="594" title="Wreck of the Old 97" label="Wreck of the Old 97"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871802" start="731" end="749" title="Hitchhike to Rhome" label="Hitchhike to Rhome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5989365" start="857" end="869" title="Idol Records" label="Idol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q885233" start="912" end="929" title="Bloodshot Records" label="Bloodshot Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037676" start="992" end="1007" title="Wreck Your Life" label="Wreck Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="1047" end="1062" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="1111" end="1117" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q602951" start="1137" end="1149" title="Rhett Miller" label="Rhett Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="1257" end="1262" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304804" start="1655" end="1665" title="Drag It Up" label="Drag It Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q804471" start="1773" end="1780" title="Blender (magazine)" label="Blender"/>
<link wikidata="Q833566" start="2044" end="2056" title="The Break-Up" label="The Break-Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099203" start="2136" end="2148" title="Clay Pigeons" label="Clay Pigeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092936" start="2185" end="2192" title="Slither (2006 film)" label="Slither"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535338" start="2232" end="2277" title="Ned&amp;#x27;s Declassified School Survival Guide" label="Ned&amp;#x27;s Declassified School Survival Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q930797" start="2320" end="2322" title="Ed (TV series)" label="Ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q485668" start="2394" end="2400" title="Scrubs (TV series)" label="Scrubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4529" start="2437" end="2450" title="Veronica Mars" label="Veronica Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110140" start="2545" end="2553" title="Scorpion (TV series)" label="Scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742171" start="2802" end="2816" title="The Instigator" label="The Instigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="2856" end="2867" title="alternative rock" label="alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q550436" start="2908" end="2917" title="Neil Finn" label="Neil Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716379" start="2978" end="2990" title="The Believer (Rhett Miller album)" label="The Believer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611959" start="3404" end="3415" title="Gruene Hall" label="Gruene Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881496" start="3431" end="3448" title="Alive &amp;amp; Wired" label="Alive &amp;amp; Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q627091" start="3457" end="3476" title="Rhino Entertainment" label="Rhino Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3492" end="3533" title="Hit by a Train: The Best of Old 97&amp;#x27;s" label="Hit by a Train: The Best of Old 97&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="3676" end="3692" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881496" start="4018" end="4035" title="Alive &amp;amp; Wired" label="Alive &amp;amp; Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323659" start="4141" end="4150" title="Rock Band" label="Rock Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569492" start="4167" end="4178" title="Rock Band 2" label="Rock Band 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737499" start="4291" end="4320" title="The Grand Theatre, Volume One" label="The Grand Theatre, Volume One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737501" start="4380" end="4409" title="The Grand Theatre, Volume Two" label="The Grand Theatre, Volume Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q251287" start="4539" end="4554" title="Waylon Jennings" label="Waylon Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041019" start="4570" end="4605" title="Old 97&amp;#x27;s &amp;amp; Waylon Jennings" label="Old 97&amp;#x27;s &amp;amp; Waylon Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q18713731" start="4774" end="4788" title="Most Messed Up" label="Most Messed Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q128280" start="4828" end="4839" title="ATO Records" label="ATO Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="5412" end="5421" title="Nashville" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q87013295" start="5455" end="5471" title="Tornado_outbreak_of_March_2–3,_2020" label="tornado outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="5493" end="5510" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106729096" start="5609" end="5652" title="The Guardians of the Galaxy Holiday Special" label="The Guardians of the Galaxy Holiday Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454165" start="5836" end="5847" title="Kevin Bacon" label="Kevin Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q602951" start="5898" end="5910" title="Rhett Miller" label="Rhett Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q14535" start="6212" end="6224" title="Fred Armisen" label="Fred Armisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083355" start="6326" end="6344" title="Old 97&amp;#x27;s Live" label="Old 97&amp;#x27;s Live"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426156" wikidata="Q229678" url="?curid=426156" title="BX">
<text>BX, Bx, and similar may refer to:

== Businesses and organizations ==
* Barnard&#x27;s Express, a transportation company in British Columbia, Canada
* Base exchange, a store operated by the Army, Naval, and Air Force Exchange Service
* Berne eXchange, the stock exchange of Bern, Switzerland
* Blackstone Group (NYSE stock ticker symbol BX)
* BookCrossing, a program for sharing second-hand books
* Air Busan (established 2007) (IATA airline code BX)
* Coast Air (1998–2008) (IATA airline code BX)

== Vehicles ==
* &quot;BX&quot; (sternwheeler), a boat owned by Barnard&#x27;s Express
* Citroën BX, an automobile
* Bionix AFV, an infantry fighting vehicle produced in Singapore

== Science and technology ==
===Biology and medicine===
* Biopsy, the extraction of cells or tissues to determine the presence or extent of a disease
* Bithorax (part of bithorax complex), a genetic mutation in flies

===Computing===
* BX register, a general-purpose 16-bit X86 register
* BitchX, an IRC client
* Intel 440BX, chipset for Pentium II/Pentium III/III and Celeron processors
* Bidirectional transformations

===Other uses in science and technology===
* BX cable, a genericized trademark term for a type of AC armoured electrical cable
* BeppoSAX catalog, also called &quot;SAX&quot; and &quot;1SAX&quot;
* Brix (°Bx), measurement unit of the dissolved sugar-to-water mass ratio of a liquid

== Places ==
* Belgium, World Meteorological Organization country code
** Brussels (French: Bruxelles), the capital of the nation
* BeNeLux, a politico-economic union of Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg
* Berryessa, San Jose, California
* Bordeaux, France
* The Bronx, one of the five boroughs of The City of New York, New York, U.S. (also for many institutions, usually in the borough, and named for it)
* Brunei (LOC MARC code and obsolete FIPS Pub 10-4 and NATO country codes)

== Other uses ==
* BX convoys of World War II ships
* Battlecross, a rock band from Michigan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229678" start="0" end="2" title="BX" label="BX"/>
<link wikidata="Q229678" start="4" end="6" title="BX" label="Bx"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861406" start="72" end="94" title="Barnard&amp;#x27;s Express" label="Barnard&amp;#x27;s Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q10901124" start="151" end="164" title="Base exchange" label="Base exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q824533" start="236" end="250" title="Berne eXchange" label="Berne eXchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q880942" start="294" end="310" title="Blackstone Group" label="Blackstone Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q324286" start="343" end="355" title="BookCrossing" label="BookCrossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q406932" start="399" end="408" title="Air Busan" label="Air Busan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104372" start="453" end="462" title="Coast Air" label="Coast Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836861" start="516" end="545" title="BX (sternwheeler)" label="&amp;quot;BX&amp;quot; (sternwheeler)"/>
<link wikidata="Q939640" start="588" end="598" title="Citroën BX" label="Citroën BX"/>
<link wikidata="Q864633" start="616" end="626" title="Bionix AFV" label="Bionix AFV"/>
<link wikidata="Q179991" start="738" end="744" title="Biopsy" label="Biopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904898" start="850" end="866" title="bithorax complex" label="bithorax complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="916" end="927" title="BX register" label="BX register"/>
<link wikidata="Q804092" start="969" end="975" title="BitchX" label="BitchX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043409" start="993" end="1004" title="Intel 440BX" label="Intel 440BX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904188" start="1070" end="1099" title="Bidirectional transformation" label="Bidirectional transformations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1146" end="1154" title="Power cable#BX cable" label="BX cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q23770" start="1230" end="1238" title="BeppoSAX" label="BeppoSAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q836941" start="1299" end="1303" title="Brix" label="Brix"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1399" end="1406" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="1458" end="1466" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1468" end="1474" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="1516" end="1523" title="BeNeLux" label="BeNeLux"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894856" start="1597" end="1628" title="Berryessa, San Jose, California" label="Berryessa, San Jose, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="1631" end="1639" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="1650" end="1659" title="The Bronx" label="The Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="1799" end="1805" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208221" start="1892" end="1902" title="BX convoys" label="BX convoys"/>
<link wikidata="Q368660" start="1927" end="1938" title="Battlecross" label="Battlecross"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426158" wikidata="Q136283" url="?curid=426158" title="ZM">
<text>ZM (and similar) may refer to:
* Zambia, a southern African country (ISO 3166-1: codice_1)
** .zm, Zambia&#x27;s Internet top-level domain

==Arts and media==
* ZM (radio station), a New Zealand broadcaster
* Zara Moussa, a Nigerian rapper

==Business==
* Zoom Video Communications, an American developer of videotelephony software (Nasdaq ticker: codice_1)

==Units of measure==
* Zeptometre, an extremely small unit of length (10−21 m)
* Zeptomolar (zM), a unit of molar concentration
* Zettametre (Zm), an extremely large unit of length (1021 m)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q136283" start="0" end="2" title="ZM" label="ZM"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="33" end="39" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41842" start="94" end="97" title=".zm" label=".zm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063148" start="161" end="179" title="ZM (radio station)" label="ZM (radio station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42711292" start="209" end="220" title="Zara Moussa" label="Zara Moussa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17460900" start="256" end="281" title="Zoom Video Communications" label="Zoom Video Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q855630" start="382" end="392" title="Zeptometre" label="Zeptometre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="467" end="486" title="Molar concentration#Units" label="molar concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q855630" start="489" end="499" title="Zettametre" label="Zettametre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426159" wikidata="Q136532" url="?curid=426159" title="ZW">
<text>ZW or zw may refer to:

* ZW sex-determination system, chromosomal in birds and some species of reptile, fish, and insect
** ZW, heterogametic female designation under this system
* Air Wisconsin (IATA airline designator), a US airline
* Zettawatt (ZW), an SI unit of power
* Zimbabwe (ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 country code ZW)
** .zw, the country code top level domain (ccTLD) for Zimbabwe
* Zulte-Waregem, Belgian association football club</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q135752" start="26" end="53" title="ZW sex-determination system" label="ZW sex-determination system"/>
<link wikidata="Q407911" start="182" end="195" title="Air Wisconsin" label="Air Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="238" end="247" title="Zettawatt" label="Zettawatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="276" end="284" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42286" start="325" end="328" title=".zw" label=".zw"/>
<link wikidata="Q376635" start="387" end="400" title="S.V. Zulte Waregem" label="Zulte-Waregem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426161" wikidata="Q218782" url="?curid=426161" title="PG">
<text>PG, P.G., P&amp;G, pg, or Pg, or similar, may refer to:

*Parental Guidance (PG), a content rating in the following motion picture content rating systems and television content rating systems: 
** Australian Classification Board
** Film Censorship Board in Barbados
** Canadian motion picture rating system/Canadian Home Video Rating System
** Canadian TV Classification System
** Cook Islands Censorship Office
** Hong Kong television rating system
** Irish Film Classification Office
** Jamaican motion picture rating system
** Kenya Film Classification Board
** Censor Board Committee in Kuwait
** Lebanese Censorship Board
** National Bureau of Classification in the Maldives
** Film Board in Malta
** Film Classification Board in Mauritius
** Classification Office (New Zealand)
** New Zealand television rating system
** National Film and Video Censors Board in Nigeria
** Movie and Television Review and Classification Board in the Philippines
** General Commission for Audiovisual Media in Saudi Arabia
** Board of Film Censors in Singapore
** Singaporean television rating system
** Film and Publication Board in South Africa
** National Media Council (United Arab Emirates)
** British Board of Film Classification
** Motion Picture Association in the United States
** TV Parental Guidelines in the United States (TV-PG)

==Businesses and organisations==
* P.G. Cigars, a cigar brand named after Paul Garmirian
* PG Tips, a British brand of tea
* Bangkok Airways, a Thai regional airline, IATA airline designator PG
* Procter &amp; Gamble (P&amp;G), an American multi-national consumer goods corporation
* Left Party (France) (&quot;Parti de gauche&quot;), a French democratic socialist political party
* Partido Galeguista (1931), a Galician nationalist political party in Galicia, Spain
* Partido Galeguista (1978), a Galician nationalist political party in Galicia, Spain
* &quot;Peoples Gazette&quot;, a Nigerian online newspaper
* Petrokimia Gresik, an Indonesian fertilizer company
* PlatinumGames, a Japanese video game developer
* Porter-Gaud School, Charleston, South Carolina, U.S.

== People ==
* PG, student in a postgraduate year after high school (secondary school)
* P.G., Brazilian musician and singer who performed with the band Oficina G3
* P.G. Sittenfeld (born 1984), American politician
* P. G. Wodehouse, English author and humorist
* Peter Gabriel, English musician and songwriter

==Places==
* Papua New Guinea (ISO 3166-1 country code PG)
* Pauri Garhwal district, a district in the state of Uttarakhand, India
* Podgorica, Montenegro, vehicle licence plate code PG
* Prince George, British Columbia, Canada
* Prince George&#x27;s County, Maryland, or PG County, U.S.

==Science, technology and mathematics==
* Polygalacturonase, an enzyme
* Propylene glycol, an organic compound
* Prostaglandin, physiologically active lipid compounds
* PG(&quot;n,q&quot;), a projective space of Galois geometry
* PG(3,2), the smallest three-dimensional projective space
* pg (Unix), a Unix system command (a terminal pager)
* Paleogene (Pg), a geologic period and system
* Panzergewinde, a technical standard for screw threads
* Petagram (Pg), 109 grams, an SI unit of mass 
* Picogram (pg), 10−18 grams, an SI unit of mass
* PostgreSQL, a free and open-source relational database management system

==Other uses==
* Pacific Games, multi-sporting event in Oceania
* Page (paper), one side of a sheet of paper, as in a book
* &quot;Patrologia Graeca&quot;, a collection of writings by Christian Church Fathers

* Point guard, one of the five positions in basketball

* Project Gutenberg, a volunteer effort to digitize and archive cultural works
* iPhrothiya yeGolide, a South African military decoration
* &quot;&quot;, a 2020 Canadian horror comedy film
* &quot;Rated PG&quot; (album), a compilation album by musician Peter Gabriel
* A US Navy hull classification symbol: Patrol gunboat (PG)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q218782" start="0" end="2" title="PG" label="PG"/>
<link wikidata="Q218782" start="4" end="8" title="PG" label="P.G."/>
<link wikidata="Q218782" start="10" end="17" title="PG" label="P&amp;amp;G"/>
<link wikidata="Q218782" start="19" end="21" title="PG" label="pg"/>
<link wikidata="Q218782" start="26" end="28" title="PG" label="Pg"/>
<link wikidata="Q14775294" start="116" end="152" title="motion picture content rating system" label="motion picture content rating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232092" start="158" end="190" title="television content rating system" label="television content rating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q874754" start="197" end="228" title="Australian Classification Board" label="Australian Classification Board"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="232" end="253" title="Motion picture content rating system#Barbados" label="Film Censorship Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030838" start="269" end="306" title="Canadian motion picture rating system" label="Canadian motion picture rating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030106" start="307" end="340" title="Canadian Home Video Rating System" label="Canadian Home Video Rating System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="344" end="377" title="Television content rating system#Canada" label="Canadian TV Classification System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="381" end="411" title="Motion picture content rating system#Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands Censorship Office"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="415" end="449" title="Television content rating system#Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong television rating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349928" start="453" end="485" title="Irish Film Classification Office" label="Irish Film Classification Office"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="489" end="526" title="Motion picture content rating system#Jamaica" label="Jamaican motion picture rating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223288" start="530" end="561" title="Kenya Film Classification Board" label="Kenya Film Classification Board"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="565" end="587" title="Motion picture content rating system#Kuwait" label="Censor Board Committee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="601" end="626" title="Motion picture content rating system#Lebanon" label="Lebanese Censorship Board"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="630" end="663" title="Motion picture content rating system#Maldives" label="National Bureau of Classification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="683" end="693" title="Motion picture content rating system#Malta" label="Film Board"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="706" end="731" title="Motion picture content rating system#Mauritius" label="Film Classification Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352932" start="748" end="783" title="Classification Office (New Zealand)" label="Classification Office (New Zealand)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="787" end="823" title="Television content rating system#New Zealand" label="New Zealand television rating system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="827" end="864" title="Motion picture content rating system#Nigeria" label="National Film and Video Censors Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547087" start="879" end="931" title="Movie and Television Review and Classification Board" label="Movie and Television Review and Classification Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q20416201" start="954" end="994" title="General Commission for Audiovisual Media" label="General Commission for Audiovisual Media"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1014" end="1035" title="Motion picture content rating system#Singapore" label="Board of Film Censors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1052" end="1088" title="Television content rating system#Singapore" label="Singaporean television rating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166778" start="1092" end="1118" title="Film and Publication Board" label="Film and Publication Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q25450195" start="1138" end="1183" title="National Media Council (United Arab Emirates)" label="National Media Council (United Arab Emirates)"/>
<link wikidata="Q861670" start="1187" end="1223" title="British Board of Film Classification" label="British Board of Film Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="1227" end="1253" title="Motion Picture Association film rating system" label="Motion Picture Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091235" start="1278" end="1300" title="TV Parental Guidelines" label="TV Parental Guidelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150823" start="1366" end="1377" title="P.G. Cigars" label="P.G. Cigars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044120" start="1422" end="1429" title="PG Tips" label="PG Tips"/>
<link wikidata="Q806487" start="1456" end="1471" title="Bangkok Airways" label="Bangkok Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q212405" start="1527" end="1547" title="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble" label="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q922707" start="1615" end="1634" title="Left Party (France)" label="Left Party (France)"/>
<link wikidata="Q538566" start="1714" end="1739" title="Partido Galeguista (1931)" label="Partido Galeguista (1931)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306235" start="1800" end="1825" title="Partido Galeguista (1978)" label="Partido Galeguista (1978)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107349206" start="1892" end="1907" title="Peoples Gazette" label="Peoples Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140016" start="1945" end="1962" title="Petrokimia Gresik" label="Petrokimia Gresik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576758" start="1999" end="2012" title="PlatinumGames" label="PlatinumGames"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231582" start="2048" end="2066" title="Porter-Gaud School" label="Porter-Gaud School"/>
<link wikidata="Q112425856" start="2134" end="2151" title="postgraduate year" label="postgraduate year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748860" start="2255" end="2265" title="Oficina G3" label="Oficina G3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117003" start="2268" end="2283" title="P.G. Sittenfeld" label="P.G. Sittenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q207515" start="2319" end="2334" title="P. G. Wodehouse" label="P. G. Wodehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="2366" end="2379" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="2427" end="2443" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085474" start="2475" end="2497" title="Pauri Garhwal district" label="Pauri Garhwal district"/>
<link wikidata="Q23564" start="2547" end="2556" title="Podgorica" label="Podgorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q590205" start="2602" end="2633" title="Prince George, British Columbia" label="Prince George, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26807" start="2644" end="2681" title="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q598874" start="2745" end="2762" title="Polygalacturonase" label="Polygalacturonase"/>
<link wikidata="Q161495" start="2776" end="2792" title="Propylene glycol" label="Propylene glycol"/>
<link wikidata="Q209717" start="2816" end="2829" title="Prostaglandin" label="Prostaglandin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973616" start="2915" end="2930" title="Galois geometry" label="Galois geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q63490825" start="2933" end="2940" title="PG(3,2)" label="PG(3,2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179836" start="2992" end="3001" title="pg (Unix)" label="pg (Unix)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55810" start="3046" end="3055" title="Paleogene" label="Paleogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q174755" start="3093" end="3106" title="Panzergewinde" label="Panzergewinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q846759" start="3149" end="3157" title="Petagram" label="Petagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q846759" start="3197" end="3205" title="Picogram" label="Picogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q192490" start="3246" end="3256" title="PostgreSQL" label="PostgreSQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q114699" start="3337" end="3350" title="Pacific Games" label="Pacific Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069725" start="3386" end="3398" title="Page (paper)" label="Page (paper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238783" start="3451" end="3468" title="Patrologia Graeca" label="Patrologia Graeca"/>
<link wikidata="Q212413" start="3532" end="3543" title="Point guard" label="Point guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="3588" end="3605" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056807" start="3667" end="3686" title="iPhrothiya yeGolide" label="iPhrothiya yeGolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q63865541" start="3777" end="3805" title="Rated PG (album)" label="&amp;quot;Rated PG&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3893" end="3912" title="List of patrol vessels of the United States Navy#Patrol gunboat (PG)" label="Patrol gunboat (PG)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426162" wikidata="Q365922" url="?curid=426162" title="Kamal Ganzouri">
<text>Kamal Ganzouri (, ‎; 12 January 1933 – 31 March 2021) was an Egyptian economist who served as the Prime Minister of Egypt from 7 December 2011 to 24 July 2012. He previously served as prime minister from 1996 to 1999. He came to power in 1996 succeeding Atef Sedki, and was in turn succeeded by Atef Ebeid in 1999. He was branded &quot;Minister of the Poor&quot; and &quot;the Opposition Minister&quot; because of his way of dealing with limited income people and the opposition. Before becoming prime minister, Ganzouri served as Minister of Planning and International Cooperation. On 24 November 2011, Egypt&#x27;s military rulers appointed him prime minister. He was sworn in and took office on 7 December 2011.

==Early life and education==
Kamal Ganzouri was born on 12 January 1933 in Garwan, a town in Bagor city in Monofia. He obtained a PhD at Michigan State University, United States and began teaching at Egyptian universities and training institutes in 1959.

==Political career==
===Early career===
Ganzouri served as a board member of the Sadat Academy for Administrative Sciences from 1962 to 1967 and became economic adviser to the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa in 1968. He was an adviser to the President Anwar Sadat. He was also a member of the National Specialized Councils of production, education and services. In 1974, he became undersecretary of Planning Minister and kept this until 1975. He was appointed Governor of the New Valley State in 1976 and then became Governor of the Bani Suef State in 1977 but resigned after just six months.

===Minister of Planning===
He was appointed director of The National Planning Institute in 1977 after resigning from Governor of Bani Suef State. After Hosni Mubarak assumed power as President of Egypt in 1981, Ganzouri became Minister of Planning after one year in 1982. In June 1984, he became Minister of International Cooperation. He was also Deputy Prime Minister from November 1986 to January 1996.

==First premiership==
On 2 January 1996, Hosni Mubarak appointed Ganzouri as a replacement of Atef Sedki. During his appointment, in what was to be known as his first cabinet, he operated at a level that was unprecedented in Egypt&#x27;s modern history. In about 4 years or less they declared 387 laws, 57 of those made dramatic changes to Egypt. He started his Prime Ministry with 4 major projects that were supposed to help move Egypt from the valley of the River Nile by developing and reclaiming new lands to live in away from the river Nile valley. His speciality in Planning enabled him to make a plan of development for Egypt up to 2017. He improved Egypt&#x27;s relations with the International Bank through the International Monetary Fund by completing the only program ever completed between Egypt and the International Bank since 1961. 13 other programs had gone to nowhere back then. The poverty ratio was reduced from 21% to 17%. Many of his proposed projects were abandoned after he was dismissed as prime minister on 5 October 1999.

== Life after first term as prime minister ==

Following his dismissal, he stayed completely away from the media. Some regime officials kept saying he didn&#x27;t do any good to the country, and so his 20-year plan vanished while the 4 projects were neglected by the new cabinet. Even though, he had a good reputation among the people of Egypt and that was because of the major changes he had accomplished.

=== Support for the 2011 Egyptian revolution ===
Ganzouri then appeared for the first time in about 11 years of silence as the Egyptian Revolution broke and right after Hosni Mubarak stepped down in a phone call on &quot;Al Haya Al Youm&quot; television program saying that&#x27;s a day of a new era in Egypt and that there is no going back from this day.

He then reappeared in &quot;Al Ashera Masa&#x27;a&quot; TV program as his first dedicated interview after resurfacing. He started it with condolences to the protestors who died during the Egyptian Revolution, and stated that he was ready to be judged for whatever actions he took that damaged Egypt.

He was later interviewed on &quot;Almasry Alyoum&quot; where he was asked if he would nominate himself for the Presidency of Egypt, but declined to answer saying that would be the people&#x27;s choice to make.

=== Possible presidential candidacy ===

Immediately following his appearance on television, pages and groups on Facebook emerged supporting him for presidency. They grouped up and had an official page for Media outreach. Involvec parties therein expected to meet him and discuss his nomination. New Wafd Party sources were said to be thinking of backing him up as their own nominee. Nevertheless, he already had a big sector of people who supported him from the old days especially the limited income sector which is a big sector in Egypt&#x27;s population. He mentioned nothing official after his last television appearance but he had some appearances in the press answering some corruption cases and investigations which were undertaken by his Cabinet that he did not approve of.

==Second premiership==
After Essam Sharaf resigned as Prime Minister of Egypt on 21 November 2011, Supreme Council of the Armed Forces appointed Ganzouri to form a new coalition government on 24 November. He formed his &quot;Salvation Government&quot; (Second Ganzouri Cabinet) on 3 December 2011 and was sworn in on 7 December. The military leadership stated as the cabinet was being sworn in that it has transferred all presidential powers to him, with the exception of affairs related to the judiciary and the military. His government resigned on 25 June 2012 after the election of Mohamed Morsi as President of Egypt to make way for the new government.

==Personal life and death==
Ganzouri was married and had three daughters (Suzanne, Magda and Mona).

Ganzouri died on 31 March 2021. He was 88.

==References ==
==External links==
Cabinet of Egypt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q365922" start="0" end="14" title="Kamal Ganzouri" label="Kamal Ganzouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571396" start="98" end="121" title="Prime Minister of Egypt" label="Prime Minister of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q755840" start="254" end="264" title="Atef Sedki" label="Atef Sedki"/>
<link wikidata="Q559232" start="295" end="305" title="Atef Ebeid" label="Atef Ebeid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066319" start="751" end="759" title="Janzouri" label="Ganzouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164479" start="809" end="814" title="El-bagour" label="Bagor"/>
<link wikidata="Q30786" start="823" end="830" title="Monufia" label="Monofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q270222" start="853" end="878" title="Michigan State University" label="Michigan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8973195" start="1053" end="1094" title="Sadat Academy for Management Sciences" label="Sadat Academy for Administrative Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783148" start="1148" end="1192" title="Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa" label="Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15618993" start="1227" end="1236" title="President of Egypt" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="1237" end="1248" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Anwar Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q30650" start="1461" end="1477" title="New Valley Governorate" label="New Valley State"/>
<link wikidata="Q30683" start="1518" end="1533" title="Beni Suef Governorate" label="Bani Suef State"/>
<link wikidata="Q34105" start="1731" end="1744" title="Hosni Mubarak" label="Hosni Mubarak"/>
<link wikidata="Q15618993" start="1762" end="1780" title="President of Egypt" label="President of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294450" start="1875" end="1912" title="Ministry of International Cooperation (Egypt)" label="Minister of International Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q877955" start="1926" end="1947" title="Deputy Prime Minister" label="Deputy Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q755840" start="2079" end="2089" title="Atef Sedki" label="Atef Sedki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719906" start="2146" end="2159" title="First Ganzouri Cabinet" label="first cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="2445" end="2455" title="River Nile" label="River Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="2674" end="2692" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="International Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="2705" end="2732" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="3372" end="3377" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q29198" start="3569" end="3588" title="2011 Egyptian revolution" label="Egyptian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34105" start="3611" end="3624" title="Hosni Mubarak" label="Hosni Mubarak"/>
<link wikidata="Q34105" start="3625" end="3637" title="Hosni Mubarak resignation" label="stepped down"/>
<link wikidata="Q29198" start="3987" end="4006" title="2011 Egyptian Revolution" label="Egyptian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="4092" end="4097" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829240" start="4134" end="4148" title="Almasry Alyoum" label="Almasry Alyoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="4424" end="4432" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q767012" start="4607" end="4621" title="New Wafd Party" label="New Wafd Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57680" start="5124" end="5136" title="Essam Sharaf" label="Essam Sharaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q386160" start="5194" end="5229" title="Supreme Council of the Armed Forces" label="Supreme Council of the Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719908" start="5348" end="5371" title="Second Ganzouri Cabinet" label="Second Ganzouri Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631" start="5680" end="5693" title="Mohamed Morsi" label="Mohamed Morsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15618993" start="5697" end="5715" title="President of Egypt" label="President of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206677" start="5933" end="5949" title="Cabinet of Egypt" label="Cabinet of Egypt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426164" wikidata="Q696976" url="?curid=426164" title="Arnold's Cove">
<text>Arnold&#x27;s Cove (2016 Population 949) is a town on Newfoundland&#x27;s Avalon Peninsula in the province of Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. It is in Division 1 on Placentia Bay.

The name is found in population returns of 1836, and may have been given after the forename of a fisherman.
In 1864 there was one family, and by 1893 there was a post office. It was a fishing settlement located approximately two kilometers from the Newfoundland Railway, located 35 miles from Placentia Junction.

It was a Local Improvement District in 1967 and incorporated as a town the same year. It had a population of 100 in 1911 and 1,160 in 1976. It has been a center of economic growth recently, due to its proximity to projects involved with the Hibernia offshore oil platform.

==Demographics==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Arnold&#x27;s Cove had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

== Attractions ==

=== Hiking trails ===
Arnold&#x27;s Cove is home to three hiking trails varying in length from a 12 km loop to a 2 km there-and-back. Bordeaux Trail is the longest, followed by the Old Cabot Highway to Arthur&#x27;s Hill Trail with the Otter Rub/War Path Trail being the shortest of the three. All three trails are rated as Moderate or Easy/Moderate.

=== Lookout points ===
Two lookout points exist within the town of Arnold&#x27;s Cove. The Placentia Bay Lookout sits at the top of a hill, providing scenic views westward over Placentia Bay. Ivy&#x27;s Lookout is small, mostly unmarked, and sits right on the water of Arnold&#x27;s Cove itself, also looking west. Additionally, the Big Pond Bird Sanctuary, also known as the Arnold&#x27;s Cove Bird Sanctuary, offers east-facing views of a tidal inlet that is home to local waterfowl.

=== Historic buildings ===
The Drake House is a home built in 1890 by George and John Drake in a standard Georgian style. It was awarded Heritage Designation by the Heritage Foundation of Newfoundland and Labrador in 2003.

=== Religious buildings and cemeteries ===
Modern Arnold&#x27;s Cove has four churches and no other listed religious buildings. It also has three cemeteries, two affiliated with the Anglican Church and one with the Salvation Army Church.

==See also==
* List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q696976" start="0" end="18" title="Arnold&amp;#x27;s Cove" label="Arnold&amp;#x27;s Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955163" start="20" end="35" title="Canada 2016 Census" label="2016 Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q48335" start="54" end="66" title="Newfoundland (island)" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q790092" start="74" end="90" title="Avalon Peninsula" label="Avalon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="110" end="135" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303397" start="154" end="164" title="Division 1, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321555" start="168" end="181" title="Placentia Bay" label="Placentia Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017848" start="433" end="453" title="Newfoundland Railway" label="Newfoundland Railway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="477" end="495" title="Placentia Junction" label="Placentia Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q24412" start="739" end="747" title="Hibernia oil field" label="Hibernia"/>
<link wikidata="Q689880" start="757" end="769" title="oil platform" label="oil platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="796" end="821" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="835" end="852" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305607" start="1929" end="1940" title="Drake House (Newfoundland)" label="Drake House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134052" start="2376" end="2429" title="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador" label="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426166" wikidata="Q224275" url="?curid=426166" title="DP">
<text>DP may refer to:
==In arts and entertainment==
===Film, television, and theatre===
* &quot;Danny Phantom&quot;, an animated television series
* David Production, a Japanese animation studio
* Director of photography, a job in filmmaking
* Digital Playground, an American pornographic movie studio
* Dixon Place, a theater organization in New York City
* &quot;D.P.&quot;, a South Korean series
===Music===
* Daft Punk, an electronic band
* Dead Poetic, a music group
* Deep Purple, a rock music group
* Dominant parallel
* Drowning Pool, an American heavy metal music group
* &quot;dp&quot; (album), a 2005 album by Daniel Powter
===Other media===
* &quot;Daily Pennsylvanian&quot;, the University of Pennsylvania&#x27;s student newspaper
* Deadpool, a Marvel Comics comic book character
* Display picture or avatar, in gaming and online, a graphical representation of a user or their character
* &quot;Doom Patrol&quot;, a comic book series
* H. G. Wells, author; used &quot;D. P.&quot; as a pseudonym
* Dark Prince from Clash Royale
==Businesses and organizations==
* Democratic Party (disambiguation), a name shared by many political parties
* Democrazia Proletaria, a former left-wing political party in Italy
* The Detroit Partnership, a service-learning organization at the University of Michigan
* Deutsche Partei, a German political party
* Devon Preparatory School (Devon Prep), an American private school
* Distributed Proofreaders, an organisation related to Project Gutenberg
* Dorset Police, the territorial police force responsible for policing Dorset, England
* First Choice Airways, formerly Air 2000 (IATA airline code DP 1987-2008)
* Pobeda Airlines (IATA airline code DP since 2014)
* Digipen Institute of Technology
* DP World, a logistics company based in the United Arab Emirates
* Labour Party (Lithuania), a political party in Lithuania
* Paon DP, a Japanese video game developer

==Law==
* Death penalty
* Due process

==Science, technology, and mathematics==
===Computing and software===
* DP (complexity), or difference polynomial time, a computational complexity class
* Data processing
* Software design pattern, a reusable solution to a common problem in software design
* Device-independent pixel, a unit representing an abstraction of a pixel for use by an application
* Digital Performer, an audio software package for the Apple Macintosh and Windows
* DisplayPort, a computer display interface specification
* Double Parity, as used in RAID-DP, a non-standard implementation of RAID
* Dual processors, a computing component with two independent processing units 
* Dynamic positioning, a computer-controlled system to maintain a vessel&#x27;s position and heading

===Mathematics===
* Davis–Putnam algorithm, for checking the validity of a first-order logic formula
* Differential privacy, a system for publicly sharing information while withholding information about individuals in the dataset
* Dirichlet process, a stochastic process corresponding to an infinite generalization of the Dirichlet distribution.
* Dynamic programming, a method for solving a complex problem by breaking it down into a collection of simpler subproblems, used in several fields
* Number of decimal places that a number is given to

===Logic===
* Disjunction property, a typical metalogical property of intuitionistic theories
* Drinker&#x27;s paradox, a theorem of classical predicate logic

===Medicine===
* Delusional parasitosis, in which individuals incorrectly believe they are infested with parasites
* Depersonalization disorder, a state of persistently feeling detached and/or out of one&#x27;s body
* Dermal papilla, a cluster of mesenchymal cells that lie at the base of a hair follicle
* Diphallia, in which a male is born with two penises
* Disopyramide

===Weapons===
* Degtyaryov machine gun (&quot;Degtyarova pekhotnyi&quot;), a Soviet machine gun
* Drill purpose rifle, a rifle that has been altered so that it can be used for drill purposes only
* Dual purpose gun, a naval artillery mounting designed to engage both surface and air targets

===Other uses in science and technology===
* Data point, a unit of measurement or observation
* Diametral pitch, the ratio of the number of teeth in a gear to its pitch diameter
* Degree of polymerization, the number of units in an average polymer chain at a given time during a reaction
* Determiner phrase, in linguistics
* Diffraction pattern, in wave mechanics
* Diffusion pump, a type of vacuum pump
* Standard instrument departure procedure, an outbound procedure for aircraft
* Diphosgene, also called as DP for a chemical warfare agent
* Discursive psychology, a form of discourse analysis

==In sport==
* Deportivo Pereira, a Colombian soccer team
* Designated player (softball), a softball batter
* Designated Player Rule, in Major League Soccer
* Double play, in baseball
* Daytona Prototype, a type of racing car used in the Rolex Sports Car Series and United SportsCar Championship
* Dude Perfect, a trick shot conglomerate
* Dan Patrick, in broadcasting

==Other uses==
* Deepika Padukone, Indian film actress, often referred to by the acronym DP 
* Delegable proxy, a form of voting
* Delivery point, in postal systems
* Depersonalization, a state of feeling detached and/or out of one&#x27;s body
* Depository participant, an agent of the depository, in Indian banking
* Dill pickle, a type of pickled cucumber
* Displaced person, WWII term for person forced to leave home region due to invasion
* Divine Principle, the main theological book of the Unification Church
* Donkey punch, slang for a sexual practice 
* Double penetration, a variant of group sex
* Down payment
* Dr. Pepper, a type of carbonated soft drink
* Station code for Depok railway station

==See also==
*DPS (disambiguation)
*Dawn patrol (disambiguation)
*₯, symbol for currency Greek drachma
*∂P, an abbreviation for differentiable programming</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224275" start="0" end="2" title="DP" label="DP"/>
<link wikidata="Q83978" start="91" end="104" title="Danny Phantom" label="Danny Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018644" start="144" end="160" title="David Production" label="David Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q222344" start="192" end="215" title="Director of photography" label="Director of photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224808" start="239" end="257" title="Digital Playground" label="Digital Playground"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284964" start="299" end="310" title="Dixon Place" label="Dixon Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q105226735" start="360" end="364" title="D.P. (TV series)" label="D.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q185828" start="408" end="417" title="Daft Punk" label="Daft Punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020558" start="440" end="451" title="Dead Poetic" label="Dead Poetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="469" end="480" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q16246657" start="503" end="520" title="Dominant parallel" label="Dominant parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q623921" start="523" end="536" title="Drowning Pool" label="Drowning Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604603" start="576" end="598" title="dp (album)" label="&amp;quot;dp&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290101" start="656" end="675" title="Daily Pennsylvanian" label="Daily Pennsylvanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631090" start="741" end="749" title="Deadpool" label="Deadpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q152402" start="790" end="805" title="Display picture" label="Display picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q664261" start="903" end="914" title="Doom Patrol" label="Doom Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="944" end="955" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q22095476" start="1022" end="1034" title="Clash Royale" label="Clash Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q40083" start="1070" end="1103" title="Democratic Party (disambiguation)" label="Democratic Party (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185916" start="1147" end="1168" title="Democrazia Proletaria" label="Democrazia Proletaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729875" start="1216" end="1239" title="The Detroit Partnership" label="The Detroit Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q674695" start="1305" end="1320" title="German Party (1947)" label="Deutsche Partei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267755" start="1349" end="1373" title="Devon Preparatory School" label="Devon Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q906319" start="1417" end="1441" title="Distributed Proofreaders" label="Distributed Proofreaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298864" start="1490" end="1503" title="Dorset Police" label="Dorset Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q928676" start="1577" end="1597" title="First Choice Airways" label="First Choice Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q928676" start="1608" end="1616" title="Air 2000" label="Air 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398469" start="1652" end="1667" title="Pobeda Airlines" label="Pobeda Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027869" start="1704" end="1735" title="Digipen Institute of Technology" label="Digipen Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154956" start="1738" end="1746" title="DP World" label="DP World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142007" start="1804" end="1828" title="Labour Party (Lithuania)" label="Labour Party (Lithuania)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563379" start="1863" end="1870" title="Paon DP" label="Paon DP"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="1915" end="1928" title="Death penalty" label="Death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068288" start="1931" end="1942" title="Due process" label="Due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943357" start="2016" end="2031" title="DP (complexity)" label="DP (complexity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661985" start="2099" end="2114" title="Data processing" label="Data processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q181156" start="2117" end="2140" title="Software design pattern" label="Software design pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267026" start="2203" end="2227" title="Device-independent pixel" label="Device-independent pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q499062" start="2303" end="2320" title="Digital Performer" label="Digital Performer"/>
<link wikidata="Q753452" start="2386" end="2397" title="DisplayPort" label="DisplayPort"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2444" end="2457" title="Non-standard RAID levels#Double parity" label="Double Parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q555032" start="2519" end="2534" title="Dual processors" label="Dual processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268965" start="2599" end="2618" title="Dynamic positioning" label="Dynamic positioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177898" start="2719" end="2741" title="Davis–Putnam algorithm" label="Davis–Putnam algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275358" start="2802" end="2822" title="Differential privacy" label="Differential privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280766" start="2931" end="2948" title="Dirichlet process" label="Dirichlet process"/>
<link wikidata="Q981016" start="3022" end="3044" title="Dirichlet distribution" label="Dirichlet distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q380679" start="3048" end="3067" title="Dynamic programming" label="Dynamic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056761" start="3205" end="3218" title="decimal place" label="decimal place"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282264" start="3261" end="3281" title="Disjunction property" label="Disjunction property"/>
<link wikidata="Q176786" start="3317" end="3331" title="intuitionistic logic" label="intuitionistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908665" start="3332" end="3340" title="List of first-order theories" label="theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307716" start="3343" end="3365" title="Drinker&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Drinker&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q236975" start="3380" end="3389" title="classical logic" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="3390" end="3405" title="predicate logic" label="predicate logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200256" start="3424" end="3446" title="Delusional parasitosis" label="Delusional parasitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338307" start="3524" end="3550" title="Depersonalization-derealization disorder" label="Depersonalization disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922379" start="3654" end="3670" title="mesenchymal cell" label="mesenchymal cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227139" start="3714" end="3723" title="Diphallia" label="Diphallia"/>
<link wikidata="Q425120" start="3768" end="3780" title="Disopyramide" label="Disopyramide"/>
<link wikidata="Q482453" start="3798" end="3820" title="Degtyaryov machine gun" label="Degtyaryov machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307546" start="3880" end="3899" title="Drill purpose rifle" label="Drill purpose rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310234" start="3980" end="3996" title="Dual purpose gun" label="Dual purpose gun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4119" end="4129" title="Unit of observation#Data point" label="Data point"/>
<link wikidata="Q143873" start="4170" end="4185" title="Diametral pitch" label="Diametral pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q662950" start="4254" end="4278" title="Degree of polymerization" label="Degree of polymerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201147" start="4364" end="4381" title="Determiner phrase" label="Determiner phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q133900" start="4400" end="4419" title="Diffraction pattern" label="Diffraction pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q296893" start="4441" end="4455" title="Diffusion pump" label="Diffusion pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773819" start="4481" end="4510" title="Standard instrument departure" label="Standard instrument departure"/>
<link wikidata="Q419283" start="4559" end="4569" title="Diphosgene" label="Diphosgene"/>
<link wikidata="Q483610" start="4595" end="4611" title="chemical warfare" label="chemical warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q30892495" start="4620" end="4641" title="Discursive psychology" label="Discursive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q515178" start="4688" end="4705" title="Deportivo Pereira" label="Deportivo Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q171038" start="4733" end="4761" title="Designated player (softball)" label="Designated player (softball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132582" start="4783" end="4805" title="Designated Player Rule" label="Designated Player Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251475" start="4832" end="4843" title="Double play" label="Double play"/>
<link wikidata="Q93440629" start="4859" end="4876" title="Daytona Prototype" label="Daytona Prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995039" start="4971" end="4983" title="Dude Perfect" label="Dude Perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214175" start="5013" end="5024" title="Dan Patrick (sportscaster)" label="Dan Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q159178" start="5060" end="5076" title="Deepika Padukone" label="Deepika Padukone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433039" start="5138" end="5153" title="Delegable proxy" label="Delegable proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254083" start="5174" end="5188" title="Delivery point" label="Delivery point"/>
<link wikidata="Q83177" start="5210" end="5227" title="Depersonalization" label="Depersonalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260791" start="5289" end="5311" title="Depository participant" label="Depository participant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5361" end="5372" title="Pickled cucumber#Kosher dill" label="Dill pickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q837556" start="5403" end="5419" title="Displaced person" label="Displaced person"/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="5488" end="5504" title="Divine Principle" label="Divine Principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729435" start="5560" end="5572" title="Donkey punch" label="Donkey punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243210" start="5605" end="5623" title="Double penetration" label="Double penetration"/>
<link wikidata="Q708438" start="5650" end="5662" title="Down payment" label="Down payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q623561" start="5665" end="5675" title="Dr. Pepper" label="Dr. Pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966687" start="5728" end="5749" title="Depok railway station" label="Depok railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q228457" start="5765" end="5785" title="DPS (disambiguation)" label="DPS (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211403" start="5787" end="5815" title="Dawn patrol (disambiguation)" label="Dawn patrol (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546443" start="5840" end="5853" title="Modern drachma" label="Greek drachma"/>
<link wikidata="Q63100473" start="5879" end="5905" title="differentiable programming" label="differentiable programming"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426169" wikidata="Q248336" url="?curid=426169" title="HC">
<text>HC, hc or H/C may refer to:
== Science, technology, and mathematics ==
=== Medicine ===
* Health Canada
* Hemicrania continua
* Hyperelastosis cutis or hereditary equine regional dermal asthenia

=== Chemistry ===
* Hemocyanin, a metalloprotein abbreviated Hc
* HC smoke, a US military designation for Hexachloroethane
* Homocapsaicin, a capsaicinoid
*Hydrocarbon, a category of substances consisting only of hydrogen and carbon

===Other uses in science, technology, and mathematics===
* 74HC-series integrated circuits, a logic family of integrated circuits
* Felix HC, a series of Romanian personal microcomputers produced by ICE Felix Bucharest and which were ZX Spectrum clones
* &quot;Hemianthus callitrichoides&quot;, a freshwater aquatic plant native to Cuba
* + h.c., a notation used in mathematics and quantum physics

== Sports ==
* Head Coach
* Hors catégorie (French), used in cycle races to designate a climb that is &quot;beyond categorization&quot;
* UCI .HC road cycling races (1.HC and 2.HC), the second tier of events in the sport, after the UCI World Tour

== Other uses ==
* Heritage Corridor, a Metra commuter rail line running from Chicago to Joliet, Illinois
* Highway contract route, an outsourced United States Postal Service delivery method, formerly known as Star routes
* Honorary degree, or &quot;honoris causa&quot;
* Hors de commerce, prints similar to Artist Proofs except they are only available through the artist directly
* Hospitality Club, an internet-based hospitality service
* &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot;, newspaper of record of Houston, Texas
* Aero-Tropics Air Services (IATA airline designator HC)
* Disability, acronym for Handicap/Handicapped 
* High-cube container, a type of intermodal shipping container</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q248336" start="0" end="2" title="HC" label="HC"/>
<link wikidata="Q248336" start="4" end="6" title="HC" label="hc"/>
<link wikidata="Q248336" start="10" end="13" title="HC" label="H/C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057591" start="90" end="103" title="Health Canada" label="Health Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q973425" start="106" end="125" title="Hemicrania continua" label="Hemicrania continua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737839" start="128" end="148" title="Hyperelastosis cutis" label="Hyperelastosis cutis"/>
<link wikidata="Q407688" start="216" end="226" title="Hemocyanin" label="Hemocyanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q415988" start="262" end="270" title="HC smoke" label="HC smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860892" start="321" end="334" title="Homocapsaicin" label="Homocapsaicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="352" end="363" title="Hydrocarbon" label="Hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="489" end="520" title="7400-series integrated circuits#CMOS" label="74HC-series integrated circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492034" start="562" end="570" title="Felix HC" label="Felix HC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5711395" start="691" end="717" title="Hemianthus callitrichoides" label="Hemianthus callitrichoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q55600322" start="769" end="775" title="+ h.c." label="+ h.c."/>
<link wikidata="Q3246315" start="844" end="854" title="Head Coach" label="Head Coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q629222" start="857" end="871" title="Hors catégorie" label="Hors catégorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q48998109" start="967" end="993" title="UCI .HC road races" label="UCI .HC road cycling races"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738778" start="1096" end="1113" title="Heritage Corridor" label="Heritage Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985029" start="1287" end="1298" title="Star routes" label="Star routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="1301" end="1316" title="Honorary degree" label="Honorary degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q108195999" start="1349" end="1365" title="Hors de commerce" label="Hors de commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q744312" start="1460" end="1476" title="Hospitality Club" label="Hospitality Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="1524" end="1541" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033467" start="1589" end="1614" title="Aero-Tropics Air Services" label="Aero-Tropics Air Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="1646" end="1656" title="Disability" label="Disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q187956" start="1694" end="1713" title="High-cube container" label="High-cube container"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426170" wikidata="Q755840" url="?curid=426170" title="Atef Sedky">
<text>Atef Mohamed Naguib Sedky (29 August 1930 – 25 February 2005; , ) was the Prime Minister of Egypt from 1986 until 1996. He replaced Aly Mahmoud Lotfy on November 10, 1986.

==Biography==
Sedky was born in the Nile Delta city of Tanta. He was a lawyer and economist by training, receiving a doctorate in economics from the University of Paris in France. Before becoming Prime Minister, he was the director of the Egyptian Central Auditing Organization. In 2004, Sedky fractured his thigh. He died on 25 February 2005 at a Cairo hospital. Sedky and his German-born wife, Ursula, had two children Ahmed and Sherif.

==Political career==
As prime minister, Sedky supervised and sometimes criticised reforms suggested by the International Monetary Fund. In November 1993, he survived an assassination attempt in Cairo by the militant Islamic group Vanguards of Conquest, which resulted in the death of a schoolgirl called Shaimaa. On 2 January 1996, he along with his cabinet resigned; his post was filled two days later by Kamal Ganzouri. Sedky is the longest serving Egyptian prime minister since the Khedivate in 1878.

==Death==
Sedky died on 25 February 2005.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q755840" start="0" end="25" title="Atef Sedky" label="Atef Mohamed Naguib Sedky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571396" start="74" end="97" title="Prime Minister of Egypt" label="Prime Minister of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391705" start="132" end="149" title="Aly Lotfy Mahmoud" label="Aly Mahmoud Lotfy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179528" start="209" end="219" title="Nile Delta" label="Nile Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q271771" start="228" end="233" title="Tanta" label="Tanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="322" end="341" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="345" end="351" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060386" start="421" end="450" title="Central Auditing Organization" label="Central Auditing Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="551" end="557" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="720" end="747" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="807" end="812" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873288" start="843" end="864" title="Vanguards of Conquest" label="Vanguards of Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q365922" start="1019" end="1033" title="Kamal Ganzouri" label="Kamal Ganzouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q127861" start="1098" end="1107" title="Khedivate of Egypt" label="Khedivate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426173" wikidata="Q1113813" url="?curid=426173" title="Come By Chance, Newfoundland and Labrador">
<text>Come By Chance is a town on the isthmus of the Avalon Peninsula in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. It is in Division 1 on Placentia Bay.

Located in this town is Newfoundland&#x27;s only oil refinery, the Come By Chance Refinery operated by North Atlantic Refining, which has a capacity of . The associated port was Canada&#x27;s fifth largest port by cargo tonnage loaded and unloaded in 2011. It handled 27.4 million metric tonnes, of which 23.7 million tonnes was crude petroleum.

== History ==
The town&#x27;s name is believed to be the result of explorers coming upon a Beothuk path by chance, and naming the location after the unexpected discovery.

Come By Chance was chosen as the location for a Canadian cottage hospital in 1936.&quot;&quot;

In February 2018, a group of oil refinery workers split a Canadian lottery winning of $60,000,000.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Come By Chance had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

== Notable people ==
* Bob Gladney, National Hockey League player

==See also==
* List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1113813" start="0" end="14" title="Come By Chance, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Come By Chance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="20" end="24" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q93267" start="32" end="39" title="isthmus" label="isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q790092" start="47" end="63" title="Avalon Peninsula" label="Avalon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="67" end="92" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303397" start="111" end="121" title="Division 1, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321555" start="125" end="138" title="Placentia Bay" label="Placentia Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151115" start="208" end="231" title="Come By Chance Refinery" label="Come By Chance Refinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053995" start="244" end="267" title="North Atlantic Refining" label="North Atlantic Refining"/>
<link wikidata="Q661423" start="579" end="586" title="Beothuk" label="Beothuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637680" start="717" end="733" title="cottage hospital" label="cottage hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="882" end="907" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="921" end="938" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932548" start="1145" end="1156" title="Bob Gladney" label="Bob Gladney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="1158" end="1180" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134052" start="1204" end="1257" title="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador" label="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426175" wikidata="Q224846" url="?curid=426175" title="FB">
<text>FB, Fb, or fb may refer to:

==Arts and media==
* F♭ (musical note)
* FB (band), an electronic music collaboration of Benny Benassi and Ferry Corsten
* Facebook, a social networking website, also known as FB.com
** Meta Platforms, formerly Facebook Inc (Nasdaq: FB), parent company of Facebook
* Friendship book, a booklet swapped amongst pen pals
* Frostbite (game engine), a video game engine
* FB, known as Trucksy in the US, an old green pickup truck from &quot;Roary the Racing Car&quot;

==Science and technology==
===Computing===
* Framebuffer, in computer technology
* FreeBASIC, a 32-bit compiler using BASIC syntax for DOS, Windows, and Linux
* FictionBook, an open XML-based e-book format hailing from Russia

===Other uses in science and technology===
* F B swamp vehicle, a Japanese military vehicle used for crossing difficult swampy terrain
* Fast busy, or reorder tone, a type of telephone signal
* Feedback, in signaling systems
* Femtobarn, a small unit of area used in high energy physics
* Fluidized bed, a special technology used in energy, reactor, chemical engineering etc.
* Ninth generation Honda Civic
* Hyundai FB, a series of buses manufactured by Hyundai Motor Company
* Foreign body, any object originating outside the body

==Sport==
* Fenerbahçe, a Turkish sports club
* Fly ball, a type of batted ball or a pitching stat in baseball
* Football
* Fullback (American football), a position in American football
* Full-back (association football), a position in association football

==Other uses==
* Bulgaria Air (Bulgarian: България еър, IATA code FB), the flag carrier airline of Bulgaria
* Firebase or Fire support base, an artillery encampment
* Footbridge (fb on some maps), a bridge designed for pedestrians
* Fremont Bank, a US based retail and commercial bank
* FB &quot;Łucznik&quot; Radom, a Polish defence industry enterprise from Radom that produces firearms

==See also==
* BF (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224846" start="0" end="2" title="FB" label="FB"/>
<link wikidata="Q224846" start="4" end="6" title="FB" label="Fb"/>
<link wikidata="Q224846" start="11" end="13" title="FB" label="fb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622022" start="50" end="67" title="F♭ (musical note)" label="F♭ (musical note)"/>
<link wikidata="Q311157" start="70" end="79" title="FB (band)" label="FB (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="152" end="160" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q380" start="215" end="229" title="Meta Platforms" label="Meta Platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q30008669" start="296" end="311" title="Friendship book" label="Friendship book"/>
<link wikidata="Q124514" start="350" end="373" title="Frostbite (game engine)" label="Frostbite (game engine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q610756" start="466" end="486" title="Roary the Racing Car" label="Roary the Racing Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163900" start="539" end="550" title="Framebuffer" label="Framebuffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q195929" start="577" end="586" title="FreeBASIC" label="FreeBASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411109" start="655" end="666" title="FictionBook" label="FictionBook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427482" start="766" end="783" title="F B swamp vehicle" label="F B swamp vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313874" start="872" end="884" title="reorder tone" label="reorder tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="915" end="923" title="Feedback" label="Feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q209351" start="948" end="957" title="Femtobarn" label="Femtobarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666694" start="1010" end="1023" title="Fluidized bed" label="Fluidized bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626573" start="1116" end="1127" title="Honda Civic (ninth generation)" label="Honda Civic"/>
<link wikidata="Q498440" start="1130" end="1140" title="Hyundai FB" label="Hyundai FB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455142" start="1200" end="1212" title="Foreign body" label="Foreign body"/>
<link wikidata="Q19648" start="1267" end="1277" title="Fenerbahçe" label="Fenerbahçe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18455523" start="1323" end="1334" title="batted ball" label="batted ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081491" start="1368" end="1376" title="Football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q526960" start="1379" end="1407" title="Fullback (American football)" label="Fullback (American football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="1443" end="1475" title="Full-back (association football)" label="Full-back (association football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q822130" start="1530" end="1542" title="Bulgaria Air" label="Bulgaria Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q91830" start="1635" end="1652" title="Fire support base" label="Fire support base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068842" start="1680" end="1690" title="Footbridge" label="Footbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501554" start="1746" end="1758" title="Fremont Bank" label="Fremont Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064033" start="1800" end="1828" title="FB &amp;quot;Łucznik&amp;quot; Radom" label="FB &amp;quot;Łucznik&amp;quot; Radom"/>
<link wikidata="Q223997" start="1917" end="1936" title="BF (disambiguation)" label="BF (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426176" wikidata="Q217453" url="?curid=426176" title="DS">
<text>DS may refer to:

==Arts and entertainment==
===Video games===
* Nintendo DS, handheld game console
* &quot;Deca Sports&quot;, a sports video game series
** &quot;Deca Sports&quot; (video game), the first game of the series
* &quot;Double Spoiler&quot;, a game in the &quot;Touhou Project&quot; series
* &quot;Dark Souls&quot;, a series of action role-playing games
** &quot;Dark Souls&quot; (video game), the first game in the series
* &quot;Death Stranding&quot;, an action game
* &quot;Don&#x27;t Starve&quot;, a survival game
===Music===
* &quot;D.S.&quot; (song), a 1995 song by Michael Jackson
* Dal segno (D.S.), a navigation marker in music notation

==Organisations==
* Committee for State Security (Bulgaria), a former Bulgarian secret service
* (Democrats of the Left), a former Italian political party
* Democratic Party (&quot;Demokratska stranka&quot;), a political party in Serbia
* Bureau of Diplomatic Security, in the US Department of State

==Science and technology==
* Dwarf spiral galaxy (dS)
* Darmstadtium (symbol Ds), a chemical element
* Data science
* Degree of substitution, relative density of substituent groups in a polymer
* Dielectric spectroscopy, measuring dielectric properties of medium
* Directional symmetry (time series)
* Dnepropetrovsk Sputnik, a class of Soviet satellites

===Computing===
* DS register, of X86 processor
* Avid DS, defunct editing and effects software
* Delegation Signer, DNSSEC record type
* DirectShow, Microsoft API
* Nintendo DS

===Mathematics===
* ds (elliptic function), one of Jacobi&#x27;s elliptic functions
* De Sitter space (dS)

===Medicine===
* Down syndrome, a genetic disorder
* Duodenal switch, a weight-loss surgery

==Transportation==
* DS Automobiles, a French car marque
* Citroën DS Inside (2009), a concept car
* Citroën DS (1955-1975), a car model 
* EasyJet Switzerland (IATA code: DS), an airline

==Weapons==
* 7.92 DS, a Polish-designed anti-tank ammunition type
* DS-39, Degtyaryova Stankovyi Model 1939, a Russian medium machine gun

==Other uses==
* Detective Sergeant, UK police rank
* Detective Superintendent, UK and Australian police rank
* Diodorus Siculus (&quot;D.S.&quot; or &quot;DS&quot;), a first-century BCE Greek historian
* Dominance and submission (D/s), a set of behaviors
* &quot;Enchiridion symbolorum, definitionum et declarationum de rebus fidei et morum&quot; (&quot;Denzinger-Schönmetzer&quot;, DS), a book of Catholic dogma
* Different subject (), in switch-reference

==See also==
* &quot;DS 21&quot;, a 1989 song by Jane Child from &quot;Jane Child&quot;
* 
* D (disambiguation) (for &quot;Ds&quot; the plural of &quot;D&quot;)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217453" start="0" end="2" title="DS" label="DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="65" end="76" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q113610575" start="108" end="119" title="Deca Sports" label="Deca Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q978521" start="157" end="193" title="Deca Sports (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Deca Sports&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q867001" start="232" end="246" title="Double Spoiler" label="Double Spoiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q99431276" start="310" end="320" title="Dark Souls" label="Dark Souls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166232" start="369" end="404" title="Dark Souls (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Dark Souls&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24666782" start="443" end="458" title="Death Stranding" label="Death Stranding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208174" start="489" end="506" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Starve" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Starve"/>
<link wikidata="Q900731" start="544" end="567" title="D.S. (song)" label="&amp;quot;D.S.&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157781" start="602" end="611" title="Dal segno" label="Dal segno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578786" start="679" end="718" title="Committee for State Security (Bulgaria)" label="Committee for State Security (Bulgaria)"/>
<link wikidata="Q281986" start="816" end="832" title="Democratic Party (Serbia)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241039" start="898" end="927" title="Bureau of Diplomatic Security" label="Bureau of Diplomatic Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q196128" start="989" end="1008" title="Dwarf spiral galaxy" label="Dwarf spiral galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266" start="1016" end="1028" title="Darmstadtium" label="Darmstadtium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374463" start="1063" end="1075" title="Data science" label="Data science"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="1146" end="1153" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q899580" start="1156" end="1179" title="Dielectric spectroscopy" label="Dielectric spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280452" start="1225" end="1259" title="Directional symmetry (time series)" label="Directional symmetry (time series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579391" start="1262" end="1284" title="Dnepropetrovsk Sputnik" label="Dnepropetrovsk Sputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="1334" end="1345" title="DS register" label="DS register"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828777" start="1366" end="1373" title="Avid DS" label="Avid DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q41609" start="1433" end="1439" title="DNSSEC" label="DNSSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q962763" start="1454" end="1464" title="DirectShow" label="DirectShow"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="1482" end="1493" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473526" start="1515" end="1537" title="ds (elliptic function)" label="ds (elliptic function)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179448" start="1581" end="1596" title="De Sitter space" label="De Sitter space"/>
<link wikidata="Q47715" start="1620" end="1633" title="Down syndrome" label="Down syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q10269071" start="1656" end="1671" title="Duodenal switch" label="Duodenal switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16040593" start="1717" end="1731" title="DS Automobiles" label="DS Automobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q748426" start="1755" end="1772" title="Citroën DS Inside" label="Citroën DS Inside"/>
<link wikidata="Q465966" start="1797" end="1807" title="Citroën DS" label="Citroën DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050862" start="1836" end="1855" title="EasyJet Switzerland" label="EasyJet Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q259245" start="1899" end="1906" title="7.92 DS" label="7.92 DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182924" start="1954" end="1959" title="DS-39" label="DS-39"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="2042" end="2060" title="Detective Sergeant" label="Detective Sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437271" start="2079" end="2103" title="Detective Superintendent" label="Detective Superintendent"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="2137" end="2153" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277656" start="2230" end="2254" title="Dominance and submission" label="Dominance and submission"/>
<link wikidata="Q969258" start="2289" end="2366" title="Enchiridion symbolorum, definitionum et declarationum de rebus fidei et morum" label="Enchiridion symbolorum, definitionum et declarationum de rebus fidei et morum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373325" start="2466" end="2482" title="switch-reference" label="switch-reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6151249" start="2555" end="2565" title="Jane Child (album)" label="Jane Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q27510" start="2577" end="2595" title="D (disambiguation)" label="D (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426177" wikidata="Q3307837" url="?curid=426177" title="William Jewell College">
<text>William Jewell College is a private liberal arts college in Liberty, Missouri, United States. It was founded in 1849 by members of the Missouri Baptist Convention and endowed with $10,000 by William Jewell. It was associated with the Missouri Baptist Convention for over 150 years until it separated in 2003 and became independent. After becoming a nonsectarian institution, the college&#x27;s enrollment fell by approximately 40% to 739 students in 2018. Jewell is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission.

==History==
===Founding===
The college is named after William Jewell, who in 1849 donated $10,000 to start a school. Jewell, who was from Columbia, Missouri, had wanted the school built in Boonville, Missouri. However, Liberty resident Alexander William Doniphan argued that donated undeveloped land in Liberty would be more valuable than the proposed developed land in Boonville, and Liberty was eventually chosen. Judge James Turner Vance Thompson donated the hilltop land on which the campus sits. In the American Civil War during the Battle of Liberty, the main building on campus, Jewell Hall, was used as a hospital, infirmary, and stables for the United States Army. Union troops were buried on the campus. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1978. The Mt. Memorial Cemetery, listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2012, is located on the campus grounds. One of the school&#x27;s founders was Baptist minister Robert S. James, father of Jesse James.

On , the nearby Liberty Female Institute, also known as the Liberty Ladies&#x27; College, was destroyed in a fire, which brought female students to Jewell. The unanticipated merger developed slowly, but by 1920 the women of the ladies&#x27; college were admitted to William Jewell on the same terms as men.

===Gano Chapel===

In 1926, the John Gano chapel was built, based on a donation from Gano&#x27;s great-granddaughter Elizabeth Price, who lived in Kansas City. Price gave the money for the chapel with provisions that the chapel be named for Gano and that it hang a painting of Gano baptizing George Washington in the Potomac River during the American Revolutionary War. The college says the painting is one of the school&#x27;s most popular tourist destinations and takes no stance on whether the baptism of Washington (who was an Episcopalian) actually took place.

===Harriman-Jewell Series===
The Harriman-Jewell Series, a performing arts series, was founded in 1965 by Department of English Professors Dean Dunham and Richard Harriman. Harriman was especially instrumental in bringing Luciano Pavarotti to campus, where the tenor made his international solo recital debut as part of the Series in 1973. Today, the Series continues to bring world-class music, dance and theatre events to Kansas City. The 2014–2015 season marked the Series&#x27; 50th anniversary.

Jewell students receive free tickets to Harriman-Jewell Series events, further shaping their liberal arts experience. Events are primarily held in downtown Kansas City at the Kauffman Center for the Performing Arts and the Folly Theater.

===Pryor Learning Commons===
In August 2013, William Jewell College opened Pryor Learning Commons, a 26,000-square-foot intellectual center where students gather, learn, and create 24 hours a day. The three-story hub of campus allows for students to work as mature, independent learners, immersing and engaging in their educational experience.

Equipped with innovation studios, recording and editing suites, a 3D printer, 80-inch touchscreens, configurable white board tables, AirMedia, live Twitter wall, coffee shop, and more, the fully donor-funded $15-million Pryor Learning Commons lends itself to the learning styles of today&#x27;s students.

===Sexual assault allegations===
In May 2019 the college was named in a lawsuit filed by a former student who was raped in Browning Hall in 2017 by another student, a member of the college&#x27;s football team. The Clay County prosecutor did not pursue the matter with criminal charges. The victim alleges that after the reporting of the incident she continued to be harassed by the perpetrator and members of the football team. While the college does not deny that the rape occurred, the college&#x27;s response in June 2019 denied any responsibility and petitioned the court to dismiss the lawsuit.

==Academics==

The college offers nearly 40 academic majors and 10 pre-professional programs.

William Jewell College also provides an Oxbridge Honors Program. Oxbridge majors take tutorials in their major, study abroad in Oxford, and take comprehensive exams during their senior year. The college offers a Journey Grant program in which students can qualify for a minimum $2,000 grant to use their junior year of school to help create an educational experience like study abroad, leadership and service projects, internships, research, business projects, etc.

In 2019, William Jewell started the Honors Institute in Critical Thinking, a scholarship honors program that delves into analytical thinking with a self-designed practicum centered around a world issue.

Since 2013, the college claimed three Fulbright Scholars, two Goldwater Scholars, one Rhodes Global Scholar international finalist, two Truman Scholar finalists, one Rotary International Scholarship and ten Teach For America corps members.

The college offers three graduate programs, all approved by the Higher Learning Commission: The Master of Arts in Teaching, the Master of Science in Curriculum and Instruction, and the Artist Diploma in Voice (certificate program).

== Athletics ==


The William Jewell athletic teams are called the Cardinals. The college is a member of the NCAA Division II ranks, primarily competing in the Great Lakes Valley Conference (GLVC) since the 2011–12 academic year. Prior to joining the NCAA, the Cardinals previously competed in the Heart of America Conference (HAAC) of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA) from 1971–72 to 2010–11; and in the Missouri College Athletic Union (MCAU) from 1924–25 to 1970–71.

William Jewell competes in 25 intercollegiate varsity sports: Men&#x27;s sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, football, golf, lacrosse, quadball, soccer, swimming, tennis, and track &amp; field; while women&#x27;s sports include basketball, cross country, golf, lacrosse, soccer, softball, swimming, tennis, track &amp; field, volleyball and wrestling; and co-ed sports include athletic band, powerlifting and spirit team.

== Greek life ==

=== Fraternities ===
* Kappa Alpha Order – &quot;Alpha Delta chapter&quot;
* Lambda Chi Alpha – &quot;Epsilon-Nu chapter&quot;
* Phi Gamma Delta (FIJI) – &quot;Zeta Phi chapter&quot;

=== Sororities ===
* Alpha Gamma Delta – &quot;Epsilon Epsilon chapter&quot;
* Delta Zeta – &quot;Zeta Rho chapter&quot;
* Zeta Tau Alpha – &quot;Delta Chi chapter&quot;

==Notable alumni==

* Cyrus Avery (1870–1963), businessman and &quot;Father of Route 66&quot;
* Eugene Monroe Bartlett (1885–1941), Christian singer, songwriter and producer of gospel music.
* Daniel Belcher, Grammy-winning operatic baritone
* Edwin Charles Boulton (A.B., 1950), a bishop of the United Methodist Church
* Nancy Boyda, deputy assistant secretary of defense for manpower and personnel; former Democratic congresswoman from Kansas, 2007–2009
* Hilary A. Bush (BA 1926), Missouri lieutenant governor
* Greg Canuteson, former state representative and Mayor of Liberty
* Robin Carnahan, Missouri Secretary of State, 2005–2013
* Tom Carnegie (AB 1942), longtime voice of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway and the Indianapolis 500 car race as track announcer from 1946 to 2006.
* Donald Marolf (1984), theoretical physicist and professor at University of California, Santa Barbara; known for being one of the originators of the black hole firewall paradox.
* Chris Cissell (A.B., 1994), current head coach of women&#x27;s soccer at University of Missouri Kansas City. Former head coach of men&#x27;s soccer &amp; women&#x27;s soccer at William Jewell College. NSCAA/adidas NAIA Men&#x27;s National Coach of the Year in 2006.
* Russ Cline, co-founder of Eagle Pro Box Lacrosse League (now called National Lacrosse League), owner of Philadelphia Wings
* Earl Thomas Coleman, Republican congressman from Missouri, 1977–1993
* Jim Davis, actor, portrayed Jock Ewing on &quot;Dallas&quot; TV series
* Connie Dover, Celtic and American music folk singer, songwriter
* Homer Drew, head basketball coach at Valparaiso University
* Zel Fischer, Missouri Supreme Court Judge
* James B. Graham, former Kentucky Auditor of Public Accounts and former Kentucky Superintendent of Public Instruction
*William Hardin Harrison, US Army general
* Larry Holley, former basketball coach at Central Methodist University and Northwest Missouri State University and former head coach at William Jewell College. Has the ninth most wins in college basketball. 
* James J. Jenkins American psychologist
* Brian Knight Major League Baseball Umpire since 2011
* Dan Lanning, Head football coach, University of Oregon
* Gatewood Lincoln, 19th and 22nd Governor of American Samoa (only attended, did not graduate) 
* Don Page (BA 1971), theoretical physicist at the University of Alberta.
* David Ring, motivational speaker with cerebral palsy
* Roy Sanders, former professional baseball player
* Bill Snyder (A.B., 1962), head American football coach for Kansas State University, 1989–2005; 2009–2018
* Josephine L. Staton, United States federal district judge on the United States District Court for the Central District of California
* Orvar Swenson (1933), pediatric surgeon
* Terry Teachout, biographer, playwright, opera librettist, drama critic for the &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;, and critic-at-large of &quot;Commentary&quot;
* JD Gravina (B.S. 2000), Head Women&#x27;s Basketball Coach at Western Illinois University

==References==
==External links==
* Athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3307837" start="0" end="22" title="William Jewell College" label="William Jewell College"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="28" end="35" title="Private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540832" start="36" end="56" title="Liberal arts colleges in the United States" label="liberal arts college"/>
<link wikidata="Q959398" start="60" end="77" title="Liberty, Missouri" label="Liberty, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="144" end="151" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013576" start="191" end="205" title="William Jewell (educator)" label="William Jewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758323" start="466" end="476" title="Higher education accreditation in the United States" label="accredited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739633" start="484" end="510" title="Higher Learning Commission" label="Higher Learning Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013576" start="567" end="581" title="William Jewell (educator)" label="William Jewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q59670" start="651" end="669" title="Columbia, Missouri" label="Columbia, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q963325" start="702" end="721" title="Boonville, Missouri" label="Boonville, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q881051" start="749" end="775" title="Alexander William Doniphan" label="Alexander William Doniphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1021" end="1039" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293850" start="1051" end="1068" title="Battle of Liberty" label="Battle of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q27889424" start="1099" end="1110" title="Jewell Hall" label="Jewell Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="1126" end="1134" title="hospital" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1167" end="1185" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="1248" end="1284" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q28007832" start="1298" end="1319" title="Mt. Memorial Cemetery" label="Mt. Memorial Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349474" start="1470" end="1485" title="Robert S. James" label="Robert S. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q213626" start="1497" end="1508" title="Jesse James" label="Jesse James"/>
<link wikidata="Q6234814" start="1851" end="1860" title="John Gano" label="John Gano"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="2101" end="2110" title="baptizing" label="baptizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="2111" end="2128" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="2136" end="2149" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="2161" end="2187" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="2350" end="2362" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37615" start="2608" end="2625" title="Luciano Pavarotti" label="Luciano Pavarotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="4602" end="4608" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="5728" end="5744" title="NCAA Division II" label="NCAA Division II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599490" start="5779" end="5808" title="Great Lakes Valley Conference" label="Great Lakes Valley Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692211" start="5917" end="5944" title="Heart of America Conference" label="Heart of America Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="5959" end="6008" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q22060312" start="6052" end="6083" title="Missouri College Athletic Union" label="Missouri College Athletic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013579" start="6278" end="6284" title="William Jewell Cardinals men&amp;#x27;s soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013578" start="6404" end="6410" title="William Jewell Cardinals women&amp;#x27;s soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6366991" start="6597" end="6614" title="Kappa Alpha Order" label="Kappa Alpha Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481107" start="6651" end="6667" title="Lambda Chi Alpha" label="Lambda Chi Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085573" start="6703" end="6718" title="Phi Gamma Delta" label="Phi Gamma Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735037" start="6779" end="6796" title="Alpha Gamma Delta" label="Alpha Gamma Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254785" start="6837" end="6847" title="Delta Zeta" label="Delta Zeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069727" start="6881" end="6895" title="Zeta Tau Alpha" label="Zeta Tau Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009486" start="6951" end="6962" title="Cyrus Avery" label="Cyrus Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865943" start="7025" end="7047" title="Eugene Monroe Bartlett" label="Eugene Monroe Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216519" start="7122" end="7136" title="Daniel Belcher" label="Daniel Belcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="7138" end="7144" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346303" start="7173" end="7194" title="Edwin Charles Boulton" label="Edwin Charles Boulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="7196" end="7200" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="A.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="7211" end="7217" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="7225" end="7248" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q434078" start="7251" end="7262" title="Nancy Boyda" label="Nancy Boyda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="7367" end="7373" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760872" start="7387" end="7401" title="Hilary A. Bush" label="Hilary A. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q41410497" start="7444" end="7458" title="Greg Canuteson" label="Greg Canuteson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159729" start="7511" end="7525" title="Robin Carnahan" label="Robin Carnahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590530" start="7527" end="7554" title="Missouri Secretary of State" label="Missouri Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815213" start="7568" end="7580" title="Tom Carnegie" label="Tom Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294808" start="7716" end="7729" title="Donald Marolf" label="Donald Marolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="7738" end="7759" title="Theoretical physics" label="theoretical physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="7777" end="7816" title="University of California, Santa Barbara" label="University of California, Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452017" start="7864" end="7891" title="Firewall (physics)" label="black hole firewall paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106161" start="7895" end="7908" title="Chris Cissell" label="Chris Cissell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="7910" end="7914" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="A.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="8036" end="8042" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="8062" end="8068" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978474" start="8096" end="8101" title="NSCAA" label="NSCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="8102" end="8108" title="adidas" label="adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="8109" end="8113" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="NAIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381113" start="8163" end="8173" title="Russ Cline" label="Russ Cline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277177" start="8288" end="8307" title="Earl Thomas Coleman" label="Earl Thomas Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="8337" end="8345" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q505916" start="8359" end="8368" title="Jim Davis (actor)" label="Jim Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945153" start="8432" end="8444" title="Connie Dover" label="Connie Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890009" start="8498" end="8508" title="Homer Drew" label="Homer Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q186047" start="8535" end="8556" title="Valparaiso University" label="Valparaiso University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068683" start="8559" end="8570" title="Zel Fischer" label="Zel Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493768" start="8572" end="8594" title="Missouri Supreme Court" label="Missouri Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q109284238" start="8603" end="8618" title="James B. Graham" label="James B. Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q130348466" start="8674" end="8719" title="Kentucky Superintendent of Public Instruction" label="Kentucky Superintendent of Public Instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16093789" start="8721" end="8744" title="William Hardin Harrison" label="William Hardin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490515" start="8764" end="8776" title="Larry Holley" label="Larry Holley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061424" start="8805" end="8833" title="Central Methodist University" label="Central Methodist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060123" start="8838" end="8873" title="Northwest Missouri State University" label="Northwest Missouri State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136696" start="8973" end="8989" title="James J. Jenkins" label="James J. Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964366" start="9014" end="9026" title="Brian Knight" label="Brian Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q98321763" start="9069" end="9080" title="Dan Lanning" label="Dan Lanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408800" start="9126" end="9142" title="Gatewood Lincoln" label="Gatewood Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q888821" start="9158" end="9184" title="Governor of American Samoa" label="Governor of American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035873" start="9222" end="9230" title="Don Page (physicist)" label="Don Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q640694" start="9271" end="9292" title="University of Alberta" label="University of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239070" start="9296" end="9306" title="David Ring" label="David Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q210427" start="9334" end="9348" title="cerebral palsy" label="cerebral palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373333" start="9351" end="9362" title="Roy Sanders (National League pitcher)" label="Roy Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910936" start="9402" end="9413" title="Bill Snyder" label="Bill Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="9433" end="9450" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q31249" start="9461" end="9484" title="Kansas State University" label="Kansas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288441" start="9509" end="9528" title="Josephine L. Staton" label="Josephine L. Staton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006696" start="9530" end="9566" title="United States federal judge" label="United States federal district judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889764" start="9574" end="9641" title="United States District Court for the Central District of California" label="United States District Court for the Central District of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q62059926" start="9644" end="9657" title="Orvar Swenson" label="Orvar Swenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705074" start="9686" end="9700" title="Terry Teachout" label="Terry Teachout"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="9771" end="9790" title="Wall Street Journal" label="Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115290" start="9827" end="9837" title="Commentary (magazine)" label="Commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q23771692" start="9846" end="9856" title="JD Gravina" label="JD Gravina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474005" start="9908" end="9935" title="Western Illinois University" label="Western Illinois University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426178" wikidata="Q7640852" url="?curid=426178" title="Sunnyside, Newfoundland and Labrador">
<text>Sunnyside is a town on the Avalon Peninsula in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. It is in Division 1 on Bull Arm.

==History==
===Early history===
The town of Sunnyside stretches for about five miles along the shore of Trinity Bay, also known as Bull Arm. Sunnyside is believed to have been once inhabited by the native people of Newfoundland known as the Beothuk, discovered by the explorer John Guy. After a few hundred years, the area was settled by the ancestors, of many of the families living there today. Those families were involved in developing the economy of Sunnyside by beginning the fishery, logging, and mining industries in the community. With the creation of those industries, the population has increased over the years resulting in Sunnyside as it is known today.

The USS Niagara landed the first successful Transatlantic Telegraph Cable here in Sunnyside on August 5, 1858. Sunnyside was then Known as &quot;Bay Bulls Arm. During the period in which the cable operated, between Aug 9 and October 20, 1858, 732 messages were sent through the cable station here in Sunnyside. One of the first official messages sent was a congratulatory message from Queen Victoria to US President James Buchanan on the success of the First Transatlantic Cable.

Before the town of Sunnyside was even settled, explorer John Guy, in the year of 1612, &quot;to the north near the present Sunnyside he found a group of natives…&quot; (Rockwood, 1992) According to the Newfoundland and Labrador Heritage website, &quot;The Beothuks are the aboriginal people of the island of Newfoundland. They were Algonkian-speaking hunter-gatherers who probably numbered less than a thousand people at the time of European contact.&quot; (Pastore, 1997) Prior to the area being known as Sunnyside, John Guy had named the area Truce Sound in honour of the good relations established with the Beothuk.

As the area was first settled, it was known as Bottom of Bay Bulls Arm. There were other related settlements nearby like Centre Cove. The area was known as Bay Bulls Arm for some time and then changed to Bull Arm. The reason for the change was likely because there is another town known as Bay Bulls. The first permanent settlers to the community were the Snooks from the nearby community of New Perlican. The current name of Sunnyside came from a former school teacher who said &quot;…the spot of sun which seems always to shine on that tiny section of Trinity Bay.&quot;(Rockwood, 1992)

===19th century to present===
By the mid 19th century, the community was made up of full fisherman and loggers. During that time, working in the saw-mill was an important job but due to a fire in the community, most of the standing timber was destroyed. The pulpwood drive was also an important form of employment and Morgan Snook was the foreman of the Main River and Badger drive. Fishing was a small part of the economy, but people from other Trinity Bay communities came to Bay Bulls Arm to fish.

&quot;In 1921, the population had reached 337, and the town name had officially been changed to Sunnyside.&quot; (Hike Discovery, para. 3) By the 1930s the population in the community had reached its peak of 399 citizens. The population by the 1950s had declined to 228 people. After that time, the population grew steadily over the years until reaching a high population of 726, later decreasing to 634 by 1986.

Over the years many of the citizens of Sunnyside could be found in road construction and other large construction projects. The oil refinery, located in Come By Chance, is a source of employment for many Sunnyside residents. Along with the oil refinery, many of the residents were once employed by working on the Hibernia Oil Platform project, which was located right in their own backyards. &quot;One of the five super modules, the wellhead module, was built at the Bull Arm construction site in Newfoundland. The other four super modules were constructed outside Canada (two in Italy and two in Korea) and shipped to Bull Arm in May and June of 1995 where they were welded together to form one integrated unit.&quot; (Hibernia, para. 10)

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Sunnyside had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

==See also==
* List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador

== References ==

* Discovery Trail – Hike Discovery, the.(n.d.). Retrieved February 10, 2009, from http://www.thediscoverytrail.org/english/hikediscovery/index.html Hibernia.(n.d.). Retrieved February 10, 2009, from https://web.archive.org/web/20090220200226/http://www.hibernia.ca/index2.html
* Pastore, Ralph. (1997). Aboriginal Peoples: The Beothuks: Newfoundland and Labrador Heritage. Retrieved February 10, 2009, from http://www.heritage.nf.ca/aboriginal/beothuk.html.
* Rockwood, Walter. (1992). Come Home Year Book. Sunnyside, NL.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7640852" start="0" end="9" title="Sunnyside, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Sunnyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="15" end="19" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q790092" start="27" end="43" title="Avalon Peninsula" label="Avalon Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="47" end="72" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303397" start="91" end="101" title="Division 1, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996540" start="105" end="113" title="Bull Arm" label="Bull Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q661423" start="357" end="364" title="Beothuk" label="Beothuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236654" start="393" end="401" title="John Guy (colonial administrator)" label="John Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="1170" end="1184" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="1201" end="1215" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q361047" start="1244" end="1263" title="Transatlantic communications cable" label="Transatlantic Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q15068812" start="2278" end="2290" title="New Perlican" label="New Perlican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274444" start="2440" end="2451" title="Trinity Bay (Newfoundland and Labrador)" label="Trinity Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q24412" start="3705" end="3734" title="Hibernia oil field" label="Hibernia Oil Platform project"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="4159" end="4184" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="4198" end="4215" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134052" start="4409" end="4462" title="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador" label="List of cities and towns in Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151169" start="4968" end="4982" title="Come Home Year" label="Come Home Year"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426184" wikidata="Q118781" url="?curid=426184" title="Chrysotile">
<text>Chrysotile or white asbestos is the most commonly encountered form of asbestos, accounting for approximately 95% of the asbestos in the United States and a similar proportion in other countries. It is a soft, fibrous silicate mineral in the serpentine subgroup of phyllosilicates; as such, it is distinct from other asbestiform minerals in the amphibole group. Its idealized chemical formula is Mg(SiO)(OH). The material has physical properties which make it desirable for inclusion in building materials, but poses serious health risks when dispersed into air and inhaled.

==Polytypes==
Three polytypes of chrysotile are known. These are very difficult to distinguish in hand specimens, and polarized light microscopy must normally be used. Some older publications refer to chrysotile as a group of minerals—the three polytypes listed below, and sometimes pecoraite as well—but the 2006 recommendations of the International Mineralogical Association prefer to treat it as a single mineral with a certain variation in its naturally occurring forms.

Clinochrysotile is the most common of the three forms, found notably at Val-des-Sources, Quebec, Canada. Its two measurable refractive indices tend to be lower than those of the other two forms. The orthorhombic paratypes may be distinguished by the fact that, for orthochrysotile, the higher of the two observable refractive indices is measured parallel to the long axis of the fibres (as for clinochrysotile); whereas for parachrysotile the higher refractive index is measured perpendicular to the long axis of the fibres.

== Physical properties ==

Bulk chrysotile has a hardness similar to a human fingernail and is easily crumbled to fibrous strands composed of smaller bundles of fibrils. Naturally-occurring fibre bundles range in length from several millimetres to more than ten centimetres, although industrially-processed chrysotile usually has shorter fibre bundles. The diameter of the fibre bundles is 0.1–1 μm, and the individual fibrils are even finer, 0.02–0.03 μm, each fibre bundle containing tens or hundreds of fibrils.

Chrysotile fibres have considerable tensile strength, and may be spun into thread and woven into cloth. They are also resistant to heat and are excellent thermal, electrical and acoustic insulators.

== Chemical properties ==
The idealized chemical formula of chrysotile is Mg(SiO)(OH), although some of the magnesium ions may be replaced by iron or other cations. Substitution of the hydroxide ions for fluoride, oxide or chloride is also known, but rarer. A related, but much rarer, mineral is pecoraite, in which all the magnesium cations of chrysotile are substituted by nickel cations.

Chrysotile is resistant to even strong bases (asbestos is thus stable in high pH pore water of Portland cement), but when the fibres are attacked by acids, the magnesium ions are selectively dissolved, leaving a silica skeleton. It is thermally stable up to around , at which temperature it starts to dehydrate. Dehydration is complete at about , with the final products being forsterite (magnesium silicate), silica and water.

The global mass balance reaction of the chrysotile dehydration can be written as follows:
:&lt;chem&gt;\overset{Chrysotile\ (serpentine)}{2Mg3Si2O5(OH)4} -&gt;[{750^\circ C}] [{dehydration}] \overset{Forsterite}{3Mg2SiO4} + \overset{silica}{SiO2} + \overset{water}{4H2O}&lt;/chem&gt;
The chrysotile (serpentine) dehydration reaction corresponds to the reverse of the forsterite (Mg-olivine) hydrolysis in the presence of dissolved silica (silicic acid).

== Applications ==
Previously, in the 1990s it was used in asbestos-cement products (like pipes and sheets).

Magnesium sulfate (MgSO4) may be produced by treating chrysotile with sulfuric acid (H2SO4).

== Safety concerns ==
Chrysotile has been included with other forms of asbestos in being classified as a human carcinogen by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) and by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. These state that &quot;Asbestos exposure is associated with parenchymal asbestosis, asbestos-related pleural abnormalities, peritoneal mesothelioma, and lung cancer, and it may be associated with cancer at some extra-thoracic sites&quot;. In other scientific publications, epidemiologists have published peer-reviewed scientific papers establishing that chrysotile is the main cause of pleural mesothelioma.

Chrysotile has been recommended for inclusion in the Rotterdam Convention on Prior Informed Consent, an international treaty that restricts the global trade in hazardous materials. If listed, exports of chrysotile would only be permitted to countries that explicitly consent to imports. Canada, a major producer of the mineral, has been harshly criticized by the Canadian Medical Association for its opposition to including chrysotile in the convention.

According to EU Regulation 1907/2006 (REACH) the marketing and use of chrysotile, and of products containing chrysotile, are prohibited.

As of March 2024, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency finalized regulations banning imports of chrysotile asbestos (effective immediately) due to its link to lung cancer and mesothelioma. However, the new rules can allow up to a dozen years to phase out the use of chrysotile asbestos in some manufacturing facilities. The long phase-out period was a result of a strong lobby by Olin Corporation, a major chemical manufacturer, as well as trade groups like the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the American Chemistry Council. Chrysotile asbestos is now banned in more than 50 other countries.

==Critics of safety regulations==

===1990s: Canada-European dispute GATT dispute===
In May 1998, Canada requested consultations before the WTO and the European Commission concerning France&#x27;s 1996 prohibition of the importation and sale of all forms of asbestos. Canada said that the French measures contravened provisions of the Agreements on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and on Technical Barriers to Trade, and the GATT 1994. The EC claimed that safer substitute materials existed to take the place of asbestos. It stressed that the French measures were not discriminatory under the terms of international trade treaties, and were fully justified for public health reasons. The EC further claimed that in the July consultations, it had tried to convince Canada that the measures were justified, and that just as Canada broke off consultations, it (the EC) was in the process of submitting substantial scientific data in favour of the asbestos ban.

===2000s: Canadian exports face mounting global criticism===
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the Government of Canada continued to claim that chrysotile was much less dangerous than other types of asbestos. Chrysotile continued to be used in new construction across Canada, in ways that are very similar to those for which chrysotile was exported. Similarly, Natural Resources Canada once stated that chrysotile, one of the fibres that make up asbestos, was not as dangerous as once thought. According to a fact sheet from 2003, &quot;current knowledge and modern technology can successfully control the potential for health and environmental harm posed by chrysotile&quot;. The Chrysotile Institute, an association partially funded by the Canadian government, also prominently asserted that the use of chrysotile did not pose an environmental problem and the inherent risks in its use were limited to the workplace.

However, under increasing criticism by environmental groups, in May, 2012, the Canadian government stopped funding the Chrysotile Institute. As a result, the Chrysotile Institute has now closed.

The Canadian government continues to draw both domestic and international criticism for its stance on chrysotile, most recently in international meetings about the Rotterdam Convention hearings regarding chrysotile. The CFMEU pointed out that most exports go to developing countries. Canada has pressured countries, including Chile, and other UN member states to avoid chrysotile bans.

In September 2012, governments in Quebec and Canada ended official support for Canada&#x27;s last asbestos mine in Asbestos, Quebec, now renamed as Val-des-Sources.

==See also==
* Erionite
* Antigorite

==References==
==External links==
* The Chrysotile Institute
* &quot;Asbestos-containing Floor Tile and Mastic Abatement: Is there Enough Exposure to Cause Asbestos-related Disease?&quot;
* Deer William Alexander, Howie Robert Andrew, Zussman Jack, &quot;An introduction to the rock-forming minerals&quot;, , OCLC 183009096 pp. 344–352, 1992
* Ledoux, RL (ed), &quot;Short course in mineralogical techniques of asbestos determination&quot;, Mineralogical Association of Canada, pp. 35–73, 185, 1979.
* http://www.microlabgallery.com/ChrysotileFile.aspx Photomicrographs of parachrysotile and clinochrysotile
* Nolan, RP, Langer AM, Ross M, Wicks FJ, Martin RF (eds), &quot;The health effects of chrysotile asbestos&quot;, &quot;The Canadian Mineralogist&quot;, Special Publication 5, 2001.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q118781" start="0" end="10" title="Chrysotile" label="Chrysotile"/>
<link wikidata="Q118781" start="14" end="28" title="Chrysotile" label="white asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="70" end="78" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q178977" start="217" end="233" title="silicate mineral" label="silicate mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q335249" start="241" end="260" title="serpentine subgroup" label="serpentine subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q178977" start="264" end="278" title="phyllosilicate" label="phyllosilicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17159" start="344" end="359" title="amphibole group" label="amphibole group"/>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="375" end="391" title="chemical formula" label="chemical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="395" end="397" title="Magnesium" label="Mg"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="398" end="400" title="Silicon" label="Si"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="400" end="401" title="Oxygen" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q425597" start="403" end="405" title="Hydroxide" label="OH"/>
<link wikidata="Q907364" start="595" end="603" title="polytype" label="polytype"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="693" end="708" title="polarized light" label="polarized light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074953" start="709" end="719" title="microscopy" label="microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898535" start="858" end="867" title="pecoraite" label="pecoraite"/>
<link wikidata="Q268771" start="912" end="951" title="International Mineralogical Association" label="International Mineralogical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q48785" start="1123" end="1146" title="Val-des-Sources, Quebec" label="Val-des-Sources, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1148" end="1154" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="1175" end="1193" title="Refractive index" label="refractive indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q36864" start="1654" end="1664" title="fingernail" label="fingernail"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="1973" end="1975" title="micrometre" label="μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="2129" end="2145" title="tensile strength" label="tensile strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="2333" end="2349" title="chemical formula" label="chemical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="2367" end="2369" title="Magnesium" label="Mg"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="2370" end="2372" title="Silicon" label="Si"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="2372" end="2373" title="Oxygen" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q425597" start="2375" end="2377" title="Hydroxide" label="OH"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="2401" end="2410" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="2435" end="2439" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="2449" end="2456" title="cations" label="cations"/>
<link wikidata="Q425597" start="2478" end="2487" title="hydroxide" label="hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q44793182" start="2497" end="2505" title="fluoride" label="fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="2507" end="2512" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q44791900" start="2516" end="2524" title="chloride" label="chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898535" start="2589" end="2598" title="pecoraite" label="pecoraite"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="2668" end="2674" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="2789" end="2795" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="2897" end="2903" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183091" start="2986" end="2995" title="Dehydration (chemistry)" label="dehydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q415037" start="3062" end="3072" title="forsterite" label="forsterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="3496" end="3503" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="3545" end="3551" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457481" start="3553" end="3565" title="silicic acid" label="silicic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q288266" start="3679" end="3696" title="Magnesium sulfate" label="Magnesium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="3749" end="3762" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="3844" end="3852" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="3884" end="3894" title="carcinogen" label="carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q552168" start="3902" end="3945" title="International Agency for Research on Cancer" label="International Agency for Research on Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="3964" end="4008" title="United States Department of Health and Human Services" label="U.S. Department of Health and Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q664174" start="4082" end="4092" title="asbestosis" label="asbestosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192398" start="4111" end="4118" title="Pleural cavity" label="pleural"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168876" start="4134" end="4157" title="peritoneal mesothelioma" label="peritoneal mesothelioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="4163" end="4174" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9645" start="4227" end="4235" title="Chest" label="thoracic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4396" end="4416" title="Mesothelioma#Pleural mesothelioma" label="pleural mesothelioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q94947" start="4472" end="4518" title="Rotterdam Convention" label="Rotterdam Convention on Prior Informed Consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="4706" end="4712" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867874" start="4782" end="4810" title="Canadian Medical Association" label="Canadian Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q221143" start="4912" end="4917" title="Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals" label="REACH"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="5034" end="5070" title="U.S. Environmental Protection Agency" label="U.S. Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="5175" end="5186" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077603" start="5191" end="5203" title="mesothelioma" label="mesothelioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086908" start="5396" end="5412" title="Olin Corporation" label="Olin Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800288" start="5478" end="5502" title="U.S. Chamber of Commerce" label="U.S. Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743356" start="5511" end="5537" title="American Chemistry Council" label="American Chemistry Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="5747" end="5750" title="WTO" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="5759" end="5778" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693808" start="5942" end="5991" title="Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures" label="Agreements on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q194284" start="6036" end="6040" title="GATT" label="GATT"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="6670" end="6690" title="Government of Canada" label="Government of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q94947" start="7851" end="7871" title="Rotterdam Convention" label="Rotterdam Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128334" start="7907" end="7912" title="Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union" label="CFMEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="8013" end="8018" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q48785" start="8189" end="8205" title="Asbestos, Quebec" label="Asbestos, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q48785" start="8222" end="8237" title="Val-des-Sources" label="Val-des-Sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q415108" start="8255" end="8263" title="Erionite" label="Erionite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252850" start="8266" end="8276" title="Antigorite" label="Antigorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750099" start="8533" end="8577" title="An introduction to the rock-forming minerals" label="An introduction to the rock-forming minerals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426185" wikidata="Q5284465" url="?curid=426185" title="Division No. 7, Subdivision M, Newfoundland and Labrador">
<text>Division No. 7, Subdivision M is an unorganised subdivision in eastern Newfoundland, Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. It is in Division No. 7 on Trinity Bay.

According to the 2016 Statistics Canada Census:
*Population: 1,966
*% Change (2011-2016): -4.3
*Dwellings: 1,183
*Area (km2.): 454.42
*Density (persons per km2.): 4.3

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5284465" start="0" end="29" title="Division No. 7, Subdivision M, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division No. 7, Subdivision M"/>
<link wikidata="Q48335" start="71" end="83" title="Newfoundland (island)" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="85" end="110" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712119" start="129" end="143" title="Division No. 7, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Division No. 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274444" start="147" end="158" title="Trinity Bay, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Trinity Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="183" end="200" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426188" wikidata="Q2125866" url="?curid=426188" title="Radioallergosorbent test">
<text>A radioallergosorbent test (RAST) is a blood test using radioimmunoassay test to detect specific IgE antibodies in order to determine the substances a subject is allergic to. This is different from a skin allergy test, which determines allergy by the reaction of a person&#x27;s skin to different substances.

==Medical uses==
The two most commonly used methods of confirming allergen sensitization are skin testing and allergy blood testing. Both methods are recommended by the NIH guidelines and have similar diagnostic value in terms of sensitivity and specificity.

Advantages of the allergy blood test range from: excellent reproducibility across the full measuring range of the calibration curve, it has very high specificity as it binds to allergen specific IgE, and extremely sensitive too, when compared with skin prick testing. In general, this method of blood testing (in-vitro, out of body) vs skin-prick testing (in-vivo, in body) has a major advantage: it is not always necessary to remove the patient from an antihistamine medication regimen, and if the skin conditions (such as eczema) are so widespread that allergy skin testing cannot be done. Allergy blood tests, such as ImmunoCAP, are performed without procedure variations, and the results are of excellent standardization.

Adults and children of any age can take an allergy blood test. For babies and very young children, a single needle stick for allergy blood testing is often more gentle than several skin tests. However, skin testing techniques have improved. Most skin testing does not involve needles and typically skin testing results in minimal patient discomfort.

Drawbacks to RAST and ImmunoCAP techniques do exist. Compared to skin testing, ImmunoCAP and other RAST techniques take longer to perform and are less cost effective. Several studies have also found these tests to be less sensitive than skin testing for the detection of clinically relevant allergies. False positive results may be obtained due to cross-reactivity of homologous proteins or by cross-reactive carbohydrate determinants (CCDs).

In the NIH food guidelines issued in December 2010 it was stated that &quot;The predictive values associated with clinical evidence of allergy for ImmunoCAP cannot be applied to other test methods.&quot; With over 4000 scientific articles using ImmunoCAP and showing its clinical value, ImmunoCAP is perceived as &quot;Gold standard&quot; for in vitro IgE testing

==Method==
The RAST is a radioimmunoassay test to detect specific IgE antibodies to suspected or known allergens for the purpose of guiding a diagnosis about allergy. IgE is the antibody associated with Type I allergic response: for example, if a person exhibits a high level of IgE directed against pollen, the test may indicate the person is allergic to pollen (or pollen-like) proteins. A person who has outgrown an allergy may still have a positive IgE years after exposure.

The suspected allergen is bound to an insoluble material and the patient&#x27;s serum is added. If the serum contains antibodies to the allergen, those antibodies will bind to the allergen. Radiolabeled anti-human IgE antibody is added where it binds to those IgE antibodies already bound to the insoluble material. The unbound anti-human IgE antibodies are washed away. The amount of radioactivity is proportional to the serum IgE for the allergen.

RASTs are often used to test for allergies when:
* a physician advises against the discontinuation of medications that can interfere with test results or cause medical complications;
* a patient has severe skin conditions such as widespread eczema or
* a patient has such a high sensitivity level to suspected allergens that any administration of those allergens might result in potentially serious side effects.

==Scale==

The RAST is scored on a scale from 0 to 6:
== History ==
The market-leading RAST methodology was invented and marketed in 1974 by Pharmacia Diagnostics AB, Uppsala, Sweden, and the acronym RAST is actually a brand name. In 1989, Pharmacia Diagnostics AB replaced it with a superior test named the ImmunoCAP Specific IgE blood test, which literature may also describe as: CAP RAST, CAP FEIA (fluorenzymeimmunoassay), and Pharmacia CAP. A review of applicable quality assessment programs shows that this new test has replaced the original RAST in approximately 80% of the world&#x27;s commercial clinical laboratories, where specific IgE testing is performed. The newest version, the ImmunoCAP Specific IgE 0–100, is the only specific IgE assay to receive FDA approval to quantitatively report to its detection limit of 0.1kU/L. This clearance is based on the CLSI/NCCLS-17A Limits of Detection and Limits of Quantitation, October 2004 guideline.The guidelines for diagnosis and management of food allergy issues by the National Institute of Health state that:

In 2010 the United States National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases recommended that the RAST measurements of specific immunoglobulin E for the diagnosis of allergy be abandoned in favor of testing with more sensitive fluorescence enzyme-labeled assays.

==See also==
* Prausnitz-Küstner test
* Skin allergy test

==References==
==External links==
* Allergies - Americal Academy of Allergy Asthma and Immunology
* Allergy Blood Testing - Lab Tests Online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2125866" start="2" end="26" title="Radioallergosorbent test" label="radioallergosorbent test"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125866" start="28" end="32" title="Radioallergosorbent test" label="RAST"/>
<link wikidata="Q857638" start="56" end="77" title="radioimmunoassay test" label="radioimmunoassay test"/>
<link wikidata="Q79455" start="97" end="100" title="Immunoglobulin E" label="IgE"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="162" end="170" title="allergy" label="allergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q641267" start="200" end="217" title="skin allergy test" label="skin allergy test"/>
<link wikidata="Q229256" start="1094" end="1100" title="eczema" label="eczema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760689" start="1996" end="2012" title="cross-reactivity" label="cross-reactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349355" start="2042" end="2082" title="cross-reactive carbohydrate determinants" label="cross-reactive carbohydrate determinants"/>
<link wikidata="Q857638" start="2482" end="2503" title="radioimmunoassay test" label="radioimmunoassay test"/>
<link wikidata="Q79455" start="2523" end="2526" title="Immunoglobulin E" label="IgE"/>
<link wikidata="Q186752" start="2560" end="2568" title="allergen" label="allergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="2635" end="2643" title="antibody" label="antibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941165" start="2660" end="2684" title="Type I hypersensitivity" label="Type I allergic response"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="2757" end="2763" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346149" start="3548" end="3569" title="Complication (medicine)" label="medical complications"/>
<link wikidata="Q229256" start="3629" end="3635" title="eczema" label="eczema"/>
<link wikidata="Q898992" start="3943" end="3967" title="Pharmacia" label="Pharmacia Diagnostics AB"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4204" end="4226" title="fluorenzymeimmunoassay" label="fluorenzymeimmunoassay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519875" start="4899" end="4952" title="National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases" label="National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q838244" start="5155" end="5177" title="Prausnitz-Küstner test" label="Prausnitz-Küstner test"/>
<link wikidata="Q641267" start="5180" end="5197" title="Skin allergy test" label="Skin allergy test"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426193" wikidata="Q380127" url="?curid=426193" title="Tony Stewart">
<text>Anthony Wayne Stewart (born May 20, 1971), nicknamed &quot;Smoke&quot;, is an American semi-retired professional stock car racing driver, and former NASCAR team co-owner of Stewart-Haas Racing. He also competes in NHRA. He is a four-time NASCAR Cup Series champion, winning two as a driver (2002, 2005), one as owner/driver (2011), and one as an owner (2014).

Throughout his racing career, Stewart has won racing titles in Indy, midget, sprint, and USAC Silver Crown cars. He is the only driver in history to win a championship in both IndyCar and NASCAR. Stewart became known for his hot temper and for his sarcasm with the media.

He last competed full-time in the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series (now known as the NASCAR Cup Series) during the 2016 season, driving the No. 14 Chevrolet SS for his team, Stewart-Haas Racing, under crew chief Mike Bugarewicz. From 1999 to 2008, he drove the No. 20 Joe Gibbs Racing car, under crew chief Greg Zipadelli with The Home Depot as the primary sponsor. While driving for car owner Joe Gibbs, Stewart won two Cup Series championships in 2002 and 2005. In 2011, Stewart became the first owner-driver since Alan Kulwicki to win the Cup Series championship. Stewart is the only driver to win the Cup Series championship under the old points system and the chase playoff format, and is the only driver to win the title under three different sponsorships (Winston in 2002, Nextel in 2005, and Sprint in 2011). He is also the first driver in the Cup Series to win the championship by a tiebreaker. On May 22, 2019, Stewart was voted into the NASCAR Hall of Fame, and on January 31, 2020, was inducted alongside the 11th Hall of Fame class. On November 21, 2021, he married NHRA Top Fuel Drag Racer Leah Pruett. He will replace Pruett in Top Fuel for the 2024 season as Pruett steps aside to start a family with Stewart.

==Racing career==
===Beginnings===
Tony Stewart got his first competitive go kart in Westport, Indiana in 1979. In 1980, he won his first championship. He grew up racing go karts and was successful very early, winning a World Karting Association championship in 1987. He moved up to the United Midget Racing Association (UMRA) where he raced TQ (three quarter) midgets until 1991 when he again moved up this time to the United States Auto Club (USAC) series with the help of one of his karting sponsors and friend Mark Dismore. Stewart was the USAC Rookie of the Year in 1991, USAC National Midget Series Champion in 1994 and 1995, and USAC Silver Crown Series champion in 1995.

===IndyCar and NASCAR Xfinity Series===

In 1995, Stewart became the first driver to win USAC&#x27;s version of the Triple Crown, earning championships in all three of USAC&#x27;s major divisions, National Midget, Sprint, and Silver Crown. His winning the Hut Hundred and 4 Crown Nationals were the highlights of the year. With the advent of the Indy Racing League (IRL), which intended to provide opportunities for grassroots racers, Stewart found his way into Indy car racing; after unsuccessful negotiations with A. J. Foyt Racing, he signed early in 1996 for Team Menard as a last-minute addition for the abridged three-race initial season. In his Indy car debut at Walt Disney World Speedway, Stewart led 37 laps and finished a close second to fellow rookie Buzz Calkins. He also led laps at Phoenix in the early stages before a myriad of pit stop woes and mechanical issues led to his early exit from the race.

For his Indianapolis 500 debut, he initially qualified on the outside of the front row, but the disqualification of Arie Luyendyk&#x27;s time and the death of his teammate Scott Brayton a week later propelled Stewart to the pole position. After leading 44 laps, his race ended before the halfway point due to a malfunctioning pop-off valve, which dropped him to 8th in the final point standings. When Stewart was not racing IndyCars, he raced stock cars, which he had signed to do beforehand. In 1996, he made his NASCAR Busch Series debut, driving for car owner Harry Rainer. In nine races, he had a best finish of 16th place. Stewart had more success in a one-time ride in the Truck Series with Mueller Brothers Racing, where he finished 10th.

Stewart was poised to improve his IRL standing in the 1996-97 season but at times he struggled to finish. He failed to finish the first three races of a ten-race schedule, but recovered to come in second at Phoenix. At that year&#x27;s Indy 500, Stewart&#x27;s car was good enough to enable him to win his first IRL race, leading 64 laps. However, he trailed off near the end of the race and settled for 5th place. He finally got his first career win at Pikes Peak, where he led all but seven laps of a 200 lap race. He became the leading contender for the series championship after a bad slump knocked points leader Davey Hamilton out of first place. Despite an average end to his season, finishing 7th, 14th, and 11th, and five DNFs, Stewart did just enough to beat Hamilton for the IRL title. He also raced in several midget events, finishing thirteenth and eleventh in the 1997 and 1998 USAC national points, and winning the Copper Classic both years. Between his time in USAC and the IRL, Stewart earned the nickname of &quot;Smoke&quot;, first for slipping the right rear tire during dirt races and then for blowing his engine often during his 1997 championship run.

As he had done the previous year, he raced a handful of Busch Series races in 1998. This time, he was racing for Joe Gibbs, NFL Hall of Fame head coach of the Washington Redskins, who was having major success with Bobby Labonte in the Winston Cup Series. When Stewart was able to finish races, he finished in the top 10 and had a 3rd-place finish at Charlotte. Stewart so impressed Gibbs that he was signed to drive the majority of the Busch schedule in 1998 to go along with a full-time IRL schedule. The double duty did not affect his performance in either series. In the IRL, he won twice and finished 3rd in the championship. His season was a disappointment as he finished last in the Indy 500 because of an engine failure.

On the Busch side, he finished in the top-five five times in 22 starts. He came close to winning his first Busch Series race at Rockingham, but was beaten on a last-lap pass by Matt Kenseth. Stewart finished a solid 2nd place in 2 (of 31) starts, ahead of six drivers with more starts, and had an average finish that was comparable to some of the series&#x27; top 10 finishers. Gibbs had enough confidence in Stewart that he was moved up to a Cup ride for the 1999 season. With that move, Stewart ended his three-year career as a full-time IRL driver.

After transitioning to the Cup level, Stewart continued racing in the Busch Series on a part-time basis. On August 16, 2005, Stewart was fined $5,000 and placed on probation until December 31 for hitting Brian Vickers after the completion of the Busch Series Zippo 200 at Watkins Glen. He was driving a Busch car owned by Kevin Harvick Incorporated at the time.

In 2013, Stewart renewed his RCR deal to drive the No. 33 Oreos/Ritz Chevrolet. He won the opening Nationwide Series event at Daytona, overtaking Regan Smith on the last lap, but his win was overshadowed by worry because Smith had been turned and in the resulting crash, Kyle Larson had flown into the catch fence, completely slicing off the front part of his car and injuring 28 spectators in the grandstands (2 critically). The next day in the Daytona 500, Stewart&#x27;s day ended on lap 35 when he was caught up in an early crash with Kevin Harvick and Kasey Kahne; this would allow him to finish 41st. He rebounded slightly with an 8th-place finish at Phoenix and an 11th-place finish in Las Vegas. At Bristol, Stewart blew his tire on lap 3 and cut a brake line; he came back out over 20 laps down, unable to contend for the victory.

In 2020, Stewart planned to make his return to the now-Xfinity Series for the Pennzoil 150 on the Indianapolis Motor Speedway&#x27;s road course, but plans were called off due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

===NASCAR Cup Series===
After competing part-time during the 1996 NASCAR Busch Series season with the team, Stewart had planned to move up to the Winston Cup Series in 1997 driving for Ranier-Walsh Racing; however the deal fell through when Stewart decided he was not yet ready for the move.

====Joe Gibbs Racing (1999–2008)====
=====1999 season=====
Stewart started his NASCAR Cup career in 1999 with a bang, as he qualified his No. 20 The Home Depot-sponsored Pontiac on the outside pole for the Daytona 500. He showed courage in one of the Gatorade Twin 125s when he was involved in a battle with Dale Earnhardt for the lead in the last laps. Though Earnhardt came out on top, Stewart had nonetheless impressed quite a few people with his performance. In the 500, Stewart ran near the front until problems with the car relegated him to a 28th-place finish.

Stewart spent most of his rookie season wowing people, as his car was often in the Top 5. He won a pair of pole positions at short tracks, and set a series record for wins by a rookie with three—Richmond, Phoenix, and Homestead—surpassing Davey Allison&#x27;s record set in 1987 (Stewart&#x27;s record would hold until 2002, when Jimmie Johnson tied the feat by winning three times; although Carl Edwards won four times in 2005, his first full Cup season, he was not regarded as a rookie by NASCAR standards because he had run more than ten Nextel Cup races in 2004). He finished his first Cup season with 3 wins, 12 top fives, 21 top tens, 2 poles, only 1 DNF, 1,226 laps led, a 10.26 average finish, and a 4th-place finish in the point standings, making it the highest points finish by a rookie in the modern era (which held until 2006 when his future teammate Denny Hamlin finished 3rd) and only bested by James Hylton, who finished 2nd as a first-timer in 1966. Not surprisingly, he ran away with the Winston Cup Rookie of the Year award.

Stewart also attempted to race on Memorial Day weekend, as he competed in both the Indy 500 during the day and the Coca-Cola 600 in Charlotte, N.C., at night. He finished in the Top 10 at both races: 9th in the 1999 Indianapolis 500 and 4th at Charlotte. However, he only completed of the scheduled 1,100, as he finished 4 laps down at Indianapolis.

=====2000 season=====

Stewart showed no signs of a sophomore slump in the 2000 NASCAR Winston Cup Series, winning a series-high six races (Martinsville, New Hampshire, Michigan, Homestead, and both Dover races). However, he fell to 6th place in the standings because of a handful of DNFs and an increase in the number of competitive drivers, among them his teammate Labonte, who won the Cup championship. Stewart also began to get some bad press for his on-track incidents. The best known of these came at Watkins Glen when he and Jeff Gordon tangled and crashed. Stewart made his displeasure toward Gordon known in an obscenity-laden tirade. Stewart won the Turkey Night Grand Prix midget car event at Irwindale, California, which he called, “one of his greatest wins ever.&quot;

=====2001 season=====
Stewart got off to a scary start for the 2001 season: during the Daytona 500, he was involved in an 18-car crash on lap 173. The crash began on the back straightaway and also collected Bobby Labonte and his brother Terry, Rusty Wallace, Steve Park, Jason Leffler, Jerry Nadeau, Buckshot Jones, Andy Houston, Ward Burton, Mark Martin, Kenny Wallace, Jeff Gordon, Elliott Sadler, Dale Jarrett, Jeff Burton, John Andretti, and Robby Gordon. Stewart took the worst of it, as his car turned backward after being hit by Ward Burton, pushed over Robby Gordon, then flipped twice in midair, hooked Bobby Labonte&#x27;s hood, and came to a stop in the infield. Stewart was transported to Halifax Medical Center after complaints of discomfort in his shoulder. Stewart&#x27;s crash was greatly overshadowed by Dale Earnhardt&#x27;s fatal crash on the last lap. Stewart recovered to win three more races at Richmond, Infineon, and Bristol and, as he had done before, he ran near the front most of the season. Statistically, he had a worse season than 2000, but he finished 2nd to Gordon in the final points standings.

For the second time, Stewart ran the &quot;Memorial Day Double&quot;, in spite of a 17-minute rain delay at Indianapolis. He finished sixth in the Indianapolis 500 and third in the Coca-Cola 600, running all of the two races.

The 2001 season was not without controversy. Jeff Gordon pulled a &quot;bump and run&quot; on Stewart to gain a better finishing position at Bristol and Stewart retaliated in a post-race incident by spinning Gordon out on pit road. Stewart was fined and placed on NASCAR probation. He got into much bigger trouble in the Pepsi 400 at Daytona, where he confronted a Winston Cup official after ignoring a black flag, which he had received for an illegal pass on Dave Blaney. In the same race, he had an incident with a &quot;Winston-Salem Journal&quot; reporter in which he kicked away a tape recorder. He confronted that same official during the Talladega race after he refused to wear a mandated head-and-neck restraint. Stewart was not allowed to practice until he wore one, and only managed to do so after his crew chief Greg Zipadelli intervened. Stewart&#x27;s fines and periods of probation resulting from these incidents have earned him a reputation of having a hot temper, and he became known as NASCAR&#x27;s &quot;bad boy&quot;.

=====2002 season: First Cup championship=====
Stewart started the 2002 season even more inauspiciously than last year&#x27;s, as the Daytona 500 lasted just two laps for him due to a blown engine. He went on to win twice early in the season at Atlanta and Richmond, but he was only seventh in the points standings at the season&#x27;s halfway point. At Darlington, Stewart was involved in a multi-car wreck in which Jimmy Spencer&#x27;s car t-boned Stewart&#x27;s car. While Stewart was sent to the hospital following the crash, he was able to start the next race at Bristol. Due to the injuries sustained at Darlington, he was relieved during the race by Todd Bodine. The second half of his season was plagued by an altercation with a photographer after the Brickyard 400. He was fined $50,000 by NASCAR and penalized with a 25-point deduction. However, despite the controversy, he went on to win the very next week at Watkins Glen. Strangely enough, this race also ended in controversy, when it was revealed that he had jumped the restart and, despite the infraction, officials upheld Stewart&#x27;s win. This win proved to be a turning point in Stewart&#x27;s season; he went on a hot streak following Watkins Glen, and despite not winning any more races that season his consistent top 10 finishes, combined with his rivals running into trouble, allowed him to claim the points lead at Talledega. At the end of the season, Stewart held off Mark Martin to win his first Winston Cup championship. This was Stewart&#x27;s last season driving a Pontiac.

=====2003 season=====
As the defending champion, Stewart managed to have a relatively incident-free 2003 season. Joe Gibbs Racing changed manufacturers, so he and Labonte were now driving Chevrolets instead of Pontiacs. Stewart had his worst Cup season at this point up until 2006, but it was still good enough for seventh in the points standings. He only won two races that season at Pocono and Charlotte but he led more laps than he did last year and was highly competitive in the final races of the season.

=====2004 season=====
In January 2004, Stewart teamed with Andy Wallace and Dale Earnhardt Jr. in a Boss Motorsports Chevrolet to take fourth in the 24 Hours of Daytona sports car endurance race. The result does not show the trio&#x27;s performance, however. They had dominated the race until the last two hours when the suspension cracked. With 15 minutes left in the race and Stewart driving, one of the rear wheels came off, finally ending their run. In addition to placing fourth overall, the trio placed third in the Daytona Prototype class.

Stewart started on a higher note in the 2004 season as he finished second in the Gatorade 125. In the Daytona 500, he and Dale Earnhardt Jr. both dominated the race, leading 156 laps overall (98 for Stewart). Stewart was in contention to win it, only to lose the lead to Earnhardt Jr. with 20 laps to go. That would be Stewart&#x27;s best finish in the Daytona 500.

At Infineon, Stewart was involved in an altercation with rookie driver Brian Vickers. On lap 88 of 110, Stewart got spun out by Vickers as retaliation for an earlier collision in the race. Stewart replied by confronting Vickers after the race and throwing a punch through Vickers&#x27; window. Stewart was fined $50,000, stripped of 25 driver &amp; owner points, and put on probation for the rest of 2004.

The season was highlighted with Stewart&#x27;s first win coming at Chicagoland. This win was not without controversy as on a mid-race restart, he turned Kasey Kahne into the wall, which eventually led to an altercation between his and Kahne&#x27;s pit crews. Stewart felt very sick during the race at Watkins Glen International and nearly withdrew from it due to food poisoning, stomach cramps, a headache, and a sinus infection. He ultimately relented and ran the race, dominating and holding off Canadian road ringer Ron Fellows for the win. He qualified fourth for the first-ever Chase for the NASCAR NEXTEL Cup. However, an incident at the first race of The Chase at Loudon ended his hopes of a second Cup championship. Stewart got collected in a multi-car crash, which started when Robby Gordon repaid Greg Biffle some retaliation, and Stewart t-boned Biffle. Stewart had to make repairs and lost three laps. He finished two laps down, causing him to lose his shot at his second championship. Gordon did not get off the hook however and was penalized with a $15,000 fine and a 50-point deduction for his actions.

After losing his bid for the championship title, Stewart finished sixth in the Nextel Cup point standings.

In November 2004, Stewart became the owner of one of the most legendary short tracks in America, Eldora Speedway. Located in New Weston, Ohio, Eldora is a half-mile dirt track known to many as &quot;Auto Racing&#x27;s Showcase Since 1954.&quot; Stewart began racing there in 1991 and continues racing in special events alongside other Sprint Cup drivers and dirt track legends.

=====2005 season: Second championship=====

2005 was one of Stewart&#x27;s most successful years in the Nextel Cup Series as he won his second Cup title. He won five races at Infineon, Daytona, New Hampshire, Watkins Glen (which gave him a sweep of the road course races for the year and a record 3 straight road course wins) and Indianapolis, his hometown track (in a race that Stewart said he would give up his championship to win, and took with it the No. 1 seed heading into NASCAR&#x27;s Chase for the Nextel Cup 10-race playoff).
Following his win in the Pepsi 400, Stewart began climbing the fence separating the fans from the race track after each victory, borrowing IndyCar Series driver Hélio Castroneves&#x27; trademark move. After winning the 2009 All-Star race, Stewart was quoted as saying &quot;I&#x27;m too damn fat to be climbing fences,&quot; and recently purchased $17,000 worth of exercise equipment to remedy the problem. It also led to sponsor The Home Depot cashing in on Stewart&#x27;s success with some promotions reminiscent of Stewart&#x27;s Eldora Speedway drivers. After his second full climb of the fence in Loudon, N.H., they ran a discount on ladders and fencing at the stores with a campaign named, &quot;Hey Tony, we&#x27;ve got ladders&quot;, where anyone who presented the advertisement in national newspapers in their stores earned the discount. After his victory in Indianapolis, The Home Depot presented fans who presented the advertisement of his Allstate 400 win with a discount on purchasing bricks. He mentioned in a press release from his sponsor, &quot;I plan to keep winning races and helping to drive down the cost of home improvement for The Home Depot customers.&quot;

On November 20, 2005, Stewart won his second Cup Championship, joining Jeff Gordon as the only active, full-time drivers at the time to have won multiple championships. Jimmie Johnson afterward did so from 2006 to 2010. In victory circle, Stewart had said that he loved winning his 2005 championship better than his 2002 one because his 2005 season was more well-behaved than 2002. At an age of 34, this made Stewart one of the youngest drivers to win multiple championships (with Johnson joining this category as he won his five straight titles while in his early 30s) and to date, he is still the only driver to have won championships under both the Chase and non-Chase formats. During the 2005 season, Stewart won a total of $13,578,168, including $6,173,633 for winning the championship, the largest season total in NASCAR history.

===== 2006 season: Championship hangover =====
Stewart&#x27;s 2006 season had up and down notes. He had competitive cars and scored early wins at Daytona and Martinsville. However, he also had strings of bad luck. He also suffered a shoulder injury due to two heavy crashes in both the Busch and Cup races at Charlotte during the Memorial Day Weekend races (Stewart&#x27;s Busch car hit the Turn 4 wall so hard it even knocked the rear end off the car). During the Dover race, he was substituted by Ricky Rudd and, in later weeks, had to drive in pain.

Additionally, he has once again been involved in several on-track controversies.

Following a rough Bud Shootout on February 12, Stewart expressed concern to the media about the possibility of aggressive driving resulting in the serious injury or death of a driver. It came during a week in which the racing world remembered the fifth anniversary of Dale Earnhardt&#x27;s death. Just a few days later, during the Daytona 500, Stewart was involved in several incidents with Jeff Gordon, Kyle Busch, and Matt Kenseth, whom he chased halfway across the track to run into the grass. &quot;He has no room to complain,&quot; Stewart said of his brush with Kenseth. &quot;He started it, and I finished it&quot;.

On May 20, during NASCAR&#x27;s All Star Race, Stewart and Kenseth wrecked again. Each driver claimed it was the other one&#x27;s fault with Stewart saying, &quot;if (Kenseth) thinks it&#x27;s my fault and I (caused the wreck) he&#x27;s screwed up in his head.&quot; Following the wreck, several media outlets proclaimed the new Stewart-Kenseth rivalry as must-see TV. The so-called rivalry was short-lived as Kenseth and Stewart participated as friends in a joint promotional tour for DeWalt and The Home Depot; Kenseth also appeared in September at Stewart&#x27;s Eldora Speedway in the NEXTEL PRELUDE with NASCAR drivers, as well as the ARCA Truck Series event there.

On July 1, Stewart dominated the Pepsi 400 but after a pit stop seemed like an unlikely contender for the win. However, Stewart amazed the audience when in the final 10 laps he drove from 14th up to second place, and passed Boris Said to take the lead and win. After the race, Stewart said he no longer wanted to climb the catch-fencing at Daytona because of the fans crowding him but he later changed his mind on that thought.

On July 23, Stewart once again was at the center of a media storm. On lap 31 of the Pennsylvania 500, Stewart was accidentally squeezed against the wall by Clint Bowyer. Stewart responded by waving his hand in anger, then purposely hitting Bowyer&#x27;s car. This contact sent Bowyer spinning down the front stretch where he collided with Carl Edwards. Stewart was promptly held one lap by NASCAR for rough driving. He did however pass leader Ryan Newman to get back on the lead lap and eventually rallied to finish 7th and get back in the top 10 in the point standings. After initially refusing to take responsibility for the incident he apologized the next day.

Stewart missed the cut to qualify for the 2006 Chase for the Nextel Cup by 16 points, becoming the first defending champion to miss the Chase the following year. He finished poorly at Richmond after wrecking his primary car in practice, and was displaced in the top ten by Kasey Kahne. As a result, he finished the 2006 season 11th in points, his worst thus far in his career, as he had completed each of his seven previous seasons in the top ten in points. Commenting on not being in the 2006 Chase, he says: &quot;It lets us have the ability to take chances and try things ... that we&#x27;ve been wanting to try but just haven&#x27;t had the luxury to do it. If we were in the Chase we wouldn&#x27;t have that ability&quot;. Stewart won three races in the 2006 Chase (Kansas, Atlanta, and Texas).

The season was not unkind to Stewart, however. He was a participant in the 30th season of IROC and won 2 of the 4 races (Texas, and the Daytona road course) on his way to capturing the series championship. He won a million dollars for the effort but made an offer to return his prize money if IROC would hold one of its events at his Eldora Speedway. This offer was not entertained as IROC folded in 2007. In addition, Stewart&#x27;s three wins in the Chase races gave him five total for the season, tying him with Jimmie Johnson and Kevin Harvick for second-most in Nextel Cup behind Kasey Kahne&#x27;s six.

=====2007 season=====

Stewart started the 2007 season by winning his second Chili Bowl Nationals midget car feature. Stewart started off the Daytona Speedweeks with a win in the 2007 Budweiser Shootout. It was his third win in the race. He also won his qualifying race for the Daytona 500.

On lap 152 of the Daytona 500, the rear of Stewart&#x27;s car slid up the track and, when he tried to cut down the track, he smacked the front of Kurt Busch&#x27;s car knocking both of them out of the race. Stewart and the Busch brothers (Kurt and Kyle) were the three leaders for the majority of the race.

On March 22, 2007, it was announced that Stewart would be on the cover of the official NASCAR video game &quot;NASCAR 08&quot;, published by Electronic Arts. This would be the third time this honor was given to Stewart (2001 &amp; 2003).

In his first Car of Tomorrow race with the Impala SS, Stewart was dominant at Bristol, leading 257 of 504 laps (green-white-checker finish), before he experienced a fuel pump problem. In his third Car of Tomorrow race at Phoenix, Stewart lead a race high 132 laps, but a late race caution moved Stewart to 2nd, where he finished behind Jeff Gordon. In the following week, Stewart implied the cautions were &quot;bogus&quot; and that NASCAR is &quot;rigged like professional wrestling&quot;.

On June 4, 2007, Stewart and Kurt Busch had another altercation on pit road in the Autism Speaks 400 at Dover. Kurt Busch passed Stewart on the inside and then slid up, which caused contact, sending him into the wall, knocking out Busch, but with Stewart staying in the race. Initially, it was thought that Stewart intentionally crashed Busch due to hard feelings over their accident at Daytona that year. Under the caution, Stewart was on pit road and his crew was surveying the massive damage he received from the crash; when an enraged Busch pulled alongside and gave Stewart a profane gesture to express his feelings over the incident. One of Stewart&#x27;s pit-crew members jumped out of the way of Busch&#x27;s car to avoid being hit, while Busch was parked for the contact made on pit road. Busch would later be fined $100k for his actions by NASCAR, while Stewart got off with a pre-race warning from NASCAR before the following race at Pocono.

At the All-Star Race at Charlotte, he finished 5th behind Kevin Harvick, Jimmie Johnson, Mark Martin, and Jeff Burton. At the Coca-Cola 600, Stewart finished sixth, after having to come into the pit for fuel. On July 15, 2007, Stewart led a race-high 108 laps and recorded his 30th career NEXTEL Cup win at the USG Sheetrock 400 at Joliet.

On July 29, 2007, after leading a race-high 65 of 160 laps, Stewart won the Brickyard 400 again, just 45 minutes from where he grew up. This was his second win in the race at his favorite track. It was not without controversy though; Stewart made the winning pass by accidentally bending the rear of Kevin Harvick&#x27;s car, causing Harvick to fall back quickly to seventh place by the time the checkers waved. Stewart apologized for the contact in victory lane and during the victory lane interview, Stewart was penalized 25 points and fined $25,000 for violating NASCAR&#x27;s policy on the use of obscene language during interviews during the race. This was similar to 2004 when Dale Earnhardt Jr. used an obscenity in a post-race interview at Talladega and was knocked out of the points lead as a result of the penalty.

On August 12, 2007, he won the Centurion Boats at the Glen at Watkins Glen after Jeff Gordon spun his car around after wheel hopping in turn 1 with two laps to go. Carl Edwards briefly challenged Stewart on the final lap, but spun out into a pullover site sealing Stewart&#x27;s win.

=====2008 season: Final season at JGR=====

As Joe Gibbs Racing officially switched its manufacturer partnership from Chevrolet to Toyota, Stewart began the 2008 season with a 6th-place start in the Daytona 500. During this race, he was only able to come up with a 3rd-place finish after being passed by Ryan Newman and Kurt Busch on the last lap. The finish of this race was somewhat like a repeat of the previous year&#x27;s Daytona 500, in which Stewart&#x27;s close friend Kevin Harvick passed Mark Martin to win it.

On lap 109 of the UAW-Dodge 400, Stewart&#x27;s car cut a tire and slammed hard into the turn 3 retaining wall. Although he climbed out under his own power, Stewart was transported by ambulance to the infield care center. Stewart had complained about a sore foot from a wreck that occurred the day before the Nationwide Series race at Las Vegas. Stewart was later announced that he was okay and ripped on Goodyear for not bringing any quality tires.

With 3 laps to go in the 2008 Coca-Cola 600, Stewart cut a tire and saved it from contact with the wall. However, Stewart had to give up the lead to future race winner Kasey Kahne to make pit stops.

In the Best Buy 400, Stewart was involved in another crash with Elliott Sadler, in which Sadler got turned by David Gilliland and car collected Stewart and 11 other cars; those included Dale Earnhardt Jr. and Denny Hamlin. Stewart, who was frustrated over his misfortune, sarcastically said, &quot;I take 100 percent responsibility – it&#x27;s my fault for being anywhere close to Elliott. If I&#x27;m within half a lap of him, I expect that to happen. It&#x27;s my fault – I&#x27;m the one that hit him. When I hit him, it caused all the guys behind us to wreck, so it&#x27;s my fault.&quot;

In July 2008, Stewart made a deal with car owner Gene Haas into a co-owning partnership in a racing organization called Stewart-Haas Racing for 2009 when he left Joe Gibbs Racing. Ryan Newman came to the meeting to make his deal with SHR officially signed earlier in the year.

On July 5, 2008, during the Coke Zero 400 at Daytona, Stewart started feeling ill and turned his car over to former Joe Gibbs Racing teammate J. J. Yeley, who took the car to a 20th-place finish after getting involved in two wrecks in the last 5 laps. Stewart earned his first and only win of the season in the AMP Energy 500 at Talladega on October 5, 2008, driving for Subway as his sponsor, making it his last win with Joe Gibbs Racing. On the final lap, Stewart was passed by Regan Smith (the rookie of Dale Earnhardt, Inc.) who beat Stewart to the line. NASCAR declared that Smith had made an illegal pass under the yellow line, and awarded the victory to Stewart.

After the Ford 400, Stewart attended a tearful farewell meeting with Joe Gibbs Racing and gave his car and team to rookie Joey Logano, who replaced him for JGR.

====Stewart Haas Racing (2009–2016)====
=====2009 season=====

On July 8, 2008, it was reported that Stewart was released from the last year of his contract with Joe Gibbs Racing, primarily because JGR had switched from Chevrolet to Toyota, and Stewart was vocal about his loyalty to Chevrolet (which sponsors his USAC Midget, Sprint Car, and Silver Crown teams). Stewart announced he would move to Haas CNC Racing to drive a Haas Chevrolet, with sponsorships from Office Depot (relocating from the No. 99 Roush Fenway team) and Old Spice. Stewart took half ownership of the team which was renamed Stewart-Haas Racing, and Stewart became the highest-paid NASCAR driver. Stewart&#x27;s car at Haas has the number 14 as an homage to his hero A. J. Foyt. To date, he is the third-most successful driver for Joe Gibbs Racing with 33 wins and 2 championships (2002 and 2005), behind Kyle Busch, who has 59 wins and 2 championships (2015 and 2019) and Denny Hamlin with 54 wins.

On August 15, 2008, fellow Indiana native Ryan Newman signed a multi-year contract to drive the second car for Stewart-Haas Racing, originally to be designated No. 4 but changed to his USAC No. 39, with sponsorship from the U.S. Army (relocating from Earnhardt Ganassi Racing).

As the most recent series champion not among the Top 35 in owners&#x27; points, Stewart was first in line for past champions&#x27; provisionals for the first five races of 2009. He completed those races without needing to use the provisional, ending up well inside the Top 10 in points. Stewart won his first race as a driver/owner in the non-championship NASCAR Sprint All-Star Race XXV, winning more than $1,000,000, his first win in the event in 10 attempts. He followed that victory with his first points race win as a driver/owner at Pocono in the Pocono 500 on June 7, 2009, the first owner-driver in the Cup series to win a race since Ricky Rudd in 1998. Stewart also won the Coke Zero 400 at Daytona after a controversial finish when he wrecked Kyle Busch to do so. In a similar fashion to the spring race at Talladega that year, Busch passed Stewart on the final lap but in the final turn Stewart went underneath Busch who tried to block but with 100 feet left from the checkers the two made contact resulting in Stewart sending Busch into the wall, and Busch wrecked across the line in the final lead position while Kasey Kahne submarined under his car.

Stewart&#x27;s season overall was his best showing since his rookie year, with another win coming at Watkins Glen International. Stewart qualified for the 2009 Chase for the Sprint Cup as he finished the first 26 races as the points leader. He fell to second in points following reseeding when Mark Martin, who won more races than Stewart, moved ahead of him. On October 5, 2009, Stewart won the Price Chopper 400 and moved to fourth in the standings, ending the season in sixth place.

=====2010 season=====

On April 16, 2010, Stewart won his first Sprint Cup pole position in five years at Texas Motor Speedway, with a lap speed of 191.327 mph. The race was the 400th in the Sprint Cup for Stewart, and was his first starting from the pole since October 2005 at Martinsville Speedway.

On May 9, 2010, it was reported that Stewart would lose Old Spice as a sponsor after 11 years with them.

Stewart won two races in 2010: the Emory Healthcare 500 at Atlanta Motor Speedway on September 5, 2010, and the Pepsi Max 400 at Auto Club Speedway on October 10, 2010.

In September at Loudon, Stewart lead part of the final stages trying to hold off Clint Bowyer for RCR who dominated the race; when the white flag waved the fans saw that Stewart was out of gas; Bowyer passed him and won both the white flag and the checkers. Stewart finished 24th and waved to Bowyer to congratulate him as he slowly crossed the line to finish. After the race Stewart said when interviewed &quot;My feelings are not happy that&#x27;s for sure but we had a strong race; I thank Office Depot, Coca-Cola, and my sponsors... congratulations to Clint Bowyer and the helping hands, they deserved that one. I think I ran myself out of fuel; my team apologized and said &quot;sorry for running you out of fuel&quot;, I think I ran myself out of fuel.&quot;

On October 12, 2010, Mobil 1 announced a sponsorship deal with Stewart-Haas Racing to sponsor Stewart&#x27;s car, starting in 2011. It would be the primary sponsor for 11 races, while Office Depot would be the primary sponsor for the rest of the season. Mobil 1 would also sponsor Stewart in the Budweiser Shootout and the All-Star Race.

=====2011 season: Third championship=====

In 2011, Stewart returned in the No. 14 Office Depot-sponsored Chevrolet. Following a crash intentionally caused by Stewart on Brian Vickers at Infineon Raceway in June 2011, Vickers intentionally wrecked Stewart as payback. In an interview when asked about the crashes, Stewart said, &quot;It was payback, but, you know, I dumped him first, and I dumped him because he was blocking...&quot; Stewart and his teammate, Newman, started the Lenox Industrial Tools 301 first and second, and they finished it where they started as Newman won that race. By the Heluva Good! Sour Cream Dips 400, Stewart said in a post-race interview that his team was running so poorly that he was &quot;wasting one of those top 12 spots.&quot; Entering the Chase for the NASCAR Sprint Cup portion of the schedule winless, Stewart won the opening race of the Chase at the Chicagoland Speedway and jumped up seven spots in the points, securing second place and extending his streak of consecutive years with a win to 13. Stewart made it two for two in the Chase after Clint Bowyer ran out of fuel in the closing laps of the Sylvania 300 at the New Hampshire Motor Speedway. Stewart took the win and the points lead after New Hampshire. At Talladega, Stewart struggled to lead a lap, and eventually did so; with assistance from Ryan Newman, Paul Menard, and Joey Logano, he led an additional 29 laps and captured the two-point bonus for leading the most laps. On October 30, 2011, at Martinsville Speedway, Stewart won the Tums Fast Relief 500, leading three times for 14 laps and moving into championship contention in second place in the points standings.

The next week, Stewart led 173 laps en route to winning the AAA Texas 500 at Texas Motor Speedway, bringing him to within three points of championship points leader Carl Edwards with two races to go in the 2011 season. On November 20, 2011, Stewart won the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series championship by winning the final race at Homestead-Miami Speedway while Edwards finished second. Stewart and Edwards were tied on total points, but Stewart claimed the tiebreaker by having five race wins, all during the Chase, to Edwards&#x27;s one win. In the process, Stewart became the first driver/owner to win the championship since Alan Kulwicki in 1992.

=====2012 season=====

Before the season Stewart welcomed new drivers retired Indycar driver Danica Patrick and driver David Reutimann to drive partly for Stewart-Haas Racing as part of a partnership with Tommy Baldwin Racing who provided parts of the cars.

On February 11, 2012, Stewart led the final stages of the Budweiser Shootout by passing Marcos Ambrose on the final lap but was passed in a desperate charge to the finish line by Kyle Busch who beat him to the line in what was said the closest finish in Budweiser Shootout history (It would have been 2011 with Kurt Busch and Denny Hamlin but Hamlin was black-flagged for being below the yellow line). Stewart won the 1st duel of the Gatorade Duels at Daytona when his new driver Danica Patrick hit the wall hard on the backstretch on the final lap, which brought out the caution. Stewart started 3rd in the Daytona 500 and ran well throughout the race, but was caught up in a late-race crash on lap 196 after getting turned by Ricky Stenhouse Jr. On March 11, Stewart won the Kobalt Tools 400 at Las Vegas Motor Speedway beating Jimmie Johnson. It was his 45th career win and brought his streak of consecutive Cup seasons with a win to 14.

On March 25, 2012, Stewart won the rain-shortened Auto Club 400 at Auto Club Speedway. On June 3, 2012, Stewart was caught in a 13 car crash on the back leg at Dover and finished the race in 25th place.

Tony Stewart led 18 laps at the 2012 Quicken Loans 400 and finished second behind Dale Earnhardt Jr. Stewart however caused controversy and got ripped by the fans and media for saying in a media conference that Earnhardt winning &quot;Is not a national holiday.&quot; and taunting the Earnhardt nation for celebrating the 4th anniversary of Earnhardt&#x27;s last win in 2008.

At Sonoma, Stewart moved quickly from the top 20 to third in the final laps of the Toyota Save Mart 350 and ended up second to Clint Bowyer by passing Kurt Busch on the final turn on the final lap. On July 7, Stewart was able to hold off Matt Kenseth to win his fourth Coke Zero 400 as a wreck ensued behind him. The win was a surprise one, as Stewart had been forced to start 42nd due to his car failing pre-qualifying inspection.

In August at Bristol in the 2012 Irwin Tools Night Race, when battling for the lead on lap 333, Stewart and Matt Kenseth tangled and brought out a caution. This was soon after Ryan Newman was wrecked by Juan Pablo Montoya in an accident which collected Jeff Burton. A furious Stewart climbed out of his wrecked car and angrily tossed his helmet at Kenseth&#x27;s car, who exit out of the pit road, and then gestured applause at the fans. This was followed shortly thereafter by his student driver Danica Patrick wagging a finger at Regan Smith after he turned her into the inside wall many laps later.

In September at Atlanta, team spokesman Mike Arning announced that Office Depot will not be Stewart&#x27;s sponsor in 2013.

On October 2, 2012, Bass Pro Shops announced they would be a co-primary sponsor for Stewart in a selected number of races for the 2013 season.

At the Talladega race in the fall, Stewart was leading on the final lap but underestimated the speed of a closing Michael Waltrip. On turn 4, Waltrip got a run, and tapped Stewart from behind, causing Stewart to spin and Waltrip to spin into the pack, causing a Big One that involved 23 cars, the largest crash of the season to date. Stewart flipped over, hitting the roofs of several other cars, including Kasey Kahne, Paul Menard, and Clint Bowyer, before landing upright. On November 9, it was announced that Kevin Harvick would be joining Stewart&#x27;s team starting in 2014.

Stewart would finish ninth in points, with two top-fives and four top tens in the Chase, for a final season total of three wins, 12 top-five, and 16 top-ten finishes overall.

=====2013 season=====

In early 2013, reports said that Stewart was offered a chance by Roger Penske to race in the 2013 Indianapolis 500 in a Penske car. Stewart declined and said he was not ready to try the big race yet, due to his focus on stock cars.

In the Daytona 500, Stewart&#x27;s day ended on lap 35, when he was caught up in an early crash with Kevin Harvick and Kasey Kahne; this would allow him to finish 41st. He rebounded slightly with an 8th-place finish at Phoenix and an 11th-place finish in Las Vegas. At Bristol, Stewart blew his tire on lap 3 and cut a brake line; he came back out over 20 laps down, unable to contend for the victory.

At Fontana, Stewart ran well for most of the day, leading laps and running on an alternate pit cycle, and nearly contended for the win. However, due to a late-race incident when Joey Logano blocked him on the last restart, Stewart ended up in 22nd place at the bottom of the lead lap. After the race, Stewart, angered, confronted Logano, who had just wrecked his car after battling with Denny Hamlin hard into the last turn, on pit road in a scuffle involving both teams&#x27; crews.

At Richmond, Stewart looked to be in contention for the win as he was 5th on a green-white-checkered finish, but in a fashion similar to his confrontation with Logano at Fontana; after a poor restart he lost a few positions. On the last lap, Kurt Busch tapped his bumper, moving Stewart out of the 2nd groove up to the top of the race track subsequently losing about 5 positions coming home 18th while Busch took a 9th-place finish. Stewart showed his displeasure with Busch after the race had finished, rubbing with him on the race track leading to a shoving match between the two when slowing down after the race ended. Down near the haulers, the two turned the attention given to race winner Harvick; to them when they had a verbal confrontation, again Stewart showing Busch his displeasure with his aggressive move. It was the first time since 2008 that the two got together in a feud.

At Talladega, Stewart was caught up in a 15 car wreck on lap 43 and ended up finishing 27th, 5 laps down. His teammates Danica Patrick and Ryan Newman were caught up in a later wreck on lap 182, in which Newman&#x27;s car got crushed when Kurt Busch flipped over and landed on top of it.

Stewart&#x27;s 2013 season start was considered his worst start to a Sprint Cup season yet. As of Richmond, he had only one Top 10 finish, which was at Phoenix. The rest of his finishing positions had been in the upper 10&#x27;s or lower 20&#x27;s. After Richmond, Stewart was 22nd in the points standings with 207 points, 136 behind Jimmie Johnson. However, he showed signs of a rebound in the following weeks, scoring a solid 7th-place finish at the Coca-Cola 600 while avoiding several wrecks.

The following week at Dover, Stewart went a lap down early but got back on the lead lap with a beneficiary. In the last 20 laps, after Johnson was penalized for jumping the last restart, Stewart overtook Juan Pablo Montoya and held him off over the last three laps to score his sole Sprint Cup win of 2013. The win propelled him up 4 positions to 16th, into a Wildcard spot. This also gave Stewart a streak of 15 straight seasons with at least one race win. He followed this up with a fourth-place finish at Pocono and a fifth place at Michigan. His momentum was killed briefly by a 28th-place run at Sonoma and a 20th-place finish at Kentucky, but Stewart then rebounded to a second-place finish at the Coke Zero 400.

At New Hampshire, Stewart led 84 laps and was overtaken by Brian Vickers with 14 laps to go. A caution that led to a green-white-checkered finish ultimately ruined Stewart&#x27;s chances of winning, as he ran out of fuel after the restart while Vickers took the win. Stewart then rebounded with a 4th-place run at Indianapolis and a 9th-place run at Pocono.

======Leg injury======
The day after the Pocono race, on August 5, 2013, while leading a sprint car race at Southern Iowa Speedway in Oskaloosa, Iowa, Stewart was involved in a multi-car crash when a lapped car spun in front of him and Stewart drove straight into him while it was sideways causing him to flip multiple times. The hit was hard enough that Stewart broke both the tibia and fibula bones in his lower right leg. He was taken by ambulance to a local hospital where surgery was performed on his broken leg. A second surgery was performed on August 8, 2013, in which a metal rod was inserted into the tibia. The injuries were bad enough that Stewart&#x27;s streak of 521 consecutive Sprint Cup starts, dating back to the 1999 Daytona 500, ended. A replacement driver for the August 11 race at Watkins Glen International was not immediately named, though it was eventually announced that road veteran Max Papis would fill in for Watkins Glen. Stewart was eventually released from the hospital on August 11.

Prior to August 11, 2013, speculation arose regarding who would replace Stewart on the oval courses, with speculation that the replacement would either be Regan Smith, who drove two races in Dale Earnhardt Jr.&#x27;s car after Earnhardt was sidelined with a concussion in 2012, or Austin Dillon. It was announced after Watkins Glen that Dillon would drive Stewart&#x27;s car for Michigan. On August 19, 2013, Stewart was ruled out for the remainder of the season. Mark Martin was released from his contract with Michael Waltrip Racing and signed on to drive Stewart&#x27;s car for the remaining thirteen races of the year, with the exception of Talladega, where Dillon drove the car. Brian Vickers and Elliott Sadler would drive the No. 55 for races Martin was originally intended to drive for MWR in.

=====2014 season=====

Before the season it was announced that Stewart had been medically cleared to race. Stewart mentioned during Pre-Season Thunder that his leg would be about 65% healed going into Daytona. Stewart ran the Sprint Unlimited and was collected in a nine-car crash, though he was able to exit his car under his own power and without any pain. Stewart entered the Daytona 500 in his backup car, starting from the rear of the field. After the 6 hour and 22-minute rain delay, the race resumed, but just shy of halfway, Stewart&#x27;s fuel pickup began to fail. His crew repaired the problem in the garage and allowed Stewart to return to the track, finishing the race 27 laps down.

The next week at Phoenix, Stewart ran in the top ten most of the day. A late string of cautions set up multiple restarts and Stewart opted to come down to pit road to be serviced each time the caution was thrown, subsequently losing track position. On the last and final restart, Stewart had 4 fresh tires and was starting 19th. He gained 3 positions, from 19th to 16th, where he finished. Stewart gained 12 spots in the standings, from 32nd to 20th.

At Las Vegas, Stewart struggled with the handling of his car and finished 33rd, four laps down.

At Bristol, Stewart missed the second round of knockout qualifying and started 37th. However, with a fast racecar, he was able to make his way up the field and finish fourth, his first top-five finish since the previous year&#x27;s Brickyard 400. Stewart was the highest finishing Chevrolet in the race.

Stewart qualified 10th at Auto Club. After a spin early in the race, Stewart was running 12th at the last caution, coming off of pit road 2nd and lining up 4th for the green-white-checkered finish behind Paul Menard, his driver Kurt Busch, and Landon Cassill. On the final restart, Stewart and Busch battled for the win, only to be passed up by Kyle Busch and Kyle Larson. Stewart finished third not being passed by Matt Kenseth, his fifth top 5 in a row.

Stewart had a strong run at Pocono. He qualified in the top five and ran in there nearly the whole race, before a speeding penalty on pit road left him with a 13th-place finish. When Stewart was asked about what happened he said &quot;It was a 100% driver error. Last week I cried over a 6th place finish and I just threw this one away. 100% driver error. My fault.&quot;

At Michigan, Stewart ran in the top-five. Late in the race, Stewart tangled with rookie Kyle Larson when Larson threw a block, leaving Stewart with an 11th-place finish. Stewart replied by bumping Larson under yellow and side-swiping him. The next week Stewart said &quot;He&#x27;ll learn not to block me. One way or another he&#x27;ll learn like I did at his age.&quot;

After the Kevin Ward Jr. tragedy in mid-August, Stewart skipped Watkins Glen, Michigan, and Bristol. He was subbed by Regan Smith and Jeff Burton for those races. Despite having missed three races and thus losing too many points to recover lost points in the final 2 races, NASCAR granted him a waiver allowing him to still be eligible for the Chase if he won in the final two &#x27;regular season&#x27; events, which he failed to do, causing him to miss the Chase for the third time in his career.

At the end of the October Charlotte race, Stewart was hit on pit road by Brad Keselowski, who was trying to run into Matt Kenseth, but missed. Stewart retaliated by reversing into him, smashing Keselowski&#x27;s front in. Stewart was fined $25,000 and placed on probation until November 12, 2014, along with Keselowski who was fined $50,000.

At Martinsville, Stewart almost won. On the final restart, he pulled out in front of Dale Earnhardt Jr. but having older tires, got over-taken by Earnhardt with four laps to go. Stewart finished 4th but stated that after what he went through from August to then, finishing 4th felt like a win to him.

Stewart finished the year with a last-place finish at Homestead-Miami, ending his 15-year winning streak. As a driver, 2014 was Stewart&#x27;s worst year statistically. The season ended on a positive note for Stewart, as he won the Owner&#x27;s Championship with Kevin Harvick. In an interview the day before the race, Stewart blamed his subpar year on the new rules package, saying it did not complement his driving style. He also dismissed countless claims that his poor showing had anything to do with his 2013 leg injury.

======Return to sprint cars======
On February 15, 2014, Stewart returned to sprint car racing in his No. 14 sprint car, the very car that broke his leg in 2013. When asked why he returned, Stewart said he loved racing sprint cars too much to leave. Stewart silenced his critics by dominating and winning a sprint car race at Tri-City Motor Speedway in a huge comeback story. After the race Stewart said:
=====2015 season=====

Stewart did not do as well in the 2015 season as hoped, as he failed to score a win for the second year in a row and missed the Chase. He even failed to finish higher than 6th-place for the first time in his career, only scoring 3 top-10 finishes the entire season. Despite these results, Stewart refused to put the blame on his crew chief, in spite of criticism from fans, saying that &quot;I still really like working with Chad Johnston, I don&#x27;t feel like he&#x27;s what&#x27;s holding us back... I&#x27;m holding him and the team back versus vice versa&quot;. He showed signs of a comeback after qualifying runs of 4th at Indianapolis, 5th at Pocono, 3rd at Watkins Glen, and 5th at Michigan.

In his last start of the season-opener Daytona 500, Stewart was involved in an accident on lap 41 with Matt Kenseth that collected Ryan Blaney and Michael Waltrip. Stewart pitted with significant front-right damage, and later took responsibility for the accident, saying that &quot;when it got three-wide that particular lap, it got away from me&quot;. He ended up retiring on lap 72.

At the next race, the QuikTrip 500, Stewart did not set a time in qualifying due to a technical irregularity surrounding the amount of camber the car was running. Stewart had a relatively clean first part of the race, however in the second half of the race with 21 laps to go, was involved in a large accident alongside Clint Bowyer, Greg Biffle, Ricky Stenhouse Jr., Regan Smith and Joe Nemechek, resulting in a red flag. Tony would finish 30th.

After qualifying 12th for the Kobalt 400, Stewart&#x27;s fortunes did not improve as he finished 33rd, due to a pass-through penalty issued for a tire rolling out from his pit.

At the 2015 CampingWorld.com 500 Stewart qualified 17th, however on lap 288, he crashed, grinding alongside the front-stretch barrier, resulting in a caution. Stewart&#x27;s teammate Harvick would eventually win.

At the next race, the Auto Club 400, Stewart had a clean race until 36 laps till the end. He was racing Aric Almirola hard, and Martin Truex Jr. cut in front of Tony, creating a hole in Stewart&#x27;s bodywork which required him to pit for repairs. Following the incident, Stewart confronted Truex post-race, however Stewart still felt he had reason to be happy bar the incident, saying &quot;We are getting to where we were sniffing the edge of the top 10 anyway all day,&quot; and that &quot;this [race] is a big gain for us&quot;.

In August, Stewart lent his private plane to the family of IndyCar driver Justin Wilson so they could fly out to Long Pond, PA after Wilson was severely injured during a late-race crash; Wilson died several hours later.

On September 27, 2015, Bob Pockrass reported that Stewart announced plans to retire from racing after the 2016 season. Stewart formally announced on September 30, 2015, confirming this and announcing that Clint Bowyer would replace him in the No. 14 in 2017.

=====2016: Final season=====
On January 31, 2016, Stewart injured his back while riding a dune buggy outside of San Diego with fellow driver Greg Biffle. Four days later, Stewart-Haas Racing announced he had suffered a burst fracture in his lumbar vertebra, which would prevent him from competing in the Daytona 500. Stewart was replaced by Brian Vickers and Ty Dillon. Stewart missed the first eight races of the season. On April 24, 2016, Stewart returned to racing in the Toyota Owners 400 at Richmond, where he finished 19th. Before the Richmond race, NASCAR granted Stewart a waiver from the rule saying that a driver must attempt every race to be eligible for the Chase. If Stewart won a race and finished in the top 30 in the standings by the autumn Richmond race, he would qualify for the 2016 Chase for the Sprint Cup.

For the running of the GEICO 500 at Talladega, Stewart would struggle at the beginning of the race but he would switch with Ty Dillon after the first caution and Dillon would drive the rest of the race; the doctor advised Stewart not to drive the whole race to avoid further injury. The No. 14 car would get the free pass after the first caution. Dillon would finish 6th, but Stewart would get the credit since he started the race and would get his first top 10 of the year. He finished 12th at Kansas the following week. At Michigan for the running of the FireKeepers Casino 400, Stewart would have his best race of the year so far, he would qualify a strong 3rd and run great all race long and would finish 7th.
The very next week at Sonoma, Stewart took advantage of a late caution and was able to lead the last 20 laps, winning for the first time in three years after making a last-lap pass on Denny Hamlin, who wheel-hopped in the final turn and hit the wall after Stewart slipped into the inside. The win was very popular amongst the garages and the win vaulted Stewart from 34th to 31st in the standings, just 9 points out of the top 30. Then the next race at Daytona, Stewart finished 26th due to a late wreck, but moved up to 30th in the points and currently became part of the Chase for the first time since 2012. He did much better at Kentucky, finishing a solid 5th and further propelling him to 20th in owner&#x27;s points. The next week at New Hampshire he would continue his streak of strong races and get a 2nd-place finish, followed by two 5th-place finishes at Pocono and Watkins Glen.

At Richmond, Stewart was involved in a controversy with 28 laps to go in the race. Stewart, while racing former teammate Ryan Newman for 10th place, wrecked Newman in turn 3, causing a five-car pileup and ending Newman&#x27;s chase chances. In an interview minutes after the crash, Newman was outspoken about his displeasure against Stewart and said &quot;I guess he thought he was in a sprint car again and didn&#x27;t know how to control his anger. It&#x27;s disappointing that you have somebody who should be retired the way he drives. It&#x27;s just ridiculous.&quot; Stewart&#x27;s bid for a fourth title ended after poor finishes caused him to be eliminated from the first round of the Chase. After having his final top-ten at the 2016 Bank of America 500, Tony Stewart wrapped up his 18-year career in Cup competition with a 22nd-place finish at the 2016 Ford EcoBoost 400 where he was 2 laps down.

Before the 23rd running of the Brickyard 400, Stewart was inducted into the USAC Hall of Fame in recognition of his sterling United States Auto Club (USAC) career. He was the 1994 USAC National Midget champion; in 1995, Stewart became the first driver ever to claim all three of United States Auto Club National championships in a single season and is one of only six USAC “Triple Crown Champions.” To date, Stewart racing has also won seven USAC Silver Crown Series titles.

===Rolex 24 at Daytona===
Stewart has raced in a few sports car races, including the Rolex 24 at Daytona.
*2002: Competed in the Rolex 24 on 2/2-2/3 for the Crawford factory team with co-drivers Jan Lammers and Johnny Mowlem.
*2004: Competed for the second time in the Rolex 24 on 1/31-2/1 for Howard-Boss Motorsports with co-drivers Dale Earnhardt Jr., and Andy Wallace. Team led 355 of 526 laps and had a commanding five-lap advantage before mechanical problems less than 20 minutes short of the finish ended their shot at victory and placed them a disappointing fourth.
*2005: Competed for the third time in the Rolex 24 on 2/5-2/6 for Howard-Boss Motorsports with co-drivers Jan Lammars and Andy Wallace. Team was leading with less than two hours remaining when a broken gearbox dropped them off the lead lap. Crew was able to make repairs so that the trio could rejoin the race, whereupon they finished third. It was Stewart&#x27;s first podium finish in the Rolex 24 Hours At Daytona.
*2006: Competed for the fourth time in the Rolex 24 on 1/28-1/29 for Howard-Boss Motorsports with co-drivers Butch Leitzinger and Andy Wallace. Team finished 30th after suffering mechanical problems throughout the event.
*2007: Competed for the fifth time in the Rolex 24 on 1/27-1/28 for Howard-Boss Motorsports with co-drivers Butch Leitzinger and Andy Wallace. Team finished 48th after mechanical trouble hampered the trio throughout the event.

===Other racing===

Stewart has enjoyed a highly successful career in USAC; he has 27 USAC National Midget wins to his credit, as well as 10 wins in the Sprint cars and three in the Silver Crown series. He is also a member of the National Midget Auto Racing Hall of Fame (2001) and the National Sprint Car Hall of Fame (2022). In addition to his USAC driving titles, he also has seven Sprint Car Owner championships as well as seven in the Silver Crown Series as an owner.

Stewart frequently makes appearances on dirt tracks, appearing regularly at an ARCA race on dirt and many prominent midget car events, USACs Turkey Night Grand Prix, and the indoor Chili Bowl Midget Nationals.

Stewart races 410 and 360 Dirt Sprint Cars about 50 times a year throughout the United States and Canada. On July 27, 2011, Stewart won his first-ever World of Outlaws race at Ohsweken Speedway. As of October 7, 2014, Stewart has three career World of Outlaws main event victories. Stewart competes with the World of Outlaws, All-Stars, and IRA Sprint Car series when traveling between NASCAR races and on off weekends.

===Superstar Racing Experience===
Along with Stewart co-founding the Superstar Racing Experience, he would also drive full-time in the No. 14 machine. Stewart got a podium finish in the inaugural 2021 SRX Series race at Stafford Motor Speedway, finishing third. He followed by sweeping the series&#x27; two dirt track races at Knoxville Raceway and Eldora. A second-place finish in the final race at Nashville Fairgrounds Speedway enabled Stewart to win the championship by 45 points over Ernie Francis Jr.

==Death of Kevin Ward Jr.==

On August 9, 2014, Stewart competed in an evening sprint car race at Canandaigua Motorsports Park in Canandaigua, New York. About halfway through the race, Stewart bumped Kevin Ward Jr., causing Ward to lose control and spin out, into the wall. A full course yellow caution flag was displayed. Ward exited his vehicle and charged down the banked circuit. Several cars tacked down to the inside most line to avoid him, Stewart veered up towards the young driver and hit Ward, impacting him with his right rear tire. Mortally injured when the right rear tire of Stewart&#x27;s car struck him, Ward was flung across the track to his death. Ward was transported by paramedics to Thompson Hospital but was pronounced dead on arrival, due to &quot;massive blunt trauma&quot;.

The incident took place the night before Stewart was scheduled to race in the Cup Series&#x27; Cheez-It 355 at Watkins Glen International; however, Stewart decided not to compete in the event, and Regan Smith started in his place. Stewart later released a statement &quot;There aren&#x27;t words to describe the sadness I feel about the accident that took the life of Kevin Ward Jr. It&#x27;s a very emotional time for all involved, and it is the reason I&#x27;ve decided not to participate in today&#x27;s race at Watkins Glen. My thoughts and prayers are with his family, friends, and everyone affected by this tragedy.&quot;

The day after the incident, Philip Povero, sheriff of Ontario County, New York, told reporters &quot;At this very moment, there are no facts in hand that would substantiate or support a criminal charge, or indicate criminal intent on the part of any individual.&quot;

On August 15, 2014, NASCAR announced a rule change requiring that drivers who are involved in an accident and are unable to drive their cars back to pit road or the garage must remain in their vehicles until emergency crews arrive, except in an emergency (such as a fire or smoke caused by a blown engine).

For the August 17, 2014 race at Michigan and the following one at Bristol, Stewart was replaced by Jeff Burton. He returned at Atlanta, and was granted a waiver to maintain Chase eligibility despite missing three races (current Chase rules state that a driver must attempt to qualify for every race in order to be eligible). However, he failed to win at Atlanta or Richmond and thus was unable to qualify for the Chase.

Stewart gave a tearful interview when he returned to race in Atlanta, stating:
This has been one of the toughest tragedies I&#x27;ve ever had to deal with, both professionally and personally. This is something that will definitely affect my life forever. This is a sadness and a pain I hope no one ever has to experience in their life. That being said, I know that the pain and the mourning that Kevin Ward&#x27;s family and friends are experiencing is something that I can&#x27;t possibly imagine. I want Kevin&#x27;s father, Kevin Sr., his mother Pam, and his sisters Christi, Kayla, and Katelyn to know that every day I&#x27;m thinking about and praying for them.

The racing community is a large family, as you guys know. Everyone&#x27;s saddened with this tragedy. I want to thank all my friends and family for their support through this tough, emotional time. And the support from the NASCAR community, my partners, all of our employees has been overwhelming. I&#x27;ve taken the last couple weeks off out of respect for Kevin and his family and also to cope with the accident in my own way. It&#x27;s given me the time to think about life and how easy it is to take it for granted. I miss my team, my teammates, and the other drivers very much and I miss being back in the race car. I think that being back in the car this week with my racing family will help me get through this difficult time.

On September 24, 2014, a grand jury declined to indict Stewart on charges of manslaughter in the second-degree and criminally negligent homicide. Following the decision, District Attorney Michael Tantillo stated that videos of Stewart&#x27;s driving did not demonstrate any aberrational driving and that Ward was under the influence of cannabis with levels high enough to impair judgment.

Ward&#x27;s father, Kevin Ward Sr., wrote a letter vowing to &quot;pursue to make all remedies for Kevin,&quot; implying the civil lawsuit they later filed. When Ward&#x27;s family was informed that he had been high on cannabis, Ward Sr. wrote a letter that went viral on the internet, saying:
Tell me how a man the size of Kevin can make a sprint car turn to the right on impact. Tell me how a lap before (the incident) everything was fine, but the following lap was poor lighting. Tell me how a NASCAR star totally forgot what caution means. Maybe he should get a different headset so he is able to hear on the radio that the car in caution is up high, so go low. Or was he low until he rounded the corner and saw Kevin, Jr. standing up for himself?

A couple of days after the announcement of his exoneration by Ontario County (N.Y.) District Attorney Michael Tantillo, Stewart told &quot;The Associated Press&quot;, that &quot;I know 100 percent in my heart and in my mind that I did not do anything wrong. This was 100 percent an accident.&quot;

After a few years of going through the process of the wrongful death lawsuit filed by the Ward family, it was announced in April 2018, that the suit had been settled out-of-court, just a few weeks before the trial was scheduled to begin. The terms of the settlement were confidential.

==Business ventures==
===Motorsports team ownership===
Stewart is the owner of various open-wheel short-track racing cars, most of them being sponsored by Chevrolet since 2007. He also owns and drives dirt super late models.

====Tri Star Motorsports====
Tri Star Motorsports (no relation to the TriStar Motorsports NASCAR team) was an IRL team that Stewart owned with Larry Curry, Andy Card, and Rick Ehrgott from 1999 to 2001.

====Stewart-Haas Racing====

Following the 2008 season, Stewart was given a 50% stake in Haas CNC Racing, which was owned outright by Gene Haas and fielded Chevrolet vehicles. This allowed Stewart to become an owner-driver, as he left his long-term team at Joe Gibbs Racing to start the venture. Initially fielding two cars, the #14 for himself and the #39 for Ryan Newman, Stewart has since expanded the operation to four cars and began running with Ford engines in 2017. The team has won two NASCAR Cup Series championships, the first with Stewart driving in 2011 and the second with Kevin Harvick driving in 2014.

On May 28, 2024, it was announced that the team would shut down at the end of the 2024 season. On June 20, Gene Haas announced he will keep one of the team&#x27;s four charters and restructure the team as Haas Factory Team in 2025.

====Tony Stewart Racing====
Stewart has won USAC car owner titles in the Silver Crown division in 2002 and 2003 with J. J. Yeley, in 2004 &amp; 2005 with Dave Steele and 2010 and 2011 with Levi Jones of Olney, IL. He also collected owner titles in USAC&#x27;s National Sprint Car Series with Yeley in 2003 and Jay Drake in 2004. He also won an owner title in the USAC National Sprint Car Series in 2006 with Josh Wise and 2007, 2009, 2010, and 2011 with Levi Jones of Olney, IL

Stewart&#x27;s USAC midget and sprint cars carry No. 20 and No. 21, while his Silver Crown car carries No. 22.

Stewart has also won World of Outlaws Sprint Car Championships as an owner with Donny Schatz in 2008–2009, 2012, and 2014–2018. The team was a two car operation with Schatz and Steve Kinser until Kinser&#x27;s retirement in 2016. The team currently competes full time in the World of Outlaws with Schatz.

In October 2021 it was reported that Tony Stewart Racing would begin fielding entries in the NHRA Camping World Drag Racing Series which will first be made up of a Top Fuel entry for Leah Pruett and a Funny Car entry for Matt Hagan.
On December 7, 2023, During a livestream on the NHRA Official YouTube channel; Leah Pruett announced that Tony will be driving an NHRA TopFuel Dragster in 2024.

===Motorsports venues===
Stewart purchased Eldora Speedway located near Rossburg, Ohio in late 2004 from Earl Baltes. Stewart is currently a co-owner of Paducah International Raceway near Paducah, Kentucky. He also co-owns Macon Speedway in Macon, Illinois along with Kenny Schrader, Kenny Wallace, and Bob Sargent.

===All Star Circuit of Champions===

In January 2015, Stewart purchased the All Star Circuit of Champions from Guy Webb. The purchase was Stewart&#x27;s first foray into owning an entire racing series. In a separate agreement, Stewart announced that he had reached an agreement with the owners of the Renegade Sprint Series to merge with the All Star Circuit of Champions for the 2015 season under the All Star name.

The ASCoC is an American motorsports sanctioning body of Sprint Cars founded in 1970. The series sanctions 410ci winged sprint car races in Ohio, Indiana, Pennsylvania, Michigan, Illinois, Wisconsin, New York, and Florida.

===Superstar Racing Experience===

In July 2020, Stewart and former NASCAR crew chief Ray Evernham formed the Superstar Racing Experience (SRX), a stock car series that began in summer 2021.

===Other entities===
Stewart owns a dirt late model Chevrolet Impala that carries No. 14 which he races frequently. He is also the owner of Custom Works, a company that manufactures radio-controlled oval track cars, and has had a degree of success as an r/c racer himself.

Stewart was also the driving force behind the Prelude to the Dream, a dirt late model race held at Eldora Speedway from 2005 to 2012. It featured top drivers from NASCAR, IndyCar, NHRA, and World of Outlaws, including race winners Kenny Wallace, Carl Edwards, Jimmie Johnson, Clint Bowyer, Kyle Busch, and Stewart himself. The event raised over 4 million dollars for various NASCAR and driver charities including The Victory Junction Gang Camp.

==Tony Stewart Foundation==
Founded in 2003 by Stewart, the principal purposes of the Tony Stewart Foundation are to raise and donate funds to help care for chronically ill children, drivers injured in motorsports activities, and to support other charitable organizations in the protection of various animal species. The Tony Stewart Foundation will raise and donate funds to charitable interests, specifically those that support the aforementioned groups. In October 2024, it was announced that The Tony Stewart Foundation is closing.

==Career achievements==
===Awards and honors===
*1995, 2002 Hoosier Auto Racing Fans Driver of the Year
*2001 National Midget Auto Racing Hall of Fame inductee
*2002 Hoosier Auto Racing Fans Hall of Fame inductee
*2002, 2005, 2011 Richard Petty Driver of the Year
*2003, 2006, 2012 Best Driver ESPY Award recipient
*2008 Legends of The Glen inductee
*2008 &quot;NASCAR Illustrated&quot; Person of the Year Award recipient
*2013 Myers Brothers Award recipient
*2016 Sonoma Raceway Wall of Fame inductee
*2018 Indianapolis Motor Speedway Hall of Fame inductee
*2019 Motorsports Hall of Fame of America inductee
*2020 NASCAR Hall of Fame inductee
*2022 National Sprint Car Hall of Fame inductee

===Records and milestones===
With 49 career points-paying victories, Stewart is ranked thirteenth among the all-time NASCAR Cup Series winners; he is ranked ninth among those who have competed during the sport&#x27;s modern era (1972–present).

Stewart is the only driver to complete the Indianapolis 500–Coca-Cola 600 Double Duty, finishing sixth and third respectively in 2001. He is also the second owner-driver to win a NASCAR championship.

Stewart is the all-time winningest Cup Series driver at the following tracks:
*Chicagoland Speedway (3)
*Homestead-Miami Speedway (3; tied with Greg Biffle)
*Watkins Glen International (5)

==In popular media==
===Radio===
Stewart hosted a two-hour weekly radio show, titled &quot;Tony Stewart Live&quot;, broadcast on Sirius Satellite Radio. Stewart co-hosted the show with Matt Yocum, and took listener calls. The show ran from 2007 to 2008.

===Television===
*From 1999 to 2003, Stewart worked for Turner Sports as a guest analyst on one NASCAR Busch Series race per year, one of the earliest examples of a current Cup driver doing commentary for a lower series race. Stewart called the fall Charlotte race in 1999 and 2000 alongside Allen Bestwick, and the Watkins Glen race in 2001 alongside Mike Hogewood.
*In 2007, Stewart appeared in commercials for Subway with their spokesman Jared Fogle.
*He was in a 2008 Toyota commercial where the cars of Toyota Sprint Cup drivers, including Stewart&#x27;s, are driven by kids with remote controls. When his kid driver spins his car out of control, he crawls out, yelling to his crew chief, &quot;Zippy, run for your life!&quot; Stewart then throws his helmet at his car.
*Stewart appears in commercials as a member of the Coca-Cola Racing Family of drivers.
*In 2010, Stewart appeared in a commercial for the Burger King Steak House XT, which he endorsed. This video entered the Top 10 of the &quot;Ad Age&quot;/Visible Measures Top Viral Ad Chart on August 12, 2010.
*On February 14, 2012, Stewart guest-starred on the ABC series &quot;Last Man Standing&quot;.
*On March 17, 2013, he voiced himself in &quot;The Cleveland Show&quot; in the episode, &quot;The Hangover Part Tubbs&quot;.
*In 2013 and 2014, Stewart appeared as himself in a special series of McLaren&#x27;s cartoon &quot;Tooned&quot; in partnership with Mobil 1.
* On January 22, 2022, during the San Francisco 49ers/Green Bay Packers NFL playoff game, FOX Sports announced the addition of Stewart to the broadcast booth next month. He will join Mike Joy and Clint Bowyer in the booth for the inaugural running of the Clash at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum as well as the 64th running of the Daytona 500.
* In 2023, Stewart was a part of the FOX Sports broadcast booth for both the Clash at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum as well as the 65th running of the Daytona 500.

===Video games===
*EA Sports announced that Stewart would appear in person for the first time on the cover of &quot;NASCAR Thunder 2004&quot; in late 2003, his Home Depot Winston Cup car appeared on &quot;NASCAR 2001&quot;&#x27;s cover. He also appears on the North American cover of &quot;NASCAR 08&quot;.
*Stewart is included in &quot;NASCAR 2011: The Game&quot; and &quot;NASCAR The Game: Inside Line&quot;. On December 3, 2013, it was announced that he would appear on the cover of &quot;NASCAR &#x27;14&quot;.
*In 2019, Stewart and his Stewart-Haas Racing drivers were featured on the &quot;NASCAR Heat 4&quot; cover; he also appears as a playable driver and dirt team owner in the game&#x27;s Career Mode. The following year, he was included on the cover of &quot;NASCAR Heat 5&quot; Gold Edition.
*In 2020, Stewart partnered with Monster Games for &quot;Tony Stewart&#x27;s Sprint Car Racing&quot;. The game, which features Stewart&#x27;s All Stars Circuit of Champions, was released on February 14, 2020. A second game, &quot;Tony Stewart&#x27;s All American Racing&quot;, came out on September 4. 
*In 2021, a third game, &quot;SRX: The Game&quot; came out May 28, 2021. It featured 305 Sprints, Stadium Trucks, Late Models, and the Camping World SRX series. A free DLC including Super Late Models and 6 additional asphalt tracks were released later, along with a physical copy of the game. It is available on Xbox One, Xbox Series X|S, PS4, PS5, and Steam.

===Other media===
* He appeared with Dale Earnhardt Jr. in the music video for 3 Doors Down&#x27;s song &quot;The Road I&#x27;m On&quot;.
* Stewart is mentioned in the song &quot;Glory&quot; by Lil Wayne off his &quot;Free Weezy Album&quot;.
* Stewart is mentioned in the song &quot;Slow Down&quot; by Clyde Carson featuring The Team.
* Stewart is mentioned in the song “Set It Off” by Boosie Badazz.
* He appeared in the 2005 film &quot;&quot;, along with other NASCAR drivers, having his car driven over by Herbie and being one of four cars who boxed Herbie in.
* Stewart is mentioned in Eminem&#x27;s verse on the Shady Records &quot;SHADY CXVPHER&quot; video promoting the compilation album &quot;Shady XV&quot;, specifically referencing the Kevin Ward Jr. incident.
* In K-pop group Blackpink&#x27;s music video for &quot;Ddu-Du Ddu-Du&quot;, group member Lisa is seen wearing a vintage Stewart jacket from when he raced for Joe Gibbs Racing.
* Stewart is mentioned in the song &quot;Really Got It&quot; by Jerreau.
* While the song did not use his name, Stewart&#x27;s number 14 was referenced in the Brad Paisley song &quot;Country Nation&quot;. At the time of the song&#x27;s 2015 release, Stewart was still driving the No. 14 car in NASCAR. Every driver referenced in the song (Stewart, Jeff Gordon, Dale Earnhardt Jr., and Jimmie Johnson) has since retired or semi retired from the sport.
* Stewart has appeared in YouTube videos with rallycross driver Ken Block and drag racer Leah Pruett, both affiliated with the car channel Hoonigan. In March 2021, Stewart announced his engagement to Pruett. They married on November 21, 2021, in Los Cabos, Mexico.

==Motorsports career results==

===Indy Racing League===
() (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in &quot;italics&quot; indicate fastest lap)

: &quot;1 The VisionAire 500K was abandoned after three spectators were killed when debris from a crash on the track went into the grandstands.&quot;

====Indianapolis 500====
===NASCAR===
() (Bold – Pole position awarded by qualifying time. &quot;Italics&quot; – Pole position earned by points standings or practice time. * – Most laps led.)

====Sprint Cup Series====
=====Daytona 500=====
====Nationwide Series====
====Craftsman Truck Series====
====NASCAR Whelen Modified Tour====
 Ineligible for series points

===ARCA Menards Series===
() (Bold – Pole position awarded by qualifying time. &quot;Italics&quot; – Pole position earned by points standings or practice time. * – Most laps led.)
===International Race of Champions===
() (Bold – Pole position. * – Most laps led.)
===Rolex Sports Car Series===
() (Races in bold indicate pole position, Results are overall/class)
===Superstar Racing Experience===


==See also==
* List of NASCAR race wins by Tony Stewart

==References==
==External links==
*
*Tony Stewart Foundation
*Tony Stewart at The Coca-Cola Racing Family</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q380127" start="0" end="21" title="Tony Stewart" label="Anthony Wayne Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q380127" start="59" end="64" title="Tony Stewart" label="Smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758324" start="113" end="129" title="stock car racing" label="stock car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="149" end="155" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q511684" start="173" end="192" title="Stewart-Haas Racing" label="Stewart-Haas Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536294" start="214" end="218" title="NHRA" label="NHRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="238" end="255" title="NASCAR Cup Series" label="NASCAR Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="424" end="428" title="IndyCar Series" label="Indy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16816896" start="430" end="436" title="midget car racing" label="midget"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290416" start="438" end="444" title="sprint car racing" label="sprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336046" start="450" end="467" title="United States Automobile Club" label="USAC Silver Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="668" end="674" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="675" end="692" title="Sprint Cup Series" label="Sprint Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q317181" start="773" end="785" title="Chevrolet SS" label="Chevrolet SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q511684" start="800" end="819" title="Stewart-Haas Racing" label="Stewart-Haas Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q47002831" start="838" end="853" title="Mike Bugarewicz" label="Mike Bugarewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691437" start="894" end="910" title="Joe Gibbs Racing" label="Joe Gibbs Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606464" start="933" end="947" title="Greg Zipadelli" label="Greg Zipadelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q864407" start="953" end="967" title="The Home Depot" label="The Home Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254455" start="1020" end="1029" title="Joe Gibbs" label="Joe Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983252" start="1124" end="1136" title="Owner-Driver (NASCAR)" label="owner-driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375059" start="1143" end="1156" title="Alan Kulwicki" label="Alan Kulwicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068013" start="1291" end="1311" title="Chase for the Sprint Cup" label="chase playoff format"/>
<link wikidata="Q171494" start="1389" end="1396" title="Winston (cigarette)" label="Winston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2951715" start="1400" end="1404" title="2002 NASCAR Winston Cup Series" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071758" start="1406" end="1412" title="Nextel" label="Nextel"/>
<link wikidata="Q595609" start="1416" end="1420" title="2005 NASCAR Nextel Cup Series" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q301965" start="1426" end="1432" title="Sprint Nextel" label="Sprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041573" start="1436" end="1440" title="2011 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443089" start="1574" end="1593" title="NASCAR Hall of Fame" label="NASCAR Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q26251205" start="1730" end="1741" title="Leah Pruett" label="Leah Pruett"/>
<link wikidata="Q15037754" start="1927" end="1934" title="kart" label="go kart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318270" start="1938" end="1955" title="Westport, Indiana" label="Westport, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15037754" start="2023" end="2031" title="kart" label="go karts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035895" start="2073" end="2098" title="World Karting Association" label="World Karting Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888268" start="2140" end="2172" title="United Midget Racing Association" label="United Midget Racing Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336046" start="2273" end="2296" title="United States Auto Club" label="United States Auto Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423885" start="2367" end="2379" title="Mark Dismore" label="Mark Dismore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2649" end="2661" title="United States Auto Club#The Triple Crown" label="Triple Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703344" start="2789" end="2800" title="Hut Hundred" label="Hut Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325639" start="2805" end="2822" title="4 Crown Nationals" label="4 Crown Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="2879" end="2897" title="IndyCar Series" label="Indy Racing League"/>
<link wikidata="Q278779" start="3049" end="3066" title="A. J. Foyt Racing" label="A. J. Foyt Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401369" start="3096" end="3107" title="Team Menard" label="Team Menard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199981" start="3203" end="3229" title="Walt Disney World Speedway" label="Walt Disney World Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q572740" start="3296" end="3308" title="Buzz Calkins" label="Buzz Calkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803538" start="3330" end="3337" title="Phoenix Raceway" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="3459" end="3475" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q262437" start="3567" end="3580" title="Arie Luyendyk" label="Arie Luyendyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629938" start="3623" end="3636" title="Scott Brayton" label="Scott Brayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q645499" start="3972" end="3984" title="Busch Series" label="Busch Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q255911" start="4130" end="4142" title="NASCAR Truck Series" label="Truck Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654485" start="4252" end="4266" title="1996–97 Indy Racing League" label="1996-97 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803538" start="4405" end="4412" title="Phoenix International Raceway" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="4434" end="4442" title="Indy 500" label="Indy 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423492" start="4652" end="4662" title="Pikes Peak International Raceway" label="Pikes Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173429" start="4815" end="4829" title="Davey Hamilton" label="Davey Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254455" start="5485" end="5494" title="Joe Gibbs" label="Joe Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="5496" end="5499" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="5500" end="5512" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="5531" end="5550" title="Washington Redskins" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q636178" start="5586" end="5599" title="Bobby Labonte" label="Bobby Labonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033478" start="6229" end="6239" title="North Carolina Speedway" label="Rockingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q468436" start="6278" end="6290" title="Matt Kenseth" label="Matt Kenseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112545" start="6858" end="6871" title="Brian Vickers" label="Brian Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396457" start="6976" end="7002" title="Kevin Harvick Incorporated" label="Kevin Harvick Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156661" start="7116" end="7150" title="2013 DRIVE4COPD 300" label="Nationwide Series event at Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q977193" start="7163" end="7174" title="Regan Smith (racing driver)" label="Regan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308142" start="7288" end="7299" title="Kyle Larson" label="Kyle Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629280" start="7463" end="7474" title="2013 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q739092" start="7556" end="7569" title="Kevin Harvick" label="Kevin Harvick"/>
<link wikidata="Q468429" start="7574" end="7585" title="Kasey Kahne" label="Kasey Kahne"/>
<link wikidata="Q124705550" start="7936" end="7948" title="Pennzoil 150" label="Pennzoil 150"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="8041" end="8058" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591539" start="8122" end="8146" title="1996 NASCAR Busch Series" label="1996 NASCAR Busch Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q864407" start="8499" end="8513" title="The Home Depot" label="The Home Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q40990" start="8524" end="8531" title="Pontiac (automobile)" label="Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594626" start="8560" end="8571" title="1999 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q378806" start="8605" end="8623" title="Can-Am Duel" label="Gatorade Twin 125s"/>
<link wikidata="Q355420" start="8662" end="8676" title="Dale Earnhardt" label="Dale Earnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935680" start="9048" end="9060" title="short track motor racing" label="short tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683169" start="9162" end="9175" title="Davey Allison" label="Davey Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="9253" end="9267" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q704008" start="9315" end="9327" title="Carl Edwards" label="Carl Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q721634" start="9786" end="9798" title="Denny Hamlin" label="Denny Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q674150" start="9832" end="9844" title="James Hylton" label="James Hylton"/>
<link wikidata="Q371781" start="10001" end="10021" title="Memorial Day" label="Memorial Day weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104915" start="10082" end="10095" title="Coca-Cola 600" label="Coca-Cola 600"/>
<link wikidata="Q745387" start="10178" end="10199" title="1999 Indianapolis 500" label="1999 Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153714" start="10393" end="10423" title="2000 NASCAR Winston Cup Series" label="2000 NASCAR Winston Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q171449" start="10825" end="10837" title="Watkins Glen International" label="Watkins Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="10850" end="10861" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855084" start="10978" end="11001" title="Turkey Night Grand Prix" label="Turkey Night Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q984171" start="11022" end="11043" title="Irwindale, California" label="Irwindale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598619" start="11188" end="11199" title="2001 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q636178" start="11308" end="11321" title="Bobby Labonte" label="Bobby Labonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q204845" start="11338" end="11343" title="Terry Labonte" label="Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q641022" start="11345" end="11358" title="Rusty Wallace" label="Rusty Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q609705" start="11360" end="11370" title="Steve Park" label="Steve Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6162955" start="11372" end="11385" title="Jason Leffler" label="Jason Leffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093946" start="11387" end="11399" title="Jerry Nadeau" label="Jerry Nadeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983496" start="11401" end="11415" title="Buckshot Jones" label="Buckshot Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760834" start="11417" end="11429" title="Andy Houston" label="Andy Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464210" start="11431" end="11442" title="Ward Burton" label="Ward Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q719186" start="11444" end="11455" title="Mark Martin" label="Mark Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195241" start="11457" end="11470" title="Kenny Wallace" label="Kenny Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="11472" end="11483" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148758" start="11485" end="11499" title="Elliott Sadler" label="Elliott Sadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q946087" start="11501" end="11513" title="Dale Jarrett" label="Dale Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q719221" start="11515" end="11526" title="Jeff Burton" label="Jeff Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q377197" start="11528" end="11541" title="John Andretti" label="John Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q659690" start="11547" end="11559" title="Robby Gordon" label="Robby Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q355420" start="11922" end="11936" title="Dale Earnhardt" label="Dale Earnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247417" start="11944" end="11971" title="Death of Dale Earnhardt" label="fatal crash on the last lap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299756" start="12273" end="12292" title="Memorial Day Double" label="Memorial Day Double"/>
<link wikidata="Q172732" start="12338" end="12350" title="Indianapolis Motor Speedway" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="12377" end="12393" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104915" start="12411" end="12424" title="Coca-Cola 600" label="Coca-Cola 600"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997306" start="12529" end="12541" title="bump and run (auto racing)" label="bump and run"/>
<link wikidata="Q383490" start="12598" end="12605" title="Bristol Motor Speedway" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q13961" start="12728" end="12737" title="probation" label="probation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950921" start="12778" end="12787" title="2001 Pepsi 400" label="Pepsi 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179250" start="12791" end="12798" title="Daytona International Speedway" label="Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12860" end="12870" title="racing flags#The black flag" label="black flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017138" start="12917" end="12928" title="Dave Blaney" label="Dave Blaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q962388" start="12980" end="13001" title="Winston-Salem Journal" label="Winston-Salem Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547320" start="13102" end="13111" title="Talladega Superspeedway" label="Talladega"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606464" start="13280" end="13294" title="Greg Zipadelli" label="Greg Zipadelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599902" start="13629" end="13640" title="2002 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q16189523" start="13912" end="13925" title="Jimmy Spencer (racing driver)" label="Jimmy Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094317" start="14152" end="14163" title="Todd Bodine" label="Todd Bodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q913496" start="14255" end="14268" title="Brickyard 400" label="Brickyard 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q719186" start="14939" end="14950" title="Mark Martin" label="Mark Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="15238" end="15247" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q40990" start="15260" end="15267" title="Pontiac (automobile)" label="Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q220552" start="15620" end="15632" title="Andy Wallace (racing driver)" label="Andy Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q216330" start="15710" end="15729" title="24 Hours of Daytona" label="24 Hours of Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q93440629" start="16083" end="16100" title="Daytona Prototype" label="Daytona Prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602692" start="16211" end="16222" title="2004 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112545" start="16547" end="16560" title="Brian Vickers" label="Brian Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q764291" start="16950" end="16961" title="Chicagoland Speedway" label="Chicagoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779435" start="17402" end="17413" title="Ron Fellows" label="Ron Fellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068013" start="17466" end="17497" title="Chase for the Sprint Cup" label="Chase for the NASCAR NEXTEL Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815356" start="17554" end="17560" title="New Hampshire Motor Speedway" label="Loudon"/>
<link wikidata="Q519609" start="17690" end="17701" title="Greg Biffle" label="Greg Biffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325639" start="18207" end="18222" title="Eldora Speedway" label="Eldora Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483515" start="18235" end="18251" title="New Weston, Ohio" label="New Weston, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="19164" end="19178" title="IndyCar Series" label="IndyCar Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q454058" start="19186" end="19203" title="Hélio Castroneves" label="Hélio Castroneves"/>
<link wikidata="Q352222" start="19390" end="19408" title="exercise equipment" label="exercise equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q864407" start="19455" end="19469" title="The Home Depot" label="The Home Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="20279" end="20290" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="20377" end="20391" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815381" start="21203" end="21215" title="Martinsville Speedway" label="Martinsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094429" start="21544" end="21554" title="Ricky Rudd" label="Ricky Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606042" start="22012" end="22023" title="2006 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="22072" end="22083" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q209479" start="22085" end="22095" title="Kyle Busch" label="Kyle Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q468436" start="22101" end="22113" title="Matt Kenseth" label="Matt Kenseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325639" start="22871" end="22886" title="Eldora Speedway" label="Eldora Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335992" start="23201" end="23211" title="Boris Said" label="Boris Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q252623" start="23490" end="23506" title="Pennsylvania 500" label="Pennsylvania 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101597" start="23562" end="23574" title="Clint Bowyer" label="Clint Bowyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q704008" start="23745" end="23757" title="Carl Edwards" label="Carl Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="23796" end="23802" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q525980" start="23849" end="23860" title="Ryan Newman (racing driver)" label="Ryan Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700358" start="24255" end="24263" title="Richmond International Raceway" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q468429" start="24344" end="24355" title="Kasey Kahne" label="Kasey Kahne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723946" start="24842" end="24848" title="Kansas Speedway" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q374058" start="24850" end="24857" title="Atlanta Motor Speedway" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636819" start="24863" end="24868" title="Texas Motor Speedway" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666840" start="24962" end="24966" title="International Race of Champions" label="IROC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098927" start="25559" end="25579" title="Chili Bowl Nationals" label="Chili Bowl Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001620" start="25666" end="25684" title="Budweiser Shootout" label="Budweiser Shootout"/>
<link wikidata="Q201820" start="25920" end="25930" title="Kurt Busch" label="Kurt Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q201820" start="26013" end="26017" title="Kurt Busch" label="Kurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q209479" start="26022" end="26026" title="Kyle Busch" label="Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282873" start="26193" end="26202" title="NASCAR 08" label="NASCAR 08"/>
<link wikidata="Q173941" start="26223" end="26238" title="Electronic Arts" label="Electronic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712419" start="26302" end="26306" title="NASCAR 2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182267" start="26313" end="26317" title="NASCAR Thunder 2004" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035256" start="26334" end="26349" title="Car of Tomorrow" label="Car of Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q226062" start="26364" end="26373" title="Chevrolet Impala" label="Impala SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q383490" start="26399" end="26406" title="Bristol Motor Speedway" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602195" start="26433" end="26459" title="green-white-checker finish" label="green-white-checker finish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035256" start="26518" end="26533" title="Car of Tomorrow" label="Car of Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803538" start="26542" end="26549" title="Phoenix International Raceway" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="26657" end="26668" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="26782" end="26804" title="professional wrestling" label="professional wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q827572" start="26896" end="26913" title="Autism Speaks 400" label="Autism Speaks 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252953" start="26917" end="26922" title="Dover International Speedway" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067286" start="27791" end="27800" title="Charlotte Motor Speedway" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485140" start="28078" end="28095" title="USG Sheetrock 400" label="USG Sheetrock 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q764291" start="28099" end="28105" title="Chicagoland Speedway" label="Joliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q739092" start="28408" end="28421" title="Kevin Harvick" label="Kevin Harvick"/>
<link wikidata="Q355388" start="28791" end="28809" title="Dale Earnhardt Jr." label="Dale Earnhardt Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q746958" start="28965" end="28992" title="Centurion Boats at the Glen" label="Centurion Boats at the Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q171449" start="28996" end="29008" title="Watkins Glen International" label="Watkins Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691437" start="29266" end="29282" title="Joe Gibbs Racing" label="Joe Gibbs Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513889" start="29337" end="29346" title="Chevrolet Performance" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830865" start="29350" end="29356" title="Toyota Racing Development" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q841738" start="29418" end="29429" title="Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q525980" start="29523" end="29534" title="Ryan Newman (racing driver)" label="Ryan Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q201820" start="29539" end="29549" title="Kurt Busch" label="Kurt Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179235" start="29625" end="29657" title="2007 Daytona 500" label="previous year&amp;#x27;s Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q739092" start="29696" end="29709" title="Kevin Harvick" label="Kevin Harvick"/>
<link wikidata="Q719186" start="29717" end="29728" title="Mark Martin" label="Mark Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82614" start="29759" end="29772" title="UAW-Dodge 400" label="UAW-Dodge 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q645499" start="30050" end="30067" title="NASCAR Nationwide Series" label="Nationwide Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523618" start="30076" end="30085" title="Las Vegas Motor Speedway" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="30146" end="30154" title="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company" label="Goodyear"/>
<link wikidata="Q468429" start="30360" end="30371" title="Kasey Kahne" label="Kasey Kahne"/>
<link wikidata="Q827572" start="30399" end="30411" title="Best Buy 400" label="Best Buy 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148758" start="30456" end="30470" title="Elliott Sadler" label="Elliott Sadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q897267" start="30502" end="30517" title="David Gilliland" label="David Gilliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q355388" start="30578" end="30596" title="Dale Earnhardt Jr." label="Dale Earnhardt Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q721634" start="30601" end="30613" title="Denny Hamlin" label="Denny Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094440" start="31292" end="31305" title="Coke Zero 400" label="Coke Zero 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179250" start="31309" end="31316" title="Daytona International Speedway" label="Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691437" start="31380" end="31396" title="Joe Gibbs Racing" label="Joe Gibbs Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503650" start="31406" end="31417" title="J. J. Yeley" label="J. J. Yeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610404" start="31575" end="31589" title="2008 AMP Energy 500" label="AMP Energy 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547320" start="31593" end="31602" title="Talladega Superspeedway" label="Talladega"/>
<link wikidata="Q977193" start="31744" end="31755" title="Regan Smith (racing driver)" label="Regan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691437" start="32259" end="32275" title="Joe Gibbs Racing" label="Joe Gibbs Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="32317" end="32326" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="32330" end="32336" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q511684" start="32496" end="32511" title="Stewart-Haas Racing" label="Haas CNC Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337797" start="32562" end="32574" title="Office Depot" label="Office Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048237" start="32603" end="32615" title="Roush Fenway Racing" label="Roush Fenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325626" start="32626" end="32635" title="Old Spice" label="Old Spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q173228" start="32837" end="32847" title="A. J. Foyt" label="A. J. Foyt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691437" start="32901" end="32917" title="Joe Gibbs Racing" label="Joe Gibbs Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q209479" start="32975" end="32985" title="Kyle Busch" label="Kyle Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q721634" start="33043" end="33055" title="Denny Hamlin" label="Denny Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q525980" start="33113" end="33124" title="Ryan Newman (racing driver)" label="Ryan Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="33295" end="33304" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074531" start="33322" end="33346" title="Earnhardt Ganassi Racing" label="Earnhardt Ganassi Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952498" start="33706" end="33737" title="NASCAR Sprint All-Star Race XXV" label="NASCAR Sprint All-Star Race XXV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813430" start="33889" end="33895" title="Pocono Raceway" label="Pocono"/>
<link wikidata="Q252623" start="33903" end="33913" title="Pocono Organics CBD 325" label="Pocono 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094429" start="33992" end="34002" title="Ricky Rudd" label="Ricky Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q209479" start="34103" end="34113" title="Kyle Busch" label="Kyle Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613146" start="34152" end="34186" title="2009 Aaron&amp;#x27;s 499" label="spring race at Talladega that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q468429" start="34476" end="34487" title="Kasey Kahne" label="Kasey Kahne"/>
<link wikidata="Q171449" start="34616" end="34642" title="Watkins Glen International" label="Watkins Glen International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613514" start="34670" end="34699" title="2009 Chase for the Sprint Cup" label="2009 Chase for the Sprint Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q719186" start="34809" end="34820" title="Mark Martin" label="Mark Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505803" start="34911" end="34928" title="Price Chopper 400" label="Price Chopper 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636819" start="35108" end="35128" title="Texas Motor Speedway" label="Texas Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815381" start="35280" end="35301" title="Martinsville Speedway" label="Martinsville Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q380068" start="35445" end="35465" title="Emory Healthcare 500" label="Emory Healthcare 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q374058" start="35469" end="35491" title="Atlanta Motor Speedway" label="Atlanta Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506353" start="35522" end="35535" title="Pepsi Max 400" label="Pepsi Max 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q784899" start="35539" end="35557" title="Auto Club Speedway" label="Auto Club Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q837922" start="36367" end="36374" title="Mobil 1" label="Mobil 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041573" start="36472" end="36476" title="2011 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337797" start="36768" end="36780" title="Office Depot" label="Office Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112545" start="36855" end="36868" title="Brian Vickers" label="Brian Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q112563" start="36872" end="36888" title="Infineon Raceway" label="Infineon Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338371" start="37166" end="37192" title="Lenox Industrial Tools 301" label="Lenox Industrial Tools 301"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="37477" end="37494" title="NASCAR Sprint Cup" label="NASCAR Sprint Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q764291" start="37577" end="37597" title="Chicagoland Speedway" label="Chicagoland Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101597" start="37772" end="37784" title="Clint Bowyer" label="Clint Bowyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338371" start="37828" end="37840" title="Sylvania 300" label="Sylvania 300"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815356" start="37848" end="37876" title="New Hampshire Motor Speedway" label="New Hampshire Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q525980" start="38031" end="38042" title="Ryan Newman (racing driver)" label="Ryan Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879369" start="38044" end="38055" title="Paul Menard" label="Paul Menard"/>
<link wikidata="Q640388" start="38061" end="38072" title="Joey Logano" label="Joey Logano"/>
<link wikidata="Q746918" start="38226" end="38246" title="Tums Fast Relief 500" label="Tums Fast Relief 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q4621172" start="38672" end="38682" title="2011 Ford 400" label="final race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626077" start="38686" end="38710" title="Homestead-Miami Speedway" label="Homestead-Miami Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375059" start="38983" end="38996" title="Alan Kulwicki" label="Alan Kulwicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231450" start="39000" end="39004" title="1992 NASCAR Winston Cup Series" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q213448" start="39100" end="39114" title="Danica Patrick" label="Danica Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q723929" start="39126" end="39141" title="David Reutimann" label="David Reutimann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001620" start="39324" end="39342" title="Budweiser Shootout" label="Budweiser Shootout"/>
<link wikidata="Q726806" start="39354" end="39368" title="Marcos Ambrose" label="Marcos Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q209479" start="39445" end="39455" title="Kyle Busch" label="Kyle Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q378806" start="39700" end="39714" title="Gatorade Duels" label="Gatorade Duels"/>
<link wikidata="Q213448" start="39746" end="39760" title="Danica Patrick" label="Danica Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q841738" start="39874" end="39885" title="Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q549284" start="39994" end="40013" title="Ricky Stenhouse Jr." label="Ricky Stenhouse Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q82614" start="40043" end="40059" title="Kobalt Tools 400" label="Kobalt Tools 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523618" start="40063" end="40087" title="Las Vegas Motor Speedway" label="Las Vegas Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q784878" start="40258" end="40271" title="Auto Club 400" label="Auto Club 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q784899" start="40275" end="40293" title="Auto Club Speedway" label="Auto Club Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q355388" start="40494" end="40512" title="Dale Earnhardt Jr." label="Dale Earnhardt Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1505910" start="40872" end="40892" title="Toyota Save Mart 350" label="Toyota Save Mart 350"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101597" start="40916" end="40928" title="Clint Bowyer" label="Clint Bowyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201820" start="40940" end="40950" title="Kurt Busch" label="Kurt Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q468436" start="41027" end="41039" title="Matt Kenseth" label="Matt Kenseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625194" start="41058" end="41071" title="2012 Coke Zero 400" label="Coke Zero 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625884" start="41250" end="41277" title="2012 Irwin Tools Night Race" label="2012 Irwin Tools Night Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q468436" start="41330" end="41342" title="Matt Kenseth" label="Matt Kenseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q525980" start="41398" end="41409" title="Ryan Newman (racing driver)" label="Ryan Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q172744" start="41425" end="41443" title="Juan Pablo Montoya" label="Juan Pablo Montoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q719221" start="41475" end="41486" title="Jeff Burton" label="Jeff Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q213448" start="41719" end="41733" title="Danica Patrick" label="Danica Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q977193" start="41754" end="41765" title="Regan Smith (racing driver)" label="Regan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867953" start="41970" end="41984" title="Bass Pro Shops" label="Bass Pro Shops"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625686" start="42101" end="42110" title="2012 Good Sam Roadside Assistance 500" label="Talladega"/>
<link wikidata="Q946057" start="42208" end="42223" title="Michael Waltrip" label="Michael Waltrip"/>
<link wikidata="Q468429" start="42501" end="42512" title="Kasey Kahne" label="Kasey Kahne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879369" start="42514" end="42525" title="Paul Menard" label="Paul Menard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101597" start="42531" end="42543" title="Clint Bowyer" label="Clint Bowyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q739092" start="42606" end="42619" title="Kevin Harvick" label="Kevin Harvick"/>
<link wikidata="Q172155" start="42940" end="42952" title="Roger Penske" label="Roger Penske"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629451" start="42968" end="42989" title="2013 Indianapolis 500" label="2013 Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629280" start="43115" end="43126" title="2013 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q739092" start="43209" end="43222" title="Kevin Harvick" label="Kevin Harvick"/>
<link wikidata="Q468429" start="43227" end="43238" title="Kasey Kahne" label="Kasey Kahne"/>
<link wikidata="Q640388" start="43689" end="43700" title="Joey Logano" label="Joey Logano"/>
<link wikidata="Q721634" start="43898" end="43910" title="Denny Hamlin" label="Denny Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q201820" start="44238" end="44248" title="Kurt Busch" label="Kurt Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q213448" start="45007" end="45021" title="Danica Patrick" label="Danica Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q525980" start="45026" end="45037" title="Ryan Newman (racing driver)" label="Ryan Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q201820" start="45126" end="45136" title="Kurt Busch" label="Kurt Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="45510" end="45524" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q172744" start="45878" end="45896" title="Juan Pablo Montoya" label="Juan Pablo Montoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112545" start="46453" end="46466" title="Brian Vickers" label="Brian Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290416" start="46842" end="46857" title="sprint car racing" label="sprint car race"/>
<link wikidata="Q984370" start="46887" end="46902" title="Oskaloosa, Iowa" label="Oskaloosa, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q178366" start="47131" end="47136" title="tibia" label="tibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q302896" start="47141" end="47147" title="fibula" label="fibula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594626" start="47484" end="47500" title="1999 Daytona 500" label="1999 Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q171449" start="47556" end="47582" title="Watkins Glen International" label="Watkins Glen International"/>
<link wikidata="Q173289" start="47663" end="47672" title="Max Papis" label="Max Papis"/>
<link wikidata="Q977193" start="47925" end="47936" title="Regan Smith (racing driver)" label="Regan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q355388" start="47961" end="47979" title="Dale Earnhardt Jr." label="Dale Earnhardt Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4823059" start="48051" end="48064" title="Austin Dillon" label="Austin Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q719186" start="48234" end="48245" title="Mark Martin" label="Mark Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929735" start="48282" end="48304" title="Michael Waltrip Racing" label="Michael Waltrip Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112545" start="48454" end="48467" title="Brian Vickers" label="Brian Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148758" start="48472" end="48486" title="Elliott Sadler" label="Elliott Sadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157343" start="48799" end="48815" title="2014 Sprint Unlimited" label="Sprint Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954101" start="50030" end="50064" title="2013 Brickyard 400" label="previous year&amp;#x27;s Brickyard 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308142" start="50484" end="50495" title="Kyle Larson" label="Kyle Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q977193" start="51444" end="51455" title="Regan Smith (racing driver)" label="Regan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q719221" start="51460" end="51471" title="Jeff Burton" label="Jeff Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q560164" start="51899" end="51914" title="Brad Keselowski" label="Brad Keselowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q468436" start="51943" end="51955" title="Matt Kenseth" label="Matt Kenseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815381" start="52172" end="52184" title="Martinsville Speedway" label="Martinsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q355388" start="52254" end="52272" title="Dale Earnhardt Jr." label="Dale Earnhardt Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q739092" start="52734" end="52747" title="Kevin Harvick" label="Kevin Harvick"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515621" start="53459" end="53470" title="2015 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series" label="2015 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710796" start="54055" end="54067" title="2015 Brickyard 400" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21043308" start="54076" end="54082" title="2015 Windows 10 400" label="Pocono"/>
<link wikidata="Q20807161" start="54091" end="54103" title="2015 Cheez-It 355 at The Glen" label="Watkins Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858227" start="54116" end="54124" title="2015 Pure Michigan 400" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q841738" start="54166" end="54177" title="Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q468436" start="54230" end="54242" title="Matt Kenseth" label="Matt Kenseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383887" start="54258" end="54269" title="Ryan Blaney" label="Ryan Blaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q946057" start="54274" end="54289" title="Michael Waltrip" label="Michael Waltrip"/>
<link wikidata="Q19366445" start="54535" end="54547" title="2015 Folds of Honor QuikTrip 500" label="QuikTrip 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101597" start="54833" end="54845" title="Clint Bowyer" label="Clint Bowyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q519609" start="54847" end="54858" title="Greg Biffle" label="Greg Biffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q549284" start="54860" end="54879" title="Ricky Stenhouse Jr." label="Ricky Stenhouse Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q977193" start="54881" end="54892" title="Regan Smith (racing driver)" label="Regan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q913119" start="54897" end="54909" title="Joe Nemechek" label="Joe Nemechek"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481028" start="54991" end="55001" title="2015 Kobalt 400" label="Kobalt 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q19630293" start="55146" end="55171" title="2015 CampingWorld.com 500" label="2015 CampingWorld.com 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q19658578" start="55375" end="55388" title="2015 Auto Club 400" label="Auto Club 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q372297" start="55457" end="55470" title="Aric Almirola" label="Aric Almirola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377913" start="55481" end="55497" title="Martin Truex Jr." label="Martin Truex Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q171577" start="55962" end="55975" title="Justin Wilson (racing driver)" label="Justin Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101597" start="56314" end="56326" title="Clint Bowyer" label="Clint Bowyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q936066" start="56459" end="56469" title="dune buggy" label="dune buggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="56481" end="56490" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q519609" start="56510" end="56521" title="Greg Biffle" label="Greg Biffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000637" start="56588" end="56602" title="burst fracture" label="burst fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q405478" start="56610" end="56625" title="lumbar vertebra" label="lumbar vertebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022314" start="56673" end="56684" title="2016 Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112545" start="56710" end="56723" title="Brian Vickers" label="Brian Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343057" start="56728" end="56737" title="Ty Dillon" label="Ty Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24908564" start="56844" end="56861" title="2016 Toyota Owners 400" label="Toyota Owners 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q303039" start="57221" end="57230" title="Jack Link&amp;#x27;s 500" label="GEICO 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q721634" start="58096" end="58108" title="Denny Hamlin" label="Denny Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q525980" start="58924" end="58935" title="Ryan Newman (racing driver)" label="Ryan Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q27630038" start="59540" end="59564" title="2016 Bank of America 500" label="2016 Bank of America 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405114" start="59660" end="59682" title="2016 Ford EcoBoost 400" label="2016 Ford EcoBoost 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q26155874" start="59721" end="59733" title="2016 Brickyard 400" label="23rd running"/>
<link wikidata="Q913496" start="59741" end="59754" title="Brickyard 400" label="Brickyard 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q216330" start="60271" end="60290" title="Rolex 24 at Daytona" label="Rolex 24 at Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511827" start="60343" end="60351" title="Crawford Composites" label="Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336046" start="61696" end="61700" title="United States Auto Club" label="USAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974326" start="61856" end="61896" title="National Midget Auto Racing Hall of Fame" label="National Midget Auto Racing Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978658" start="61912" end="61944" title="National Sprint Car Hall of Fame &amp;amp; Museum" label="National Sprint Car Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q787511" start="62179" end="62183" title="Auto Racing Club of America" label="ARCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855084" start="62241" end="62264" title="Turkey Night Grand Prix" label="Turkey Night Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098927" start="62281" end="62308" title="Chili Bowl Nationals" label="Chili Bowl Midget Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896078" start="62487" end="62504" title="Ohsweken Speedway" label="Ohsweken Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q97366935" start="62801" end="62828" title="Superstar Racing Experience" label="Superstar Racing Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q107349268" start="62928" end="62943" title="2021 SRX Series" label="2021 SRX Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596644" start="62952" end="62975" title="Stafford Motor Speedway" label="Stafford Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423691" start="63059" end="63076" title="Knoxville Raceway" label="Knoxville Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q841675" start="63132" end="63162" title="Nashville Fairgrounds Speedway" label="Nashville Fairgrounds Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q62056667" start="63221" end="63238" title="Ernie Francis Jr." label="Ernie Francis Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3290416" start="63319" end="63334" title="sprint car racing" label="sprint car race"/>
<link wikidata="Q19460795" start="63338" end="63366" title="Canandaigua Motorsports Park" label="Canandaigua Motorsports Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363104" start="63370" end="63391" title="Canandaigua, New York" label="Canandaigua, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416144" start="63528" end="63547" title="caution flag" label="yellow caution flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515727" start="64135" end="64147" title="2014 Cheez-It 355 at The Glen" label="Cheez-It 355"/>
<link wikidata="Q171449" start="64151" end="64177" title="Watkins Glen International" label="Watkins Glen International"/>
<link wikidata="Q977193" start="64237" end="64248" title="Regan Smith (racing driver)" label="Regan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q115025" start="64723" end="64747" title="Ontario County, New York" label="Ontario County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q719221" start="65345" end="65356" title="Jeff Burton" label="Jeff Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839821" start="69095" end="69114" title="TriStar Motorsports" label="TriStar Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094091" start="69363" end="69372" title="Gene Haas" label="Gene Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q525980" start="69590" end="69601" title="Ryan Newman (racing driver)" label="Ryan Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q739092" start="69815" end="69828" title="Kevin Harvick" label="Kevin Harvick"/>
<link wikidata="Q121409304" start="69929" end="69940" title="2024 NASCAR Cup Series" label="2024 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q130125307" start="70052" end="70069" title="Haas Factory Team" label="Haas Factory Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503650" start="70197" end="70208" title="J. J. Yeley" label="J. J. Yeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229915" start="70234" end="70245" title="Dave Steele" label="Dave Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166566" start="70390" end="70399" title="Jay Drake" label="Jay Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296750" start="70751" end="70763" title="Donny Schatz" label="Donny Schatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613036" start="70848" end="70860" title="Steve Kinser" label="Steve Kinser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610359" start="70946" end="70962" title="World of Outlaws" label="World of Outlaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q13574641" start="71070" end="71107" title="NHRA Camping World Drag Racing Series" label="NHRA Camping World Drag Racing Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q26251205" start="71160" end="71171" title="Leah Pruett" label="Leah Pruett"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207603" start="71198" end="71208" title="Matt Hagan" label="Matt Hagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325639" start="71415" end="71430" title="Eldora Speedway" label="Eldora Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312875" start="71444" end="71458" title="Rossburg, Ohio" label="Rossburg, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123993" start="71525" end="71554" title="Paducah International Raceway" label="Paducah International Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q984377" start="71560" end="71577" title="Paducah, Kentucky" label="Paducah, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724876" start="71595" end="71609" title="Macon Speedway" label="Macon Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q575511" start="71613" end="71628" title="Macon, Illinois" label="Macon, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094446" start="71640" end="71654" title="Kenny Schrader" label="Kenny Schrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195241" start="71656" end="71669" title="Kenny Wallace" label="Kenny Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297461" start="72417" end="72429" title="Ray Evernham" label="Ray Evernham"/>
<link wikidata="Q226062" start="72575" end="72591" title="Chevrolet Impala" label="Chevrolet Impala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108569" start="72843" end="72863" title="Prelude to the Dream" label="Prelude to the Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325639" start="72896" end="72911" title="Eldora Speedway" label="Eldora Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974326" start="73890" end="73930" title="National Midget Auto Racing Hall of Fame" label="National Midget Auto Racing Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q355130" start="74011" end="74024" title="Richard Petty" label="Richard Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896630" start="74062" end="74084" title="Best Driver ESPY Award" label="Best Driver ESPY Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q171449" start="74112" end="74120" title="Watkins Glen International" label="The Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q112563" start="74245" end="74259" title="Sonoma Raceway" label="Sonoma Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023901" start="74288" end="74328" title="Indianapolis Motor Speedway Hall of Fame" label="Indianapolis Motor Speedway Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949998" start="74344" end="74379" title="Motorsports Hall of Fame of America" label="Motorsports Hall of Fame of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443089" start="74395" end="74414" title="NASCAR Hall of Fame" label="NASCAR Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978658" start="74430" end="74462" title="National Sprint Car Hall of Fame" label="National Sprint Car Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605562" start="74581" end="74615" title="List of all-time NASCAR Cup Series winners" label="all-time NASCAR Cup Series winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="74761" end="74777" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104915" start="74778" end="74791" title="Coca-Cola 600" label="Coca-Cola 600"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299756" start="74792" end="74803" title="Double Duty" label="Double Duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q764291" start="74998" end="75018" title="Chicagoland Speedway" label="Chicagoland Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626077" start="75024" end="75048" title="Homestead-Miami Speedway" label="Homestead-Miami Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q519609" start="75063" end="75074" title="Greg Biffle" label="Greg Biffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q171449" start="75077" end="75103" title="Watkins Glen International" label="Watkins Glen International"/>
<link wikidata="Q996079" start="75238" end="75260" title="Sirius Satellite Radio" label="Sirius Satellite Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789566" start="75294" end="75304" title="Matt Yocum" label="Matt Yocum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855963" start="75420" end="75433" title="Turner Sports" label="Turner Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q645499" start="75460" end="75479" title="NASCAR Busch Series" label="NASCAR Busch Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731537" start="75656" end="75670" title="Allen Bestwick" label="Allen Bestwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209110" start="75716" end="75729" title="Mike Hogewood" label="Mike Hogewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q244457" start="75777" end="75783" title="Subway (restaurant)" label="Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159960" start="75805" end="75816" title="Jared Fogle" label="Jared Fogle"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="75836" end="75842" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606464" start="76064" end="76069" title="Greg Zipadelli" label="Zippy"/>
<link wikidata="Q380047" start="76367" end="76373" title="Ad Age" label="Ad Age"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76380" end="76396" title="Visible Measures" label="Visible Measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q34397" start="76577" end="76595" title="The Cleveland Show" label="The Cleveland Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="76725" end="76732" title="McLaren" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175215" start="76754" end="76760" title="Tooned" label="Tooned"/>
<link wikidata="Q869106" start="77330" end="77339" title="EA Sports" label="EA Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182267" start="77427" end="77446" title="NASCAR Thunder 2004" label="NASCAR Thunder 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q864407" start="77471" end="77481" title="Home Depot" label="Home Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="77482" end="77493" title="Winston Cup" label="Winston Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712419" start="77516" end="77527" title="NASCAR 2001" label="NASCAR 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282873" start="77601" end="77610" title="NASCAR 08" label="NASCAR 08"/>
<link wikidata="" start="77648" end="77669" title="NASCAR 2011: The Game" label="NASCAR 2011: The Game"/>
<link wikidata="" start="77686" end="77714" title="NASCAR The Game: Inside Line" label="NASCAR The Game: Inside Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267820" start="77803" end="77818" title="NASCAR &amp;#x27;14" label="NASCAR &amp;#x27;14"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122787" start="77907" end="77920" title="NASCAR Heat 4" label="NASCAR Heat 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q96394618" start="78081" end="78094" title="NASCAR Heat 5" label="NASCAR Heat 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q775680" start="78148" end="78161" title="Monster Games" label="Monster Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q96419559" start="78172" end="78209" title="Tony Stewart&amp;#x27;s Sprint Car Racing" label="Tony Stewart&amp;#x27;s Sprint Car Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q355388" start="78816" end="78834" title="Dale Earnhardt Jr." label="Dale Earnhardt Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q175097" start="78858" end="78870" title="3 Doors Down" label="3 Doors Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761070" start="78889" end="78909" title="The Road I&amp;#x27;m On" label="The Road I&amp;#x27;m On"/>
<link wikidata="Q15615" start="78973" end="78982" title="Lil Wayne" label="Lil Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q20645194" start="78997" end="79013" title="Free Weezy Album" label="Free Weezy Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202376" start="79081" end="79093" title="Clyde Carson" label="Clyde Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768198" start="79104" end="79112" title="The Team (band)" label="The Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q166454" start="79165" end="79178" title="Boosie Badazz" label="Boosie Badazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620474" start="79288" end="79294" title="Herbie" label="Herbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="79369" end="79375" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q568246" start="79396" end="79409" title="Shady Records" label="Shady Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q17616978" start="79480" end="79488" title="Shady XV" label="Shady XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q213665" start="79555" end="79560" title="K-pop" label="K-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q25056945" start="79567" end="79576" title="Blackpink" label="Blackpink"/>
<link wikidata="Q55078535" start="79606" end="79619" title="Ddu-Du Ddu-Du" label="Ddu-Du Ddu-Du"/>
<link wikidata="Q26707663" start="79640" end="79644" title="Lisa (rapper)" label="Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691437" start="79709" end="79725" title="Joe Gibbs Racing" label="Joe Gibbs Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="80204" end="80211" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q438382" start="80242" end="80251" title="Ken Block" label="Ken Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q26251205" start="80267" end="80278" title="Leah Pruett" label="Leah Pruett"/>
<link wikidata="Q659516" start="80424" end="80441" title="Los Cabos, Mexico" label="Los Cabos, Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936111" start="80609" end="80624" title="VisionAire 500K" label="VisionAire 500K"/>
<link wikidata="Q28137117" start="81525" end="81565" title="List of NASCAR race wins by Tony Stewart" label="List of NASCAR race wins by Tony Stewart"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426195" wikidata="Q2749841" url="?curid=426195" title="Maine Legislature">
<text>The Maine State Legislature is the state legislature of the U.S. state of Maine. It is a bicameral body composed of the lower house Maine House of Representatives and the upper house Maine Senate. The legislature convenes at the State House in Augusta, where it has met since 1832.

The House of Representatives consists of 151 members, each chosen from single-member constituencies. The House is uniquely the only state legislative body in the U.S. to set aside special seats for American Indians, where there are three non-voting Representatives from the Penobscot Nation, the Passamaquoddy Tribe, and the Houlton Band of Maliseets. The Senate currently has 35 members, though under the Maine Constitution there may be 31, 33, or 35.

==History==

In 1922, Dora Pinkham became the first woman elected to the Maine State Legislature, serving first in the House and then in the Senate.

In 1823, the Penobscot tribe sent what is believed to be their first representative to the Maine Senate. In 1842, the Passamaquoddy tribe also sent their first representative. It appears that prior to Maine&#x27;s statehood, Massachusetts allowed the tribes to send in representatives. It is not known what role the representatives played in the legislature until 1907, when records started being kept, and included documentation of where the representatives sat, what they said when they spoke, and privileges that were granted. While the representatives tried to achieve a higher status in the legislature, in 1941, legislation was passed to remove the representatives from the Hall of House, meaning that they held very little power, besides the persuasive power granted by being in the capital. It was not until 1975 when the representatives were once again allowed in the chamber hall with seating and speaking privileges. In 1996, tribe representatives tried to co-sponsor a bill, and in 1999 the tribes were formally allowed to co-sponsor bills. On 2001, this rule change allowed for Donna Loring to push for a bill, &quot;An Act to Require Teaching Maine Native American History and Culture in Maine’s Schools&quot; to require all public and private schools in the state to teach about Maine history, including Native American history. This act was signed by Governor Angus King in 2001. 

The Houlton Band of Maliseets received representation in 2012. Thus far, the Mi&#x27;kmaq Nation has not been granted representation.

In 2015, the Passamaquoddy and Penobscot pulled their representatives from the legislature in protest of growing tension between the tribes and the state government, including Governor Paul LePage. As of the 2018 election, only the Passamaquoddy tribe have returned to the legislature, while the Maliseets have departed and the Penobscot have yet to return.

==Qualifications==
To be a member of the legislature, one must be at least 21 years of age, have to have been a citizen of the US for five years, have been a resident of Maine for one year, and for the 3 months next preceding the time of this person&#x27;s election shall have been and during the period for which elected continue to be, a resident in the district represented.

==Elections==
Legislative elections are held in November of every even-numbered year, during the state&#x27;s general election. The terms for both houses are two years. Since 1996, members of both the House and Senate are limited to four two-year terms, a consecutive, rather than a lifetime, limit. Members who have served the limit are re-eligible after two years.

Until 1880, the legislature was elected for a one-year term. Starting in 1881, an amendment to the Maine Constitution took effect to provide for two-year terms, the current length.

==Sessions==
The legislature meets in two separate sessions. The first session begins the first Wednesday in December, following the general election, and continues into the following year. The second session begins the first Tuesday in January of the next year, the same year as the next general election. The second session is typically short and deals with a limited number of bills per the Maine Constitution, which are budgetary matters, legislation submitted by the Governor, bills held over from the first session, citizen initiatives, and legislation deemed to be an &#x27;emergency&#x27;. According to the Constitution, emergency legislation is supposed to be legislation for an immediate need to protect public peace, health, or safety, but that provision is often broadly interpreted.

The governor of Maine may also call the legislature into a special session for &quot;extraordinary occasions.&quot; The Governor and the Senate President may also call the Senate into session to confirm gubernatorial appointments.

==Powers==
As the legislative branch of the Maine state government, the legislature has the power to make laws, subject to a veto by the governor. The legislature, however, by a vote of two-thirds in each house, may override the veto. The legislature also has the power to propose constitutional amendments by a vote of two-thirds in each house; the proposal must be approved by a majority of voters in a referendum in order to be passed.

Unlike other states, the legislature is responsible for electing the attorney general, state treasurer, and secretary of state. Most states give this responsibility to gubernatorial appointments, or an election by the people at large.

==Practices==

=== Committees ===
Unlike committees in most state legislatures, most standing committees in the Maine State Legislature are Joint committees with members from both the House and Senate. As of 2024, the following joint committees are in operation:

* Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry (ACF)
* Appropriations and Financial Affairs (AFA)
* Criminal Justice and Public Safety (CJPS)
* Education and Cultural Affairs (EDU)
* Energy, Utilities and Technology (EUT)
* Environment and Natural Resources (ENR)
* Government Oversight Committee (GOC)
* Health and Human Services (HHS)
* Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services (HCIFS)
* Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (IFW)
* Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business (IDEA)
* Joint Select Committee on Housing (HOU)
* Joint Select Committee on Joint Rules (JTR)
* Judiciary (JUD)
* Labor and Housing (LBHS)
* Marine Resources (MAR)
* State and Local Government (SLG)
* Taxation (TAX)
* Transportation (TRA)
* Veterans and Legal Affairs (VLA)

The Senate and House have only a few separate committees:

* Bills in the Second Reading (House and Senate)
* Engrossed Bills (House and Senate)
* Ethics (&quot;Ethics&quot; in the House, &quot;Conduct and Ethics&quot; in the Senate)
* Rules (&quot;Rules and Business of the House&quot; in the House, &quot;Senate Rules&quot; in the Senate)
* Leaves of Absence (House)
* Elections (House)
* Senatorial Vote (Senate)

In addition, a Legislative Council, which manages the overall business of the legislature, comprises the President of the Senate, the Speaker of the House, the Republican and Democratic Floor Leaders for both the Senate and House of Representatives and their Assistant Floor Leaders. A Legislative Budget Subcommittee, which is a subcommittee of the Legislative Council, reviews the proposed legislative budget and sends its recommendations to the Council for approval. 

=== Legislation ===
Unlike other state legislatures (save for the unicameral Nebraska Legislature), the Maine State Legislature uses a unified numbering system for bills. Bills are assigned a House or Senate Paper number (depending on its house of origin) and a unified &quot;Legislative Document&quot; (&quot;LD&quot;) number, both of which stay constant until the end of session. 

==See also==
* Maine State House
* Maine House of Representatives
* Maine Senate
* List of Maine state legislatures
* Maine Legislative Youth Advisory Council

== References ==
==External links==
*Maine State Legislature</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2749841" start="4" end="27" title="Maine Legislature" label="Maine State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270264" start="35" end="52" title="State legislature (United States)" label="state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="60" end="70" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="74" end="79" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="89" end="103" title="Bicameralism" label="bicameral body"/>
<link wikidata="Q375928" start="120" end="131" title="lower house" label="lower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q909004" start="132" end="162" title="Maine House of Representatives" label="Maine House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="171" end="182" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q909050" start="183" end="195" title="Maine Senate" label="Maine Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985164" start="229" end="240" title="Maine State House" label="State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q28206" start="244" end="251" title="Augusta, Maine" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270264" start="415" end="432" title="State legislature (United States)" label="state legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="481" end="497" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="American Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q774932" start="557" end="573" title="Penobscot people" label="Penobscot Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649265" start="579" end="592" title="Passamaquoddy" label="Passamaquoddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563033" start="608" end="633" title="Maliseet people" label="Houlton Band of Maliseets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164204" start="689" end="707" title="Maine Constitution" label="Maine Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q27656969" start="759" end="771" title="Dora Pinkham" label="Dora Pinkham"/>
<link wikidata="Q774932" start="900" end="909" title="Penobscot" label="Penobscot"/>
<link wikidata="Q909050" start="978" end="990" title="Maine Senate" label="Maine Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649265" start="1005" end="1018" title="Passamaquoddy" label="Passamaquoddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562329" start="1978" end="1990" title="Donna Loring" label="Donna Loring"/>
<link wikidata="Q544464" start="2263" end="2273" title="Angus King" label="Angus King"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146865" start="2289" end="2314" title="Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians" label="Houlton Band of Maliseets"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715170" start="2362" end="2381" title="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq Nation" label="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q881196" start="2605" end="2616" title="Paul LePage" label="Paul LePage"/>
<link wikidata="Q56275395" start="2628" end="2641" title="2018 Maine House of Representatives election" label="2018 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q55315917" start="3268" end="3284" title="Elections in Maine" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164204" start="3625" end="3643" title="Maine Constitution" label="Maine Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164204" start="4102" end="4120" title="Maine Constitution" label="Maine Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506352" start="4180" end="4188" title="Governor of Maine" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="4755" end="4773" title="legislative branch" label="legislative branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506352" start="4874" end="4882" title="Governor of Maine" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736314" start="5246" end="5262" title="Maine Attorney General" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q17560742" start="5264" end="5279" title="Maine State Treasurer" label="state treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444375" start="5285" end="5303" title="Secretary of State of Maine" label="secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q8348544" start="5553" end="5569" title="Joint committee (legislative)" label="Joint committees"/>
<link wikidata="Q996610" start="7409" end="7429" title="Nebraska Legislature" label="Nebraska Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985164" start="7731" end="7748" title="Maine State House" label="Maine State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q909004" start="7751" end="7781" title="Maine House of Representatives" label="Maine House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q909050" start="7784" end="7796" title="Maine Senate" label="Maine Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q129254743" start="7799" end="7831" title="List of Maine state legislatures" label="List of Maine state legislatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736389" start="7834" end="7874" title="Maine Legislative Youth Advisory Council" label="Maine Legislative Youth Advisory Council"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426196" wikidata="Q211857" url="?curid=426196" title="Technique">
<text>Technique or techniques may refer to:

==Music==
* The Techniques, a Jamaican rocksteady vocal group of the 1960s
*Technique (band), a British female synth pop band in the 1990s
*&quot;Technique&quot; (album), by New Order, 1989
*&quot;Techniques&quot; (album), by Modern Baseball, 2014
*&quot;Technique&quot;, a song by Pat Boone from his EP &quot;Four by Pat&quot;, 1957

==Other uses==
* &quot;Technique&quot; (newspaper), the newspaper of the Georgia Institute of Technology, U.S.
* Technique Polytechnic Institute, in West Bengal, India
* Technique Stadium, a football stadium in Whittington Moor, Chesterfield, Derbyshire

==See also==

* Technical (disambiguation)
* Technology, the sum of techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services
* Skill, the ability to carry out a task with determined results
* Scientific technique, any systematic way of obtaining information about a scientific nature</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211857" start="0" end="9" title="Technique" label="Technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q211857" start="13" end="23" title="Technique" label="techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437104" start="51" end="65" title="The Techniques" label="The Techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692398" start="115" end="131" title="Technique (band)" label="Technique (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065877" start="179" end="208" title="Technique (album)" label="&amp;quot;Technique&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23907496" start="230" end="260" title="Techniques (album)" label="&amp;quot;Techniques&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q116245042" start="349" end="360" title="Four by Pat" label="Four by Pat"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686864" start="391" end="424" title="Technique (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;Technique&amp;quot; (newspaper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24590348" start="487" end="518" title="Technique Polytechnic Institute" label="Technique Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q619112" start="544" end="561" title="Technique Stadium" label="Technique Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692238" start="645" end="671" title="Technical (disambiguation)" label="Technical (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="674" end="684" title="Technology" label="Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q205961" start="786" end="791" title="Skill" label="Skill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918374" start="851" end="871" title="Scientific technique" label="Scientific technique"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426198" wikidata="Q888265" url="?curid=426198" title="Bob St. Clair">
<text>Robert Bruce St. Clair (February 18, 1931 – April 20, 2015) was an American professional football offensive tackle who played 11 seasons for the San Francisco 49ers of the National Football League (NFL). Known for his intelligence and towering size, at tall, St. Clair earned All-Pro honors nine times and is enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame. He played college football for the San Francisco Dons and the Tulsa Golden Hurricane.

== College career ==

A native San Franciscan, Bob St. Clair attended San Francisco Polytechnic High School (located across the street from Kezar Stadium) and the University of San Francisco, and was part of USF&#x27;s undefeated 1951 team, which famously refused to play in the Orange Bowl because the team was asked to keep its black players, future NFL hall of famer Ollie Matson and future NFL game official Burl Toler, from playing because they were black. Since USF did not return to field a football team for the 1952 season, St. Clair finished his college career at the University of Tulsa.

== Professional career ==
St. Clair was drafted by the 49ers in the third round of the 1953 NFL draft. He played his entire 11-year professional career in San Francisco, making his year at Tulsa the only season he did not play home games in Kezar Stadium.

He began his career by successfully holding out for a $6,000 rookie salary. In his first preseason, he earned his spot on the 1953 team by holding his own against defensive tackle Leo Nomellini in practice. Primarily an offensive tackle, he played alongside the Million Dollar Backfield, whose halfback Hugh McElhenny considered him a dominant blocker. He started every game for the 49ers from 1954 to 1956, when he also received his first Pro Bowl selection.

Due to his size, St. Clair was also an effective special teams player. He blocked 19 field goals over the course of his career, ten of which came in 1956, and was instrumental in Abe Woodson&#x27;s 105-yard kick return touchdown in 1959.

His only postseason game came in 1957. After missing eight weeks with a shoulder injury early in the season, St. Clair returned as the 49ers ended the season with an 8–4 record, tying the Detroit Lions to force a one-game playoff, which Detroit won in a 31–27 comeback victory.

St. Clair once again started at least ten games in each of the 1958–1961 seasons, receiving Pro Bowl honors each year. He missed time due to an Achilles injury in 1962, but returned to play the entire 1963 season, for which he received the 49ers&#x27; Len Eshmont Award. During the 1964 preseason, he injured his other Achilles tendon during punt return practice, requiring career-ending surgery.

A perennial team captain, St. Clair was nicknamed &quot;The Geek&quot; by his teammates due to his eccentric off-the-field behavior, including a habit of eating raw meat, which he frequently used to intimidate 49ers rookies.

St. Clair was elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1990. On January 19, 2001, the city of San Francisco renamed the field at Kezar Stadium in his honor in recognition of his having played all his high school and professional home games and three-quarters of his college home games there, and his number was retired by the 49ers later that year.

== Personal life ==

While still an active player, St. Clair was elected to Daly City&#x27;s city council in 1958, which included a term as mayor from 1961 to 1962; one of his mayoral and council colleagues was his high school coach Joe Verducci. The 49ers made arrangements for him to fly back to Daly City for council business during road trips. He was the county supervisor for San Mateo County from 1966 to 1974. For many years he owned a liquor store at 24th and Sanchez in Noe Valley, which still bears his name.

St. Clair broke his hip in February 2015; complications led to his death in Santa Rosa, California, on April 20, 2015, at the age of 84.

==References==
==Notes==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q888265" start="0" end="22" title="Bob St. Clair" label="Robert Bruce St. Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="89" end="97" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976" start="98" end="114" title="Tackle (gridiron football position)" label="offensive tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="145" end="164" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="172" end="196" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706900" start="276" end="283" title="All-Pro" label="All-Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="326" end="351" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="363" end="379" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413998" start="388" end="406" title="San Francisco Dons football" label="San Francisco Dons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887215" start="415" end="437" title="Tulsa Golden Hurricane football" label="Tulsa Golden Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414091" start="510" end="547" title="San Francisco Polytechnic High School" label="San Francisco Polytechnic High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263361" start="580" end="593" title="Kezar Stadium" label="Kezar Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887879" start="603" end="630" title="University of San Francisco" label="University of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q56064308" start="670" end="679" title="1951 San Francisco Dons football team" label="1951 team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028075" start="719" end="730" title="Orange Bowl" label="Orange Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021033" start="810" end="822" title="Ollie Matson" label="Ollie Matson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999093" start="852" end="862" title="Burl Toler" label="Burl Toler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848657" start="1018" end="1037" title="University of Tulsa" label="University of Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567784" start="1127" end="1141" title="1953 NFL draft" label="1953 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787520" start="1423" end="1432" title="1953 San Francisco 49ers season" label="1953 team"/>
<link wikidata="Q185975" start="1477" end="1490" title="Leo Nomellini" label="Leo Nomellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976" start="1517" end="1533" title="offensive tackle" label="offensive tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28222689" start="1559" end="1583" title="Million Dollar Backfield (San Francisco 49ers)" label="Million Dollar Backfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q457791" start="1600" end="1614" title="Hugh McElhenny" label="Hugh McElhenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q786705" start="1737" end="1745" title="Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q694589" start="1807" end="1820" title="special teams" label="special teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666452" start="1937" end="1948" title="Abe Woodson" label="Abe Woodson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788659" start="2030" end="2034" title="1957 San Francisco 49ers season" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788624" start="2185" end="2198" title="1957 Detroit Lions season" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q223172" start="2420" end="2428" title="Achilles tendon" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521760" start="2528" end="2545" title="Len Eshmont Award" label="Len Eshmont Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020528" start="2686" end="2698" title="National Football League team captains" label="team captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="2929" end="2954" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q840582" start="3203" end="3221" title="Retired number" label="number was retired"/>
<link wikidata="Q370925" start="3329" end="3338" title="Daly City, California" label="Daly City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6212798" start="3486" end="3498" title="Joe Verducci" label="Joe Verducci"/>
<link wikidata="Q108101" start="3634" end="3650" title="San Mateo County" label="San Mateo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632011" start="3696" end="3708" title="liquor store" label="liquor store"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342640" start="3732" end="3742" title="Noe Valley" label="Noe Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q212991" start="3849" end="3871" title="Santa Rosa, California" label="Santa Rosa, California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426201" wikidata="Q778094" url="?curid=426201" title="Fred Dean">
<text>Frederick Rudolph Dean (February 24, 1952 – October 14, 2020) was an American professional football player who was a defensive end in the National Football League (NFL). A two-time first-team All-Pro and a four-time Pro Bowler, he won two Super Bowls with the San Francisco 49ers. He was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2008.

Dean played college football for the Louisiana Tech Bulldogs. He was selected in the second round of the 1975 NFL draft by the San Diego Chargers. He was traded to San Francisco in 1981 due to a contract dispute. He is a member of both the Chargers Hall of Fame and 49ers Hall of Fame.

==Early life==
Dean was born in Arcadia, the seat of Bienville Parish in north Louisiana. He grew up east in Ruston, where he attended the all-Black, segregated Lincoln High School. After integration, he moved as a junior to Ruston High, where he graduated.

==College career==
Dean was a standout at Louisiana Tech University in Ruston, having spurned an opportunity to play for legendary coach Eddie Robinson at nearby Grambling State University, which at the time was sending African American players to the NFL on a yearly basis. Playing mostly as an end, Dean excelled as a defensive lineman for the Bulldogs and was a four-time all-conference selection and two-time conference defensive player of the year in the Southland Conference. He was an All-American as a senior in 1974.

==Professional career==
===San Diego Chargers===
Dean was selected by the San Diego Chargers in the second round of the 1975 NFL draft with the 33rd overall pick. Chargers coach Tommy Prothro initially projected him as a linebacker but eventually relented to Dean&#x27;s wish to remain a lineman. As a rookie, he had seven sacks and registered his career-high of 93 tackles. He recorded sacks in 1978. In 1979, the Chargers won the AFC West division while leading the AFC in fewest points allowed (246). Dean had nine sacks in 13 games and was named to the All-AFC team.

The Chargers again won the AFC West in 1980, with Dean teaming with fellow 1975 Charger draftees Gary &quot;Big Hands&quot; Johnson and Louie Kelcher as the Chargers led the NFL in sacks (60). Dean had missed the first two games of the season after not reporting, but still finished the season with sacks. He and Johnson were named first-team All-Pro, with Kelcher being named second-team All-Pro. The trio along with Leroy Jones formed a defensive front that was nicknamed the Bruise Brothers.

===San Francisco 49ers===
In 1981, Dean was traded to the San Francisco 49ers due to a contract dispute with Chargers&#x27; ownership. He complained that he was the lowest-paid sixth-year defensive lineman in 1980 and that his salary was below the average of all defensive linemen. Dean contended that he was making the same amount of money as his brother-in-law who was a truck driver. Originally set to make $75,000 that season, the 49ers renegotiated his contract to reportedly near $150,000 a year. The Chargers&#x27; defense would not be the same afterwards, and Don &quot;Air&quot; Coryell&#x27;s Chargers teams are now most remembered for its high-scoring, pass-oriented offense that did not have enough defense to make it to a Super Bowl. In 2013, &quot;U-T San Diego&quot; called the Chargers trading Dean &quot;perhaps the biggest blunder in franchise history&quot;. &quot;I can&#x27;t say how much it affected us, because we did make it to the AFC championship game,&quot; said Johnson of the Chargers without Dean. &quot;But I could say if we had more pass rush from the corner, it might&#x27;ve been different&quot;.

With San Francisco, Dean was used as a pass-rush specialist, playing only when the 49ers switched from a 3–4 defense to a 4–3 or a 4–2 nickel. He joined the team mid-season for Game 6 against the Dallas Cowboys. After only a couple of practices, he played and was still able to record two sacks and apply pressure and repeatedly hurry Danny White in a 45–14 win by the 49ers. His performance was noted by author Tom Danyluk as &quot;the greatest set of downs I have ever seen unleashed by a pass rusher&quot;. In what had been a game of possum, Bill Walsh, the 49er head coach, said to John Madden, who covered the game, &quot;Fred (Dean) just got here... If he plays, he won&#x27;t play much&quot;. But he played the whole game.

Two weeks later at home against the Los Angeles Rams, the 49ers won 20–17 for their first-ever win against the Rams at home in Candlestick Park, as Dean sacked Pat Haden times. Dean was named the UPI NFC Defensive Player of the Year with 12 sacks while playing in 11 games for the 49ers. The 49ers went on to win Super Bowl XVI that year, and Steve Sabol (NFL Films) is quoted in 2006 as saying that Dean&#x27;s acquisition was the last meaningful in-season trade, in that it affected the destination of the Lombardi Trophy. San Francisco, which was 3–2 when Dean arrived, won 13 of their final 14 games, including the playoffs.

In 1983, Dean recorded a career-high sacks to lead the NFC and recorded a then-NFL record of six in one game, setting that mark during the 49ers’ 27–0 shutout of the New Orleans Saints on November 13, 1983.

Dean was also a key player on the 1984 squad than won Super Bowl XIX. He was reunited with his former Charger teammates Johnson, Kelcher and Billy Shields, who were acquired by the 49ers.

==Legacy==

Dean ended his NFL career with 93 unofficial sacks, according to the Professional Football Researchers Association. Dean was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2008, when his bust, sculpted by Scott Myers, was unveiled. He was also named to both the Chargers&#x27; 40th and 50th anniversary teams and inducted into the Chargers Hall of Fame.

Dean was inducted into the Louisiana Tech University Athletic Hall of Fame in 1990 and the Louisiana Sports Hall of Fame in 1995. In 2009, Dean was elected to the College Football Hall of Fame.

==Personal life and death==
After his football career, Dean was a minister in his hometown, Ruston.

Dean died from COVID-19 while being airlifted from a hospital in West Monroe, Louisiana, to Jackson, Mississippi, on October 14, 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic. He was 68.

Dean is one of at least 345 NFL players to be diagnosed after death with chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), which is caused by repeated hits to the head.

==See also==
* List of Pro Football Hall of Fame inductees
* List of NFL players with chronic traumatic encephalopathy

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q778094" start="0" end="22" title="Fred Dean" label="Frederick Rudolph Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="91" end="99" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q903354" start="117" end="130" title="defensive end" label="defensive end"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="138" end="162" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706900" start="192" end="199" title="All-Pro" label="All-Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q786705" start="216" end="224" title="Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="239" end="249" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="260" end="279" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="306" end="331" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="354" end="370" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155502" start="379" end="402" title="Louisiana Tech Bulldogs football" label="Louisiana Tech Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714911" start="447" end="461" title="1975 NFL draft" label="1975 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="469" end="487" title="San Diego Chargers" label="San Diego Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596340" start="582" end="603" title="Los Angeles Chargers Hall of Fame" label="Chargers Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="608" end="626" title="San Francisco 49ers Hall of Fame" label="49ers Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251757" start="661" end="668" title="Arcadia, Louisiana" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q369211" start="682" end="698" title="Bienville Parish" label="Bienville Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="708" end="717" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271328" start="738" end="744" title="Ruston, Louisiana" label="Ruston"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031188" start="779" end="789" title="school segregation in the United States" label="segregated"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153125" start="817" end="828" title="school integration in the United States" label="integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956375" start="844" end="850" title="junior (education year)" label="junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382544" start="854" end="865" title="Ruston High School" label="Ruston High"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872239" start="930" end="955" title="Louisiana Tech University" label="Louisiana Tech University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282951" start="1025" end="1039" title="Eddie Robinson (Grambling football coach)" label="Eddie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593620" start="1050" end="1076" title="Grambling State University" label="Grambling State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="1108" end="1124" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q903354" start="1184" end="1187" title="defensive end" label="end"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060160" start="1208" end="1225" title="defensive lineman" label="defensive lineman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155502" start="1234" end="1242" title="Louisiana Tech Bulldogs football" label="Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304770" start="1348" end="1368" title="Southland Conference" label="Southland Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146372" start="1380" end="1392" title="College Football All-America Team" label="All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="1489" end="1507" title="San Diego Chargers" label="San Diego Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714911" start="1535" end="1549" title="1975 NFL draft" label="1975 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819787" start="1593" end="1606" title="Tommy Prothro" label="Tommy Prothro"/>
<link wikidata="Q528145" start="1636" end="1646" title="linebacker" label="linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854464" start="1738" end="1743" title="quarterback sack" label="sacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545990" start="1781" end="1788" title="tackle (football move)" label="tackles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578289" start="1811" end="1815" title="1978 San Diego Chargers season" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578841" start="1820" end="1824" title="1979 San Diego Chargers season" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q431944" start="1847" end="1855" title="AFC West" label="AFC West"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579384" start="2026" end="2030" title="1980 San Diego Chargers season" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q938965" start="2084" end="2118" title="Gary &amp;quot;Big Hands&amp;quot; Johnson" label="Gary &amp;quot;Big Hands&amp;quot; Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260250" start="2123" end="2136" title="Louie Kelcher" label="Louie Kelcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706900" start="2330" end="2337" title="All-Pro" label="All-Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528978" start="2405" end="2416" title="Leroy Jones (American football)" label="Leroy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q16229860" start="2465" end="2480" title="Bruise Brothers (San Diego Chargers)" label="Bruise Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579975" start="2512" end="2516" title="1981 San Francisco 49ers season" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="2541" end="2560" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239068" start="3051" end="3085" title="Don Coryell" label="Don &amp;quot;Air&amp;quot; Coryell&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547109" start="3245" end="3258" title="U-T San Diego" label="U-T San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333304" start="3653" end="3662" title="pass-rush" label="pass-rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043062" start="3719" end="3730" title="3–4 defense" label="3–4 defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707345" start="3736" end="3739" title="4–3 defense" label="4–3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028283" start="3745" end="3755" title="4–2 nickel" label="4–2 nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="3810" end="3824" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111239" start="3949" end="3960" title="Danny White" label="Danny White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365047" start="4159" end="4169" title="Bill Walsh (American football coach)" label="Bill Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345694" start="4200" end="4211" title="John Madden" label="John Madden"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="4381" end="4397" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033076" start="4472" end="4488" title="Candlestick Park" label="Candlestick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143500" start="4505" end="4514" title="Pat Haden" label="Pat Haden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865501" start="4541" end="4577" title="UPI NFC Defensive Player of the Year" label="UPI NFC Defensive Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q912929" start="4658" end="4672" title="Super Bowl XVI" label="Super Bowl XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613831" start="4688" end="4699" title="Steve Sabol" label="Steve Sabol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581185" start="4978" end="4982" title="1983 San Francisco 49ers season" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="5141" end="5159" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581852" start="5217" end="5227" title="1984 San Francisco 49ers season" label="1984 squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965838" start="5237" end="5251" title="Super Bowl XIX" label="Super Bowl XIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913303" start="5324" end="5337" title="Billy Shields" label="Billy Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247968" start="5453" end="5498" title="Professional Football Researchers Association" label="Professional Football Researchers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="5527" end="5552" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436939" start="5589" end="5600" title="Scott Myers" label="Scott Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596338" start="5646" end="5665" title="List of San Diego Chargers 40th Anniversary Team" label="Chargers&amp;#x27; 40th"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596339" start="5670" end="5691" title="List of San Diego Chargers 50th Anniversary Team" label="50th anniversary team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596340" start="5715" end="5736" title="Los Angeles Chargers Hall of Fame" label="Chargers Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972747" start="5766" end="5813" title="Louisiana Tech University Athletic Hall of Fame" label="Louisiana Tech University Athletic Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689281" start="5830" end="5859" title="Louisiana Sports Hall of Fame" label="Louisiana Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q747833" start="5902" end="5931" title="College Football Hall of Fame" label="College Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="6050" end="6058" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q727095" start="6100" end="6122" title="West Monroe, Louisiana" label="West Monroe, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28198" start="6127" end="6147" title="Jackson, Mississippi" label="Jackson, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q87746165" start="6181" end="6198" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Mississippi" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16163814" start="6240" end="6317" title="List of NFL players with chronic traumatic encephalopathy" label="NFL players to be diagnosed after death with chronic traumatic encephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851500" start="6387" end="6430" title="List of Pro Football Hall of Fame inductees" label="List of Pro Football Hall of Fame inductees"/>
<link wikidata="Q16163814" start="6433" end="6490" title="List of NFL players with chronic traumatic encephalopathy" label="List of NFL players with chronic traumatic encephalopathy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426202" wikidata="Q3270273" url="?curid=426202" title="Michigan Legislature">
<text>The Michigan Legislature is the legislature of the U.S. state of Michigan. It is organized as a bicameral body composed of an upper chamber, the Senate, and a lower chamber, the House of Representatives. Article IV of the Michigan Constitution, adopted in 1963, defines the role of the Legislature and how it is to be constituted. The chief purposes of the Legislature are to enact new laws and amend or repeal existing laws. The Legislature meets in the Capitol building in Lansing.

The 103rd Michigan Legislature was sworn in on January 11, 2025.

==Titles==
Members of the Senate are referred to as Senators and members of the House of Representatives are referred to as Representatives.

==Michigan Senate==

The Senate is the upper house of the Legislature. Its members are elected on a partisan basis for four-year terms, concurrent with the election of the Governor of Michigan. The Senate consists of 38 members elected from single-member election districts ranging from 212,400 to 263,500 residents according to the most recent creation of districts (2002). Legislative districts are drawn on the basis of population figures through the federal decennial census. Senators&#x27; terms begin at noon on January 1 following their election. The Senate Chamber is located in the south wing of the State Capitol building. As of 2025, Democrats hold the majority in the Senate with 19 seats; Republicans hold the minority with 18 seats and 1 seat is vacant. Under the Michigan Constitution, the Lieutenant Governor of Michigan serves as President of the Senate, but may only cast a vote in the instance of a tie. The Senate selects its other officers and adopts its own rules of procedure at the start of a new Legislative Session.

==Michigan House of Representatives==

The House of Representatives is the lower house of the Legislature. Its members are elected on a partisan basis for two-year terms, at the same time at which Representatives in U.S. Congress are chosen. The House of Representatives consists of 110 members who are elected from single-member election districts ranging from 77,000 to 91,000 according to the most recent creation of districts (2012). Legislative districts are drawn on the basis of population figures through the federal decennial census. Representatives&#x27; terms begin at noon on January 1 following their election. The House of Representatives Chamber in the State Capitol is located in the north wing of the State Capitol building. as of January 2025, the Republican Party have a 58-52 vote power majority within the Michigan House of Representatives. The House of Representatives selects its own Speaker of the House and other officers and adopts its rules of procedure at the start of a new legislative session. 

==Term limits==
In 1992, the Michigan public voted to enact term limits for the Michigan legislature. In 1995, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that states could not enact congressional term limits, but ruled that the state-level term limits remain. On November 8, 2022, voters approved Proposal 1, limiting state representatives and senators to 12 years combined in either chamber of the legislature, but senators re-elected in 2022 would remain eligible for their new terms even if it pushed them over the 12-year limit.

==Legislative session==
For reckoning periods of time during which the Legislature operates, each two-year period coinciding with the election of new members of the House of Representatives is numbered consecutively as a legislature, dating to the first legislature following adoption of Michigan&#x27;s first constitution. The current two-year term of the legislature (January 11, 2023 – January 8, 2025) is the 102nd Legislature.

Each year during which the Legislature meets constitutes a new legislative session. According to Article IV Section 13 of the Michigan Constitution, a new session of the Legislature begins when the members of each house convene, on the second Wednesday of January every year at noon. A regular session of the Legislature typically lasts throughout the entire year with several periods of recess and adjourns &quot;sine die&quot; in late December.

The Michigan Legislature is one of ten full-time state legislative bodies in the United States. Members receive a base salary of $71,685 per year, which makes them the fourth-highest paid legislators in the country, after California, Pennsylvania and New York. While legislators in many states receive per diems that make up for lower salaries, Michigan legislators receive $10,800 per year for session and interim expenses. Salaries and expense allowances are determined by the State Officers Compensation Commission.

Any legislation pending in either chamber at the end of a session that is not the end of a legislative term of office continues and carries over to the next Legislative Session.

==Powers and process==
All bills published by the Michigan Legislature must have been distributed to the chambers at least five days before voting and must be subject to three readings. 

===Leadership===
The House of Representatives is headed by the Speaker, while the Senate is headed by the Lieutenant Governor of Michigan, who serves as President of the Senate but may only cast a vote in the instance of a tie.

*President of the Michigan Senate (Lieutenant Governor): Garlin Gilchrist (D)
*President &quot;Pro Tempore&quot; of the Michigan Senate: Jeremy Moss (D)
*Majority Leader of the Michigan Senate: Winnie Brinks (D)
*Minority Leader of the Michigan Senate: Aric Nesbitt (R)
*Speaker of the House: Matt Hall (R)
*Speaker &quot;Pro Tempore&quot; of the Michigan House: Rachelle Smit (R)
*Majority Leader of the Michigan House: Bryan Posthumus (R)
*Minority Leader of the Michigan House: Ranjeev Puri (D)

==See also==

*Government of Michigan
* List of Michigan state legislatures

==References==
==External links==
*Michigan Legislature</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3270273" start="4" end="24" title="Michigan Legislature" label="Michigan Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270264" start="32" end="43" title="state legislature (United States)" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="51" end="61" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="65" end="73" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="96" end="105" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="126" end="139" title="Upper house" label="upper chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494600" start="145" end="151" title="Michigan Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q375928" start="159" end="172" title="Lower house" label="lower chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494590" start="178" end="202" title="Michigan House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q196227" start="222" end="243" title="Michigan Constitution" label="Michigan Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579713" start="455" end="462" title="Michigan State Capitol" label="Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q28237" start="475" end="482" title="Lansing, Michigan" label="Lansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q132132687" start="489" end="515" title="103rd Michigan Legislature" label="103rd Michigan Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589680" start="865" end="885" title="Governor of Michigan" label="Governor of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="1338" end="1347" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="1395" end="1406" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q196227" start="1471" end="1492" title="Michigan Constitution" label="Michigan Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586403" start="1498" end="1529" title="Lieutenant Governor of Michigan" label="Lieutenant Governor of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="1933" end="1965" title="United States House of Representatives" label="Representatives in U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494590" start="2563" end="2596" title="Michigan House of Representatives" label="Michigan House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597943" start="2643" end="2663" title="List of Speakers of the Michigan House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863431" start="2896" end="2901" title="U.S. Term Limits, Inc. v. Thornton" label="ruled"/>
<link wikidata="Q60786340" start="3530" end="3547" title="1st Michigan Legislature" label="first legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961717" start="4129" end="4137" title="sine die" label="sine die"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494590" start="5071" end="5095" title="Michigan House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597943" start="5113" end="5120" title="Speaker of the Michigan House of Representatives" label="Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586403" start="5156" end="5187" title="Lieutenant Governor of Michigan" label="Lieutenant Governor of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q58323075" start="5336" end="5352" title="Garlin Gilchrist" label="Garlin Gilchrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837512" start="5354" end="5355" title="Michigan Democratic Party" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q20630393" start="5416" end="5427" title="Jeremy Moss" label="Jeremy Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837512" start="5429" end="5430" title="Michigan Democratic Party" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q16727665" start="5473" end="5486" title="Winnie Brinks" label="Winnie Brinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837512" start="5488" end="5489" title="Michigan Democratic Party" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790280" start="5532" end="5544" title="Aric Nesbitt" label="Aric Nesbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837658" start="5546" end="5547" title="Michigan Republican Party" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597943" start="5550" end="5570" title="Speaker of the Michigan House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q85784337" start="5572" end="5581" title="Matt Hall (politician)" label="Matt Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837658" start="5583" end="5584" title="Michigan Republican Party" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q124460369" start="5642" end="5655" title="Rachelle Smit" label="Rachelle Smit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837658" start="5657" end="5658" title="Michigan Republican Party" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q106036007" start="5700" end="5715" title="Bryan Posthumus" label="Bryan Posthumus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837658" start="5717" end="5718" title="Michigan Republican Party" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q104833398" start="5760" end="5772" title="Ranjeev Puri" label="Ranjeev Puri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837512" start="5774" end="5775" title="Michigan Democratic Party" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589251" start="5793" end="5815" title="Government of Michigan" label="Government of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995895" start="5818" end="5853" title="List of Michigan state legislatures" label="List of Michigan state legislatures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426204" wikidata="Q656079" url="?curid=426204" title="Craig Benson">
<text>Craig R. Benson (born October 8, 1954) is an American politician and entrepreneur who served as the 79th governor of New Hampshire from 2003 to 2005. Benson first came to public attention when he founded Cabletron Systems, later known as Enterasys Networks, which became one of the largest employers in New Hampshire. Enterasys Networks was acquired by Extreme Networks in November 2016

== Early life and business career ==
Benson attended Chatham High School in Chatham, New Jersey. After receiving a bachelor&#x27;s degree in finance from Babson College in 1977, Benson attended Syracuse University, graduating with an MBA in 1979.

In 1983, Benson and partner Robert Levine started Cabletron Systems in Levine&#x27;s garage. The company moved to Rochester, New Hampshire in 1985 and went public in 1989, with what was then the largest IPO in Wall Street history. In 1991, Benson was named &quot;Entrepreneur of the Year&quot; by &quot;Inc. Magazine&quot;.

The company grew to have over $1.8 billion in annual revenue, but over time Cabletron began to face heavy competition in the industry. Benson resigned in 1999, and Cabletron was dissolved into four separate companies (Enterasys Networks, Aprisma Management Technologies, Riverstone Networks, and Global Network Technology Services) in January 2000. The company&#x27;s fragmentation brought layoffs, declines in stock price, and shareholder lawsuits.

== Governor of New Hampshire ==
Benson began running for governor of New Hampshire in 2001, promising to use technology and greater efficiency to save money in state government. Political signs appeared across New Hampshire proclaiming &quot;This is Benson Country.&quot; He was elected governor on November 5, 2002, in an open race to succeed the retiring governor, Jeanne Shaheen. In the primaries, Benson spent more than $15 million—$11 million of it his own money—in an effort to defeat former state Senator Bruce Keough and former U.S. Senator Gordon Humphrey to win the Republican nomination, making Benson&#x27;s victory one of the most expensive in American history. In the general election, Benson easily defeated Democratic state Senator Mark Fernald, by 90,386 votes. Benson successfully made Fernald&#x27;s support for a statewide income tax the dominant issue in the race. Benson spent more than $9 million, again mostly his own money, in this race.

As Governor, Benson pushed for state agencies to institute across-the-board budget reductions, and used a custom made, extra large &quot;VETO&quot; stamp to reject a state budget he thought was too large. Benson also signed into law a bill that required parental notification for minors seeking an abortion; this law was later challenged and upheld in the Supreme Court in the case &quot;Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of New England&quot;, but subsequently repealed by the New Hampshire legislature in 2007.

Benson&#x27;s administration came under criticism following the resignation of Attorney General Peter Heed, who had been accused of sexual harassment. While an investigation cleared Heed of any wrongdoing, it revealed improper interference by Benson&#x27;s security commissioner. Further criticism stems from the inappropriate awarding of a nearly $900,000 no-bid contract by his &quot;volunteer&quot; adviser (and former Cabletron human resource administrator) Linda Pepin, who was not licensed to broker such a deal.

Benson also frequently used &quot;volunteers&quot; in his office to do gubernatorial work, but would not say who they were or what they did. These were not volunteers in the sense that they were unpaid staffers volunteering their time, rather Benson paid their salaries out of his own pocket, making them volunteers in the sense that they did not draw state salaries. This move was controversial, while proponents noted that Benson was generously allowing the state to save money, critics were concerned that it would limit scrutiny of the volunteer staff. Reporters discovered that one of these &quot;volunteers&quot; (and former Cabletron director of operations), Angela Blaisdell, was New Hampshire&#x27;s official liaison with the federal government on homeland security. In addition, Benson was accused of engaging in political payback when Dori Wiggin, supervisor of the Department of Environmental Services Wetlands Division in Portsmouth, was transferred to the department&#x27;s Concord headquarters. Under Wiggin, the DES had fined Benson in 1998 and 2003 for excavating beach sand without a permit at his Rye oceanfront home.

Benson was also criticized, by both supporters and critics, for a management style that was considered &quot;autocratic&quot;. In an interview with &quot;The New York Times&quot;, Benson stated that one of his first acts after being elected was to purchase a large, high table at which to hold his meetings. Those in attendance were to stand during meetings, and any latecomers were locked out. &quot;It&#x27;s to remind people we&#x27;re here to get in and do our business and get out,&quot; he explained.

In the 2004 election, Benson lost to Democratic challenger John Lynch—only the second time in 78 years that an incumbent New Hampshire governor was denied a second term, in a very close race, Benson lost to Lynch by 14,318 votes.

== Post-governorship ==
Since leaving the Governor&#x27;s office in 2004, Benson has pursued a number of business interests. He is a Dunkin&#x27; Donuts franchisee with over 140 stores. He served as a Director of Sycamore Networks (2007 to 2013) and currently serves (since 2017) as a Director at Planet Fitness where he also served as interim CEO from Sept. 2023 to April 2024.

In December 2020, Merrill Lynch was ordered by the New Hampshire Bureau of Securities to pay $24 million in restitution to Benson, and an additional $2 million fine to the State of New Hampshire. Benson complained to the Bureau of Securities in early 2019 after suffering losses while the stock market was gaining. 

In 2025, Governor Kelly Ayotte appointed Benson to co-chair the Commission on Government Efficiency or &quot;COGE&quot;, a commission tasked with cutting spending by the New Hampshire government. COGE is modeled on the Department of Government Efficiency, doing similar work at the federal level.

== Personal life ==
Benson resides in Rye, New Hampshire with his wife Denise. They have two daughters.

Benson serves as an adjunct lecturer at Babson College, his alma mater. In 1995, he was inducted into the college&#x27;s Academy of Distinguished Entrepreneurs.

==Electoral history==




==References==
* Steen, Jennifer (2006). &quot;Self-financed candidates in congressional elections&quot;. University of Michigan Press. .

==External links==
* 2002 campaign website


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q656079" start="0" end="15" title="Craig Benson" label="Craig R. Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589687" start="105" end="130" title="governor of New Hampshire" label="governor of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q766140" start="204" end="221" title="Cabletron Systems" label="Cabletron Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055048" start="238" end="256" title="Enterasys Networks" label="Enterasys Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="303" end="316" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034659" start="353" end="369" title="Extreme Networks" label="Extreme Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087660" start="441" end="460" title="Chatham High School (New Jersey)" label="Chatham High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088995" start="464" end="483" title="Chatham, New Jersey" label="Chatham, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="503" end="525" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q650167" start="542" end="556" title="Babson College" label="Babson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="582" end="601" title="Syracuse University" label="Syracuse University"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="622" end="625" title="Master of Business Administration" label="MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q766140" start="686" end="703" title="Cabletron Systems" label="Cabletron Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q985354" start="750" end="774" title="Rochester, New Hampshire" label="Rochester, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="839" end="842" title="Initial public offering" label="IPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="846" end="857" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q954455" start="939" end="952" title="Inc. (magazine)" label="Inc. Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055048" start="1179" end="1197" title="Enterasys Networks" label="Enterasys Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782119" start="1199" end="1230" title="Aprisma Management Technologies" label="Aprisma Management Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338656" start="1232" end="1251" title="Riverstone Networks" label="Riverstone Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q766140" start="1257" end="1291" title="Global Network Technology Services" label="Global Network Technology Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q270316" start="1779" end="1793" title="Jeanne Shaheen" label="Jeanne Shaheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="1802" end="1811" title="political primary" label="primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525949" start="1910" end="1923" title="New Hampshire State Senate" label="state Senator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1924" end="1936" title="Bruce Keough" label="Bruce Keough"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="1948" end="1960" title="United States Senator" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585350" start="1961" end="1976" title="Gordon Humphrey" label="Gordon Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="2135" end="2145" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525949" start="2146" end="2159" title="New Hampshire State Senate" label="state Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q64746180" start="2160" end="2172" title="Mark Fernald" label="Mark Fernald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136783" start="2630" end="2651" title="parental notification" label="parental notification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="2732" end="2745" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831591" start="2764" end="2807" title="Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of New England" label="Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="2963" end="2979" title="Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q23762745" start="2980" end="2990" title="Peter Heed" label="Peter Heed"/>
<link wikidata="Q751722" start="3016" end="3033" title="sexual harassment" label="sexual harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935088" start="3241" end="3256" title="no-bid contract" label="no-bid contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q181467" start="4161" end="4178" title="homeland security" label="homeland security"/>
<link wikidata="Q49191" start="4339" end="4349" title="Portsmouth, New Hampshire" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q28249" start="4392" end="4399" title="Concord, New Hampshire" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q523619" start="4520" end="4523" title="Rye, New Hampshire" label="Rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="4696" end="4714" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008354" start="5057" end="5070" title="2004 New Hampshire gubernatorial election" label="2004 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q708125" start="5109" end="5119" title="John H. Lynch" label="John Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q334122" start="5679" end="5692" title="Merrill Lynch" label="Merrill Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q22354" start="5996" end="6008" title="Kelly Ayotte" label="Kelly Ayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q131158869" start="6197" end="6232" title="Department of Government Efficiency" label="Department of Government Efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q523619" start="6314" end="6332" title="Rye, New Hampshire" label="Rye, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q650167" start="6421" end="6435" title="Babson College" label="Babson College"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426205" wikidata="Q1760612" url="?curid=426205" title="Storm chasing">
<text>Storm chasing is broadly defined as the deliberate pursuit of any severe weather phenomenon, regardless of motive, but most commonly for curiosity, adventure, scientific investigation, or for news or media coverage. A person who chases storms is known as a storm chaser (or &quot;chaser&quot; for short).

While witnessing a tornado is the single biggest objective for most chasers, many chase thunderstorms and delight in viewing cumulonimbus and related cloud structures, watching a barrage of hail and lightning, and seeing what skyscapes unfold. A smaller number of storm chasers attempt to intercept tropical cyclones, waterspouts, blizzards, and other weather phenomena.

==Nature of and motivations for chasing==
Storm chasing is chiefly a recreational endeavor, with chasers usually giving their motives as photographing or video recording a storm, or for various personal reasons. These can include the beauty of the views afforded by the sky and land, the mystery of not knowing precisely what will unfold, the journey to an undetermined destination on the open road, intangible experiences such as feeling one with a much larger and more powerful natural world, the challenge of correctly forecasting and intercepting storms with optimal vantage points, and pure thrill seeking. Some chasers do it for money or competition, although chasers typically work together as well.

Although scientific work is sometimes cited as a goal, direct participation in such work is almost always impractical during the actual chase except for chasers collaborating in an organized university or government project. Many chasers also act as storm spotters, reporting their observations of hazardous weather to relevant authorities. These reports greatly benefit real-time warnings with ground truth information, as well as science as a whole by increasing the reliability of severe storm databases used in climatology and other research (which ultimately boosts forecast and warning skill). Additionally, many recreational chasers submit photos and videos to researchers as well as to the U.S. National Weather Service (NWS) for spotter training.

Storm chasers are not generally paid to chase, with the exception of television media crews in certain television market areas, video stringers and photographers (freelancers mostly, but some staff), and researchers such as graduate meteorologists and professors. An increasing number sell storm videos and pictures and manage to make a profit. A few operate &quot;chase tour&quot; services, making storm chasing a recently developed form of niche tourism. Financial returns usually are relatively meager given the expenses of chasing, with most chasers spending more than they take in and very few making a living solely from chasing. Chasers are also generally limited by the duration of the season in which severe storms are most likely to develop, usually the local spring and/or summer.

No degree or certification is required to be a storm chaser, and many chases are mounted independently by amateurs and enthusiasts without formal training. Local National Weather Service offices do hold storm spotter training classes, usually early in the spring. Some offices collaborate to produce severe weather workshops oriented toward operational meteorologists.

Storm chasers come from a wide variety of occupational and socioeconomic backgrounds. Though a fair number are professional meteorologists, most storm chasers are from other occupational fields, which may include any number of professions that have little or nothing to do with meteorology. A relatively high proportion possess college degrees and a large number live in the central and southern United States.

==History==

The first person to gain public recognition as a storm chaser was David Hoadley (born 1938), who began chasing North Dakota storms in 1956, systematically using data from area weather offices and airports. He is widely considered the pioneer storm chaser and was the founder and first editor of &quot;Storm Track&quot; magazine.

Neil B. Ward (1914–1972) subsequently brought research chasing to the forefront in the 1950s and 1960s, enlisting the help of the Oklahoma Highway Patrol to study storms. His work pioneered modern storm spotting and made institutional chasing a reality.

The first coordinated storm chasing activity sponsored by institutions was undertaken as part of the Alberta Hail Studies project beginning in 1969. Vehicles were outfitted with various meteorological instrumentation and hail-catching apparatus and were directed into suspected hail regions of thunderstorms by a controller at a radar site. The controller communicated with the vehicles by radio.

In 1972, the University of Oklahoma (OU) in cooperation with the National Severe Storms Laboratory (NSSL) began the Tornado Intercept Project, with the first outing taking place on 19 April of that year. This was the first large-scale tornado chasing activity sponsored by an institution. It culminated in a brilliant success in 1973 with the Union City, Oklahoma tornado providing a foundation for tornado and supercell morphology that proved the efficacy of storm chasing field research. The project produced the first legion of veteran storm chasers, with Hoadley&#x27;s &quot;Storm Track&quot; magazine bringing the community together in 1977.

Storm chasing then reached popular culture in three major spurts: in 1978 with the broadcast of an episode of the television program &quot;In Search of...&quot;; in 1985 with a documentary on the PBS series &quot;Nova&quot;; and in May 1996 with the theatrical release of &quot;Twister&quot;, a Hollywood blockbuster which provided an action-packed but heavily fictionalized glimpse of the hobby. Further early exposure to storm chasing resulted from notable magazine articles, beginning in the late 1970s in &quot;Weatherwise&quot; magazine.

Various television programs and increased coverage of severe weather by the news media, especially since the initial video revolution in which VHS ownership became widespread by the early 1990s, substantially elevated awareness of and interest in storms and storm chasing. The Internet in particular has contributed to a significant increase in the number of storm chasers since the mid-to-late 1990s. A sharp increase in the general public impulsively wandering about their local area in search of tornadoes similarly is largely attributable to these factors. The 2007–2011 Discovery Channel reality series &quot;Storm Chasers&quot; produced another surge in activity. Over the years the nature of chasing and the characteristics of chasers shifted.

From their advent in the 1970s until the mid-1990s, scientific field projects were occasionally conducted in the Great Plains during the spring. The first of the seminal VORTEX projects occurred in 1994–1995 and was soon followed by various field experiments each spring, with another large project, VORTEX2, in 2009–2010. Since the mid-1990s, most storm chasing science, with the notable exception of large field projects, consists of mobile Doppler weather radar intercepts.

==Typical storm chase==
Chasing often involves driving thousands of miles in order to witness the relatively short window of time of active severe thunderstorms. It is not uncommon for a chaser to end up empty handed on any particular day. Storm chasers&#x27; degrees of involvement, competencies, philosophies, and techniques vary widely, but many chasers spend a significant amount of time forecasting, both before going on the road as well as during the chase, utilizing various sources for weather data. Most storm chasers are not meteorologists, and many chasers expend significant time and effort in learning meteorology and the intricacies of severe convective storm prediction through both study and experience.

Besides the copious driving to, from, and during chases, storm chasing is punctuated with contrasting periods of long waiting and ceaseless action. Downtime can consist of sitting under sun-baked skies for hours, playing pickup sports, evaluating data, or visiting landmarks while awaiting convective initiation. During an inactive pattern, this downtime can persist for days. When storms are occurring, there is often little or no time to eat or relieve oneself and finding fuel can cause frustrating delays and detours. Navigating obstacles such as rivers and areas with inadequate road networks is a paramount concern. Only a handful of chasers decide to chase in Dixie Alley, an area of the Southern United States in which trees and road networks heavily obscure the storms and often large tornadoes. The combination of driving and waiting has been likened to &quot;extreme sitting&quot;. A &quot;bust&quot; occurs when storms do not fire, sometimes referred to as &quot;severe clear&quot;, when storms fire but are missed, when storms fire but are meager, or when storms fire after dusk.

Most chasing is accomplished by driving a motor vehicle of any make or model, whether it be a sedan, van, pickup truck, or SUV, however, a few individuals occasionally fly planes and television stations in some markets use helicopters. Research projects sometimes employ aircraft, as well.

==Geographical, seasonal, and diurnal activity==
Storm chasers are most active in the spring and early summer, particularly May and June, across the Great Plains of the United States (extending into Canada) in an area colloquially known as Tornado Alley, with many hundred individuals active on some days during this period. This coincides with the most consistent tornado days in the most desirable topography of the Great Plains. Not only are the most intense supercells common here, but due to the moisture profile of the atmosphere the storms tend to be more visible than locations farther east where there are also frequent severe thunderstorms. There is a tendency for chases earlier in the year to be farther south, shifting farther north with the jet stream as the season progresses. Storms occurring later in the year tend to be more isolated and slower moving, both of which are also desirable to chasers.

Chasers may operate whenever significant thunderstorm activity is occurring, whatever the date. This most commonly includes more sporadic activity occurring in warmer months of the year bounding the spring maximum, such as the active month of April and to a lesser extent March. The focus in the summer months is the Central or Northern Plains states and the Prairie Provinces, the Upper Midwest, or on to just east of the Colorado Front Range. An annually inconsistent and substantially smaller peak of severe thunderstorm and tornado activity also arises in the transitional months of autumn, particularly October and November. This follows a pattern somewhat the reverse of the spring pattern with the focus beginning in the north then dropping south and with an overall eastward shift. In the area with the most consistent significant tornado activity, the Southern Plains, the tornado season is intense but is relatively brief whereas central to northern and eastern areas experience less intense and consistent activity that is diffused over a longer span of the year.

Advancing technology since the mid-2000s led to chasers more commonly targeting less amenable areas (i.e. hilly or forested) that were previously eschewed when continuous wide visibility was critical. These advancements, particularly in-vehicle weather data such as radar, also led to an increase in chasing after nightfall. Most chasing remains during daylight hours with active storm intercepting peaking from mid-late afternoon through early-to-mid evening. This is dictated by a chaser&#x27;s schedule (availability to chase) and by when storms form, which usually is around peak heating during the mid-to-late afternoon but on some days occurs in early afternoon or even in the morning. An additional advantage of later season storms is that days are considerably longer than in early spring. Morning or early afternoon storms tend to be associated with stronger wind shear and thus most often happen earlier in the spring season or later during the fall season.

Some organized chasing efforts have also begun in the Top End of the Northern Territory and in southeastern Australia, with the biggest successes in November and December. A handful of individuals are also known to be chasing in other countries, including the United Kingdom, Israel, Italy, Spain, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Finland, Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Poland, Bulgaria, Slovenia, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Estonia, Argentina, South Africa, Bangladesh, and New Zealand; although many people trek to the Great Plains of North America from these and other countries around the world (especially from the UK). The number of chasers and number countries where chasers are active expanded at an accelerating pace in Europe from the 1990s–2010s.

==Dangers==
There are inherent dangers involved in pursuing hazardous weather. These range from lightning, tornadoes, large hail, flooding, hazardous road conditions (rain or hail-covered roadways), animals on the roadway, downed power lines (and occasionally other debris), reduced visibility from heavy rain (often wind blown), blowing dust, hail and hail fog. Most directly weather-related hazards such as from a tornado are minimized if the storm chaser is knowledgeable and cautious. In some situations severe downburst winds may push automobiles around, especially high-profile vehicles. Tornadoes affect a relatively small area and are predictable enough to be avoided if sustaining situational awareness and following strategies including always having an open escape route, maintaining a safe distance, and avoiding placement in the direction of travel of a tornado (in most cases in the Northern Hemisphere this is to the north and to the east of a tornado). Lightning, however, is an unavoidable hazard. &quot;Core punching&quot;, storm chaser slang for driving through a heavy precipitation core to intercept the area of interest within a storm, is recognized as hazardous due to reduced visibility and because many tornadoes are rain-wrapped. The &quot;bear&#x27;s cage&quot; refers to the area under a rotating wall cloud (and any attendant tornadoes), which is the &quot;bear&quot;, and to the blinding precipitation (which can include window-shatteringly large hail) surrounding some or all sides of a tornado, which is the &quot;cage&quot;. Similarly, chasing at night heightens risk due to darkness.

In reality, the most significant hazard is driving, which is made more dangerous by the severe weather. Adding still more to this hazard are the multiple distractions which can compete for a chaser&#x27;s attention, such as driving, communicating with chase partners and others with a phone and/or radio, navigating, watching the sky, checking weather data, and shooting photos or video. Chasers ideally work to prevent the driver from multitasking either by chase partners covering the other aspects or by the driver pulling over to do these other things if he or she is chasing alone. Falling asleep while driving is a chase hazard, especially on long trips back. This also is exacerbated by nocturnal darkness and by the defatigating demands of driving through precipitation and on slick roads.

===Incidents===
For nearly sixty years, the only known chaser deaths were driving-related. As of 22 May 2024, there have been 4 direct storm chasing deaths and 12 indirect deaths. Nearly half of the indirect deaths are a result of hydroplaning in conditions after a chase.

The first was Christopher Phillips, a University of Oklahoma (OU) undergraduate student, who died in a hydroplaning accident when swerving to miss a rabbit in 1984. Other incidents included Jeff Wear driving home in East Texas from a Hurricane Dennis chase in 2005, and Fabian Guerra swerving to miss a deer while driving to a chase on I-80 in Iowa in 2009. A wrong-way driver resulted in a head-on collision that killed Andy Gabrielson who was on the Turner Turnpike (I-44) near Sapulpa, Oklahoma, returning to Luverne, Minnesota, from a chase in 2012.

On 31 May 2013, an extreme event led to the first known chaser deaths inflicted directly by weather when the widest tornado ever recorded struck near El Reno, Oklahoma. Engineer Tim Samaras, his photographer son Paul, and meteorologist Carl Young were killed on a rural road by the tornado while doing in situ probe and infrasonic field research. An amateur storm chaser was also killed in the tornado in a separate vehicle. In an exceptional combination of events, the already large and rain-obscured yet partially translucent tornado swiftly swelled to wide as it simultaneously changed direction and accelerated. Several other chasers were also struck and some injured by this tornado and its parent supercell&#x27;s rear flank downdraft (RFD).

While chasing severe storms, a vehicle driven by Randall Yarnall for Kelley Williamson, who were contracting for The Weather Channel (TWC) as stars of their own show, &quot;Storm Wranglers&quot;, ran a stop sign while northbound on Farm to Market Road 1081 and struck a vehicle driven by Corbin Lee Jaeger going west on Farm to Market Road 2794 in West Texas in 2017. All three died at the scene, and the mother of Jaeger sued the estates of Williamson and Yarnall, as well as TWC, as there was a history of reckless driving by the pair for which it was alleged TWC ignored warnings to them by other chasers. The suit filed in 2019 was resolved in 2021.

Another fatality occurred in 2019 when Dale Sharpe, an Australian, struck a deer and subsequently became disabled on Kansas Highway 42. As he fled the vehicle, an oncoming vehicle struck him and he later died at the hospital.

Two separate fatal accidents occurred in 2022. In April three OU meteorology students, Drake Brooks, Nicholas Nair, and Gavin Short, died after hydroplaning on I-35 in Oklahoma while returning from a chase and in May, Martha Llanos Rodriguez, a storm chasing meteorologist from Mexico City was killed and three meteorologist colleagues were injured (two Chileans sustained non-life-threatening injuries and the other, Bradford Barrett, an American stationed in Chile, sustained life-threatening injuries) when they stopped for downed power lines on I-90 in southwestern Minnesota and their vehicle was hit by a semi-trailer truck.

There are other incidents in which chasers were injured by automobile accidents, lightning strikes, and tornado impacts. While chasing a tornado outbreak on 13 March 1990, KWTV television photographer Bill Merickel was shot and injured near Lindsay, Oklahoma.

==Equipment==
Storm chasers vary with regards to the amount of equipment used, some prefer a minimalist approach; for example, where only basic photographic equipment is taken on a chase, while others use everything from satellite-based tracking systems and live data feeds to vehicle-mounted weather stations and hail guards.

===Historic===
Historically, storm chasing relied on either in-field analysis or in some cases nowcasts from trained observers and forecasters. The first in-field technology consisted of radio gear for communication. Much of this equipment could also be adapted to receive radiofax data which was useful for receiving basic observational and analysis data. The primary users of such technology were university or government research groups who often had larger budgets than individual chasers.

Radio scanners were also heavily used to listen in on emergency services and storm spotters so as to determine where the most active or dangerous weather was located. A number of chasers were also radio amateurs, and used mobile (or portable) amateur radio to communicate directly with spotters and other chasers, allowing them to keep abreast of what they could not themselves see.

It was not until the mid- to late 1980s that the evolution of the laptop computer would begin to revolutionize storm chasing. Early on, some chasers carried acoustic couplers to download batches of raw surface and upper air data from payphones. The technology was too slow for graphical imagery such as radar and satellite data; and during the first years this wasn&#x27;t available on any connection over telephone lines, anyway. Some raw data could be downloaded and plotted by software, such as surface weather observations using &quot;WeatherGraphix&quot; (predecessor to &quot;Digital Atmosphere&quot;) and similar software or for upper air soundings using &quot;SHARP&quot;, &quot;RAOB&quot;, and similar software.

Most meteorological data was acquired all at once early in the morning, and the rest of day&#x27;s chasing was based on analysis and forecast gleaned from this; as well as on visual clues that presented themselves in the field throughout the day. Plotted weather maps were often analyzed by hand for manual diagnosis of meteorological patterns. Occasionally chasers would make stops at rural airstrips or NWS offices for an update on weather conditions. NOAA Weather Radio (NWR) could provide information in the vehicle, without stopping, such as weather watches and warnings, surface weather conditions, convective outlooks, and NWS radar summaries. Nowadays, storm chasers may use high-speed Internet access available in any library, even in small towns in the US. This data is available throughout the day, but one must find and stop at a location offering Internet access.

With the development of the mobile computers, the first computer mapping software became feasible, at about the same time as the popular adoption of the VHS camcorder began a rapid growth phase. Prior to the mid to late 1980s most motion picture equipment consisted of 8 mm film cameras. While the quality of the first VHS consumer cameras was quite poor (and the size somewhat cumbersome) when compared to traditional film formats, the amount of video which could be shot with a minimal amount of resources was much greater than any film format at the time.

In the 1980s and 1990s The Weather Channel (TWC) and &quot;A.M. Weather&quot; were popular with chasers, in the morning preceding a chase for the latter and both before and during a chase for the former. Commercial radio sometimes also provides weather and damage information. The 1990s brought technological leaps and bounds. With the swift development of solid state technology, television sets for example could be installed with ease in most vehicles allowing storm chasers to actively view local TV stations. Mobile phones became popular making group coordination easier when traditional radio communications methods were not ideal or for those possessing radios. The development of the World Wide Web (WWW) in 1993 hastened adoption of the Internet and led to FTP access to some of the first university weather sites.

The mid-1990s marked the development of smaller more efficient marine radars. While such marine radars are illegal if used in land-mobile situations, a number of chasers were quick to adopt them in an effort to have mobile radar. These radars have been found to interfere with research radars, such as the Doppler on Wheels (DOW) utilized in field projects. The first personal lightning detection and mapping devices also became available and the first online radar data was offered by private corporations or, at first with delays, with free services. A popular data vendor by the end of the 1990s was WeatherTAP.

===Current===

Chasers used paper maps for navigation and some of those now using GPS still use these as a backup or for strategizing with other chasers. Foldable state maps can be used but are cumbersome due to the multitude of states needed and only show major roads. National atlases allow more detail and all states are contained in a single book, with AAA favored and Rand McNally followed by Michelin also used. The preferred atlases due to great detail in rural areas are the &quot;Roads of...&quot; series originally by Shearer Publishing, which first included Texas but expanded to other states such as Oklahoma and Colorado. Covering every state of the union are the DeLorme &quot;Atlas and Gazetteer&quot; series. DeLorme also produced early GPS receivers that connected to laptops and for years was one of two major mapping software creators. &quot;DeLorme Street Atlas USA&quot; or &quot;Microsoft Streets &amp; Trips&quot; were used by most chasers until their discontinuations in 2013. Chasers now use Google Maps, Waze, and/or Apple Maps or other web mapping on mobile devices as no comparably robust mapping software emerged although operating systems later implemented the apps Windows Maps and Apple Maps. To ensure mapping availability without an active internet connection, these solutions all require downloading maps locally ahead of time. GPS receivers may still be used with other software, such as for displaying radar data.

A major turning point was the advent of civilian GPS in 1996, which was followed by additional satellite navigation systems in ensuing decades and by refinements of GPS. At first, GPS units were very costly and only offered basic functions, but that would soon change. Towards the late 1990s the Internet was awash in weather data and free weather software, the first true cellular Internet modems for consumer use also emerged providing chasers access to data in the field without having to rely on a nowcaster. The NWS also released the first free, up-to-date NEXRAD Level 3 radar data. In conjunction with all of this, GPS units now had the ability to connect with computers, granting greater ease when navigating.

2001 marked the next great technological leap for storm chasers as the first Wi-Fi units began to emerge offering wireless broadband service in many cases for free. Some places (restaurants, motels, libraries, etc.) were known to reliably offer wireless access and wardriving located other availabilities. In 2002 the first Windows-based package to combine GPS positioning and Doppler weather radar appeared called SWIFT WX. SWIFT WX allowed storm chasers to seamlessly position themselves accurately relative to tornadic storms.

In 2004 two more storm chaser tools emerged. The first, WxWorx, was a new XM Satellite Radio based system utilizing a special receiver and Baron Services weather software. Unlike preexisting cellular based services there was no risk of dead spots, and that meant that even in the most remote areas storm chasers still had a live data feed. The second tool was a new piece of software called GRLevel3. GRLevel3 utilized both free and subscription based raw radar files, displaying the data in a true vector format with GIS layering abilities. Since 2006 a growing number of chasers are using Spotter Network (SN), which uses GPS data to plot real time position of participating spotters and chasers, and allows observers to report significant weather as well as GIS layering for navigation maps, weather products, and the like.

The most common chaser communications device is the cellular phone. These are used for both voice and data connections. External antennas and amplifiers may be used to boost signal transception. It is not uncommon that chasers travel in small groups of cars, and they may use CB radio (declining in use) or inexpensive GMRS / FRS hand-held transceivers for inter-vehicle communication. More commonly, many chasers are also ham radio operators and use the 2 meters VHF and, less often, 70 cm UHF bands to communicate between vehicles or with Skywarn / Canwarn spotter networks. Scanners are often used to monitor spotter, sometimes public safety communications, and can double as weather radios. Since the mid-2000s social networking services may also be used, with Twitter most used for ongoing events, Facebook for sharing images and discussing chase reports, Discord for the same and with forecast conversations occurring on both platforms, with YouTube and sometimes Vimeo or TikTok for sharing videos, and Instagram also used to share imagery. Social networking services largely (but not completely) replace forums and email lists, which complemented and eventually supplanted &quot;Stormtrack&quot; magazine, for conversing about and sharing images of storms.

In-field environmental data is still popular among some storm chasers, especially temperature, moisture, and wind speed and direction data. Many choose to mount weather stations atop their vehicles. Even professionally installed and scientific grade instrument systems are subject to various problems, however, so such casually collected data must be considered tenuously. Others use handheld anemometers. Rulers or baseballs may be brought along for measuring hail and for showing as a comparison object. Vehicle mounted cameras, such as on the roof or more commonly on the dash, provide continuous visual recording capability.

Chasers heavily utilized still photography since the beginning. Videography gained prominence by the 1990s into the early 2000s but a resurgence of photography occurred with the advent of affordable and versatile digital SLR (DSLR) cameras. Prior to this, 35 mm SLR print and slide film formats were mostly used, along with some medium format cameras. In the late 2000s, mobile phone 3G data networks became fast enough to allow live streaming video from chasers using webcams. This live imagery is frequently used by the media, as well as NWS meteorologists, emergency managers, and the general public for direct ground truth information, and it promotes video sales opportunities for chasers. Also by this time, camcorders using memory cards to record video began to be adopted. Digital video had been around for years but was recorded on tape, whereas solid-state is random access rather than sequential access (linear) and has no moving parts. Late in the 2000s HD video began to overtake SD (which had been NTSC in North America) in usage as prices came down and performance increased (initially there were low-light and sporadic aliasing problems due to chip and sensor limitations). By the mid-2010s 4K cameras were increasingly in use. Tripods are used by those seeking crisp professional photo and video imagery and also enable chasers to tend to other activities. Other accessories include cable/remote shutter releases, lightning triggers, and lens filters. Windshield mounted cameras or dome enclosed cameras atop vehicle roofs may also be used, and a few chasers use UAVs (&quot;drones&quot;).

Late in the 2000s smartphones increased in usage, with radar viewing applications frequently used. Particularly, &quot;RadarScope&quot; on the iOS and Android platforms is favored. &quot;Pkyl3&quot; was a dominant early choice on Android devices but which discontinued development in August 2018. &quot;RadarOmega&quot; became a commonly used app in the 2020s. Other apps may be used as are browsers for viewing meteorological data and accessing social networking services. Some handsets can be used as WiFi hotspots and wireless cards may also be used to avoid committing a handset to tethering or operating as a hotspot. Some hotspots operate as mobile broadband MNVO devices using any radio spectrum that is both available and is in contract with a service provider. Such devices may expand mobile data range beyond a single carrier&#x27;s service area and typically can work on month-to-month contracts. Adoption of tablet computers expanded by the early 2010s. 4G LTE has been adopted when available and can be especially useful for uploading HD video. A gradual uptick of those selecting mirrorless interchangeable-lens cameras (MILCs) began in the mid-2010s. Usage of DSLR for video capture, called HDSLR, is common, although HD camcorders remain popular due to their greater functionality (many chasers still shoot both).

Chasers also carry common travel articles and vehicle maintenance items, and sometimes first aid kits. Full sized spare tires are strongly preferable to &quot;donut&quot; emergency replacement tires. Power inverters (often with surged protected power strips) power devices that require AC (indoor/wall outlet) power, although some devices may be powered directly with DC (battery power) from the vehicle electric system. Water repellent products, such as Rain-X or Aquapel, are frequently applied to windshields to dispel water when driving as well as mud and small detritus, which boosts visibility and image clarity on photographs and videos shot through glass (which is particularly problematic if autofocus is on). Binoculars and sunglasses are commonly employed.

==Ethics==
A growing number of experienced storm chasers advocate the adoption of a code of ethics in storm chasing featuring safety, courtesy, and objectivity as the backbone. Storm chasing is a highly visible recreational activity (which is also associated with science) that is vulnerable to sensationalist media promotion. Veteran storm chasers Chuck Doswell and Roger Edwards deemed reckless storm chasers as &quot;yahoos&quot;. Doswell and Edwards believe poor chasing ethics at TV news stations add to the growth of &quot;yahoo&quot; storm chasing. A large lawsuit was filed against the parent company of The Weather Channel in March 2019 for allegedly keeping on contract storm chaser drivers with a demonstrated pattern of reckless driving which ultimately led to a fatal collision (killing themselves and a storm spotter in the other vehicle) when running a stop sign in Texas in 2017. Edwards and Rich Thompson, among others, also expressed concern about pernicious effects of media profiteering with Matt Crowther, among others, agreeing in principle but viewing sales as not inherently corrupting. Self-policing is seen as the means to mold the hobby. There is occasional discussion among chasers that at some point government regulation may be imposed due to increasing numbers of chasers and because of poor behavior by some individuals; however, many chasers do not expect this eventuality and almost all oppose regulations—as do some formal studies of dangerous leisure activities which also advocate deliberative self-policing.

As there is for storm chaser conduct, there is concern about chaser responsibility. Since some chasers are trained in first aid and even first responder procedures, it is not uncommon for tornado chasers to be first on a scene and tending to storm victims or treating injuries at the site of a disaster in advance of emergency personnel and other outside aid.

Aside from questions concerning their ethical values and conduct, many have been accredited for giving back to the community in several ways. Just before the Joplin tornado, Storm Chaser Jeff Piotrowski provided advanced warning to Officer Brewer of Joplin local law enforcement, prompting them to activate the emergency sirens. Though lives were lost, many who survived accredited their survival to the siren. After a storm has passed storm chasers are often the first to arrive on the scene to help assist in the aftermath. An unexpected and yet increasingly more common result of storm chasers is the data they provide to storm research from their videos, social video posts and documentation of storms they encounter. After the El Reno tornado in 2013, portals were created for chasers to submit their information to help in the research of the deadly storm. The El Reno Tornado Environment Display (TED) was created to show a synchronized view of the submitted video footage overlaying radar images of the storm with various chasers&#x27; positions.

==In popular culture==
* &quot;Twister&quot;, a 1996 film starring Helen Hunt and Bill Paxton
* &quot;Into the Storm&quot;, a 2014 film
* &quot;Heavy Weather&quot;, a 1994 novel
* &quot;Storm Chasers&quot;, a 2007–2011 reality TV series
* &quot;Twisters&quot;, a 2024 film and sequel to the 1996 film starring Daisy Edgar-Jones and Glen Powell

==See also==

* 53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron
* Eclipse chasing
* Landscape photography
* Hurricane hunters (crews)
* NOAA Hurricane Hunters (aircraft)
* Weather spotting

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==Active Storm Chasers==

* USA Reed Timmer | https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reed_Timmer
* UK&#x27;s First Active Storm Chaser https://www.nodrog.uk/storm-chasing

==External links==

* The Meaning of Chasing (T.J. Turnage)
* Storm Spotters Guides: Chasing
* NSSL Field Projects
* NCAR Earth Observing Laboratory Field Projects</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1760612" start="0" end="13" title="Storm chasing" label="Storm chasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q741507" start="66" end="80" title="severe weather" label="severe weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="325" end="332" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="394" end="406" title="thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q182311" start="431" end="443" title="cumulonimbus cloud" label="cumulonimbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074" start="456" end="461" title="cloud" label="cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q37602" start="496" end="500" title="hail" label="hail"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="505" end="514" title="lightning" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="605" end="621" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022922" start="624" end="634" title="waterspout" label="waterspout"/>
<link wikidata="Q205418" start="637" end="645" title="blizzard" label="blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q182868" start="1200" end="1211" title="weather forecasting" label="forecasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436734" start="1274" end="1288" title="thrill seeking" label="thrill seeking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620208" start="1636" end="1649" title="Storm spotting" label="storm spotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q370766" start="1781" end="1793" title="ground truth" label="ground truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826003" start="1901" end="1912" title="Tornado climatology" label="climatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="2089" end="2113" title="National Weather Service" label="National Weather Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771040" start="2277" end="2286" title="Stringer (journalism)" label="stringers"/>
<link wikidata="Q215279" start="2306" end="2316" title="freelancer" label="freelancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="2367" end="2375" title="Postgraduate education" label="graduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310145" start="2376" end="2389" title="meteorologist" label="meteorologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110805" start="2585" end="2598" title="List of adjectival tourisms" label="niche tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q741507" start="3236" end="3250" title="severe weather" label="severe weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235797" start="3797" end="3810" title="David K. Hoadley" label="David Hoadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="3842" end="3854" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620181" start="4032" end="4043" title="Storm Track (magazine)" label="Storm Track"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988259" start="4061" end="4073" title="Neil B. Ward" label="Neil B. Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082241" start="4191" end="4214" title="Oklahoma Highway Patrol" label="Oklahoma Highway Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711644" start="4417" end="4437" title="Alberta Hail Project" label="Alberta Hail Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="4727" end="4749" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656840" start="4779" end="4812" title="National Severe Storms Laboratory" label="National Severe Storms Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470566" start="5057" end="5077" title="Union City, Oklahoma" label="Union City, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q747894" start="5125" end="5134" title="supercell" label="supercell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681469" start="5502" end="5517" title="In Search of... (TV series)" label="In Search of..."/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="5559" end="5562" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071768" start="5576" end="5580" title="Nova (American TV series)" label="Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q683663" start="5641" end="5648" title="Twister (1996 film)" label="Twister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978327" start="5878" end="5889" title="Weatherwise" label="Weatherwise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354506" start="6521" end="6534" title="Storm Chasers (TV series)" label="Storm Chasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283519" start="6722" end="6736" title="Field experiment" label="field projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062489" start="6829" end="6844" title="VORTEX projects" label="VORTEX projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q863343" start="7102" end="7123" title="Weather radar" label="Doppler weather radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032600" start="8525" end="8536" title="Dixie Alley" label="Dixie Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="9392" end="9404" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="9412" end="9425" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="9442" end="9448" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q923442" start="9483" end="9496" title="Tornado Alley" label="Tornado Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q747894" start="9705" end="9714" title="supercell" label="supercell"/>
<link wikidata="Q202325" start="9998" end="10008" title="jet stream" label="jet stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067421" start="10583" end="10603" title="Colorado Front Range" label="Colorado Front Range"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10987" end="10998" title="Glossary of tornado terms#S" label="significant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826003" start="11042" end="11056" title="tornado season" label="tornado season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027878" start="12104" end="12114" title="wind shear" label="wind shear"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211167" start="12259" end="12266" title="Top End" label="Top End"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="12274" end="12292" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="12313" end="12322" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="12465" end="12479" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="12481" end="12487" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="12489" end="12494" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="12496" end="12501" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="12503" end="12509" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="12511" end="12518" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="12524" end="12535" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="12537" end="12544" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="12546" end="12553" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="12555" end="12562" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="12564" end="12575" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="12577" end="12583" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="12585" end="12593" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="12595" end="12603" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="12605" end="12612" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="12618" end="12632" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="12634" end="12642" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="12644" end="12651" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="12653" end="12662" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="12664" end="12676" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="12678" end="12688" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="12694" end="12705" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="12756" end="12769" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q182878" start="13316" end="13320" title="Dust storm" label="dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q37602" start="13322" end="13326" title="hail" label="hail"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="13331" end="13339" title="hail fog" label="hail fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4847219" start="13493" end="13502" title="downburst" label="downburst"/>
<link wikidata="Q478123" start="13668" end="13689" title="situational awareness" label="situational awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="13875" end="13894" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911065" start="14303" end="14313" title="wall cloud" label="wall cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q999646" start="14640" end="14647" title="driving" label="driving"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283083" start="14751" end="14763" title="Distracted driving" label="distractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520565" start="15033" end="15045" title="Human multitasking" label="multitasking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539658" start="15192" end="15198" title="Sleep-deprived driving" label="asleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437779" start="15321" end="15341" title="Fatigue (safety)" label="defatigating demands"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="15708" end="15730" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q623085" start="15773" end="15785" title="hydroplaning" label="hydroplaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q670306" start="15904" end="15920" title="Hurricane Dennis" label="Hurricane Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q452286" start="16006" end="16010" title="Interstate 80 in Iowa" label="I-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174748" start="16122" end="16137" title="Turner Turnpike" label="Turner Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171644" start="16139" end="16143" title="Interstate 44 in Oklahoma" label="I-44"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417205" start="16330" end="16362" title="2013 El Reno tornado" label="the widest tornado ever recorded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017220" start="16375" end="16392" title="El Reno, Oklahoma" label="El Reno, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415410" start="16403" end="16414" title="Tim Samaras" label="Tim Samaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q212082" start="16545" end="16555" title="infrasonic" label="infrasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402508" start="16556" end="16570" title="field research" label="field research"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001178" start="16945" end="16965" title="rear flank downdraft" label="rear flank downdraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043935" start="17087" end="17106" title="The Weather Channel" label="The Weather Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q250429" start="17176" end="17185" title="stop sign" label="stop sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977293" start="17206" end="17230" title="Farm to Market Road 1081" label="Farm to Market Road 1081"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977248" start="17294" end="17318" title="Farm to Market Road 2794" label="Farm to Market Road 2794"/>
<link wikidata="Q962879" start="17746" end="17763" title="K-42 (Kansas highway)" label="Kansas Highway 42"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171631" start="18016" end="18020" title="Interstate 35 in Oklahoma" label="I-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448209" start="18405" end="18409" title="Interstate 90 in Minnesota" label="I-90"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936841" start="18467" end="18485" title="semi-trailer truck" label="semi-trailer truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756747" start="18623" end="18641" title="March 1990 Central United States tornado outbreak" label="a tornado outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708546" start="18660" end="18664" title="KWTV" label="KWTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927866" start="18729" end="18746" title="Lindsay, Oklahoma" label="Lindsay, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q190107" start="19042" end="19057" title="weather station" label="weather station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423499" start="19350" end="19358" title="radiofax" label="radiofax"/>
<link wikidata="Q814610" start="19626" end="19643" title="emergency service" label="emergency service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939892" start="19769" end="19783" title="Amateur radio operator" label="radio amateurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="19815" end="19828" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962" start="20022" end="20028" title="laptop" label="laptop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361224" start="20113" end="20129" title="acoustic coupler" label="acoustic coupler"/>
<link wikidata="Q863343" start="20259" end="20264" title="Weather radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q209363" start="20269" end="20278" title="Weather satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q478751" start="20454" end="20481" title="surface weather observation" label="surface weather observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q865144" start="20933" end="20944" title="weather map" label="weather map"/>
<link wikidata="Q10751397" start="21132" end="21150" title="NOAA Weather Radio" label="NOAA Weather Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832697" start="21225" end="21252" title="Severe weather terminology (United States)" label="weather watches and warning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21283" end="21301" title="Storm Prediction Center#Convective outlooks" label="convective outlook"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="21709" end="21712" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q335234" start="21713" end="21722" title="camcorder" label="camcorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q270183" start="21825" end="21834" title="8 mm film" label="8 mm film"/>
<link wikidata="Q747779" start="22003" end="22008" title="Videotape" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745370" start="22090" end="22101" title="Film stock" label="film format"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647252" start="22175" end="22187" title="A.M. Weather" label="A.M. Weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="22473" end="22484" title="Solid-state (electronics)" label="solid state"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="22808" end="22822" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="22882" end="22885" title="File Transfer Protocol" label="FTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036935" start="23247" end="23264" title="Doppler on Wheels" label="Doppler on Wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050846" start="23318" end="23337" title="lightning detection" label="lightning detection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23544" end="23554" title="WeatherTAP" label="WeatherTAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298569" start="23591" end="23595" title="Road map" label="maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q463436" start="23914" end="23917" title="American Automobile Association" label="AAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586156" start="23930" end="23942" title="Rand McNally" label="Rand McNally"/>
<link wikidata="Q214844" start="23955" end="23963" title="Michelin Guide" label="Michelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179564" start="24234" end="24241" title="DeLorme" label="DeLorme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857024" start="24458" end="24487" title="Microsoft Streets &amp;amp; Trips" label="Microsoft Streets &amp;amp; Trips"/>
<link wikidata="Q12013" start="24574" end="24585" title="Google Maps" label="Google Maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q942327" start="24587" end="24591" title="Waze" label="Waze"/>
<link wikidata="Q276101" start="24600" end="24610" title="Apple Maps" label="Apple Maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q649186" start="24620" end="24631" title="web mapping" label="web mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="24708" end="24724" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q27856743" start="24753" end="24765" title="Windows Maps" label="Windows Maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="25058" end="25061" title="Global Positioning System" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q179435" start="25104" end="25124" title="satellite navigation" label="satellite navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088597" start="25571" end="25577" title="NEXRAD" label="NEXRAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="25805" end="25810" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q751980" start="25993" end="26003" title="wardriving" label="wardriving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="26052" end="26059" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q863343" start="26105" end="26126" title="Weather radar" label="Doppler weather radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q492058" start="26333" end="26351" title="XM Satellite Radio" label="XM Satellite Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862796" start="26398" end="26412" title="Baron Services" label="Baron Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609832" start="26660" end="26668" title="GRLevelX" label="GRLevel3"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="26758" end="26764" title="Vector graphics" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q483130" start="26777" end="26780" title="Geographic information system" label="GIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580135" start="26850" end="26865" title="Spotter Network" label="Spotter Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="27139" end="27153" title="Mobile phone" label="cellular phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q770588" start="27363" end="27371" title="Citizens Band radio" label="CB radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501633" start="27406" end="27410" title="General Mobile Radio Service" label="GMRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713856" start="27413" end="27416" title="Family Radio Service" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q954187" start="27427" end="27438" title="transceiver" label="transceiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q209421" start="27542" end="27550" title="2-meter band" label="2 meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="27551" end="27554" title="Very high frequency" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q261205" start="27572" end="27577" title="70-centimeter band" label="70 cm"/>
<link wikidata="Q628096" start="27578" end="27581" title="Ultra high frequency" label="UHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278035" start="27628" end="27635" title="Skywarn" label="Skywarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034154" start="27638" end="27645" title="Canwarn" label="Canwarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474480" start="27664" end="27672" title="Scanner (radio)" label="Scanners"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417006" start="27766" end="27779" title="weather radio" label="weather radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="27802" end="27828" title="social networking services" label="social networking services"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="27852" end="27859" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="27890" end="27898" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907849" start="27948" end="27955" title="Discord" label="Discord"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="28035" end="28042" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q156376" start="28057" end="28062" title="Vimeo" label="Vimeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="28066" end="28072" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="28097" end="28106" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="28435" end="28446" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464943" start="28462" end="28472" title="wind speed" label="wind speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057900" start="28477" end="28486" title="Wind direction" label="direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743695" start="28603" end="28613" title="Meteorological instrumentation" label="instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q175029" start="28746" end="28756" title="anemometer" label="anemometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="29014" end="29025" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662841" start="29047" end="29058" title="Videography" label="Videography"/>
<link wikidata="Q196342" start="29196" end="29207" title="Digital single-lens reflex camera" label="digital SLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q15328" start="29215" end="29222" title="Still camera" label="cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051557" start="29239" end="29244" title="35mm format" label="35 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q196353" start="29245" end="29248" title="Single-lens reflex camera" label="SLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293" start="29249" end="29254" title="Photographic film" label="print"/>
<link wikidata="Q166816" start="29259" end="29264" title="Reversal film" label="slide"/>
<link wikidata="Q759853" start="29265" end="29276" title="film format" label="film format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146074" start="29312" end="29325" title="Medium format (film)" label="medium format"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="29367" end="29369" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027665" start="29412" end="29426" title="live streaming" label="live streaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q183731" start="29714" end="29725" title="memory card" label="memory card"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796889" start="29764" end="29777" title="DV (video format)" label="Digital video"/>
<link wikidata="Q193663" start="29824" end="29828" title="Magnetic tape" label="tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q19280237" start="29838" end="29849" title="Solid-state storage" label="solid-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q218825" start="29853" end="29866" title="random access" label="random access"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067705" start="29879" end="29896" title="sequential access" label="sequential access"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916762" start="29949" end="29957" title="High-definition video" label="HD video"/>
<link wikidata="Q243314" start="29976" end="29978" title="Standard-definition television" label="SD"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="29995" end="29999" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q238162" start="30190" end="30192" title="4K resolution" label="4K"/>
<link wikidata="Q683906" start="30227" end="30234" title="Tripod (photography)" label="Tripods"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="30563" end="30567" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="UAVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="30609" end="30619" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="30734" end="30737" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="30742" end="30749" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q334765" start="31094" end="31107" title="Hotspot (Wi-Fi)" label="WiFi hotspots"/>
<link wikidata="Q833066" start="31177" end="31186" title="tethering" label="tethering"/>
<link wikidata="Q640394" start="31239" end="31255" title="mobile broadband" label="mobile broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058891" start="31256" end="31260" title="Mobile virtual network operator" label="MNVO"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="31511" end="31526" title="tablet computer" label="tablet computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79703" start="31557" end="31563" title="LTE (telecommunication)" label="4G LTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q209918" start="31685" end="31723" title="mirrorless interchangeable-lens camera" label="mirrorless interchangeable-lens camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q815867" start="32009" end="32022" title="first aid kit" label="first aid kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074836" start="32036" end="32046" title="spare tire" label="spare tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q324963" start="32122" end="32136" title="Power inverter" label="Power inverter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142798" start="32150" end="32166" title="Surge protector" label="surged protected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754646" start="32167" end="32179" title="power strips" label="power strips"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="32208" end="32210" title="Alternating current" label="AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="32290" end="32292" title="Direct current" label="DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284445" start="32377" end="32383" title="Rain-X" label="Rain-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782717" start="32387" end="32394" title="Aquapel (glass treatment)" label="Aquapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q210008" start="32623" end="32632" title="autofocus" label="autofocus"/>
<link wikidata="Q102626" start="32641" end="32651" title="Binoculars" label="Binoculars"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="32783" end="32789" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="32955" end="32962" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074828" start="33040" end="33053" title="Charles A. Doswell III" label="Chuck Doswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17385875" start="33058" end="33071" title="Roger Edwards (meteorologist)" label="Roger Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448168" start="34222" end="34235" title="Industry self-regulation" label="self-policing"/>
<link wikidata="Q133981" start="34356" end="34365" title="first aid" label="first aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362384" start="34375" end="34390" title="Certified first responder" label="first responder"/>
<link wikidata="Q683663" start="35686" end="35693" title="Twister (1996 film)" label="Twister"/>
<link wikidata="Q170574" start="35722" end="35732" title="Helen Hunt" label="Helen Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q110374" start="35737" end="35748" title="Bill Paxton" label="Bill Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989191" start="35757" end="35771" title="Into the Storm (2014 film)" label="Into the Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695215" start="35799" end="35812" title="Heavy Weather (Sterling novel)" label="Heavy Weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354506" start="35841" end="35854" title="Storm Chasers (TV series)" label="Storm Chasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q115932556" start="35900" end="35908" title="Twisters (film)" label="Twisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q73889193" start="35965" end="35982" title="Daisy Edgar-Jones" label="Daisy Edgar-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567967" start="35987" end="35998" title="Glen Powell" label="Glen Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q14954844" start="36016" end="36052" title="53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron" label="53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086989" start="36055" end="36070" title="Eclipse chasing" label="Eclipse chasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353984" start="36073" end="36094" title="Landscape photography" label="Landscape photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359280" start="36097" end="36114" title="Hurricane hunters" label="Hurricane hunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961220" start="36125" end="36147" title="NOAA Hurricane Hunters" label="NOAA Hurricane Hunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144045" start="36161" end="36177" title="Weather spotting" label="Weather spotting"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426208" wikidata="Q4496" url="?curid=426208" title="Mitt Romney">
<text>Willard Mitt Romney (born March 12, 1947) is an American businessman and retired politician. He served as a United States senator from Utah from 2019 to 2025 and as the 70th governor of Massachusetts from 2003 to 2007. He was the Republican Party&#x27;s nominee in the 2012 U.S. presidential election.

Mitt Romney is a son of George W. Romney, a former governor of Michigan. Raised in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, Mitt spent over two years in France as a Mormon missionary. He married Ann Davies in 1969; they have five sons. Active in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) throughout his adult life, Romney served as bishop of his ward and later as a stake president for an area covering Boston and many of its suburbs. By 1971, he had participated in the political campaigns of both his parents. In 1971, Romney graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in English from Brigham Young University (BYU) and in 1975 he received a JD–MBA degree from Harvard. He became a management consultant and in 1977 joined Bain &amp; Company in Boston. As Bain&#x27;s chief executive officer (CEO), he helped lead the company out of a financial crisis. In 1984, he co-founded and led the spin-off company Bain Capital, a private equity investment firm that became one of the largest of its kind in the nation.

After stepping down from his positions at Bain Capital and in the LDS Church, Romney ran as the Republican nominee for the U.S. Senate in Massachusetts in 1994 and lost to the incumbent, Ted Kennedy. He then resumed his position at Bain Capital. Years later, a successful stint as president and CEO of the then-struggling Salt Lake Organizing Committee for the 2002 Winter Olympics led to a relaunch of his political career. Elected governor of Massachusetts in 2002, Romney helped develop and later signed a health care reform law (commonly called &quot;Romneycare&quot;) that provided near-universal health insurance access through state-level subsidies and individual mandates to purchase insurance. He also presided over the elimination of a projected $1.2–1.5 billion deficit through a combination of spending cuts, increased fees, and closing corporate tax loopholes. He did not seek reelection in 2006, instead focusing on his campaign for the Republican nomination in the 2008 presidential election, which he lost to Senator John McCain. Romney ran for president again four years later and was the Republican nominee in the 2012 presidential election, becoming the first LDS Church member to be a major party&#x27;s nominee. He lost the election to President Barack Obama. After reestablishing residency in Utah, Romney ran for U.S. Senate in 2018. When Romney won the Republican nomination and general election, he became the first person in modern American history to be elected governor and U.S. senator of different states.

Generally considered a moderate or more neoconservative Republican, Romney was the lone Republican to vote to convict Donald Trump in his first impeachment trial, making him the first senator ever to have voted to remove a president of the same party from office. Romney also voted to convict in Trump&#x27;s second trial in 2021. He marched alongside Black Lives Matter protestors, voted to confirm Ketanji Brown Jackson to the Supreme Court, supported gun control measures, and did not vote for Trump in the 2016 and 2020 presidential elections. He has long been hawkish on relations with Iran, China, and Russia, and was one of Israel&#x27;s staunchest supporters in Congress. He has been accused by Trump loyalists of being a Republican In Name Only. In 2023, Romney announced he would not run for reelection in 2024 and retired from the Senate when his term expired in 2025.

==Early life and education==

===Heritage and youth===
Willard Mitt Romney was born on March 12, 1947, at Harper University Hospital in Detroit, Michigan, one of four children born to automobile executive George W. Romney and actress and homemaker Lenore Romney (née LaFount). His mother was a native of Logan, Utah, and his father was born to American parents in a Mormon colony in Chihuahua, Mexico. Of primarily English descent, he also has Scottish and German ancestry. A fifth-generation member of the LDS Church, he is a great-grandson of Miles Park Romney and a great-great-grandson of Miles Romney, who converted to Mormonism in its first decade. Another great-great-grandfather, Parley P. Pratt, helped lead the early church.
Romney has three older siblings: Margo, Jane, and Scott. Mitt was the youngest by nearly six years. His parents named him after a family friend, businessman J. Willard Marriott, and his father&#x27;s cousin, Milton &quot;Mitt&quot; Romney, a former quarterback for the Chicago Bears. Romney was called &quot;Billy&quot; until kindergarten, when he expressed a preference for &quot;Mitt&quot;. In 1953, the family moved from Detroit to the affluent suburb of Bloomfield Hills and his father became the chairman and CEO of American Motors the following year and helped the company avoid bankruptcy and return to profitability. By 1959, his father had become a nationally known figure in print and on television, and Mitt idolized him.

Romney attended public elementary schools until seventh grade, when he enrolled as one of only a few Mormon students at Cranbrook School, a private upscale boys&#x27; preparatory school a few miles from his home. Many students there came from backgrounds even more privileged than his. Not particularly athletic, he also did not distinguish himself academically. He participated in his father&#x27;s successful 1962 Michigan gubernatorial campaign, and later worked as an intern in the governor&#x27;s office. Romney took up residence at Cranbrook when his newly elected father began spending most of his time at the state capitol.

At Cranbrook, Romney helped manage the ice hockey team, and joined the pep squad. During his senior year, he joined the cross country running team. He belonged to 11 school organizations and school clubs, including the Blue Key Club, a booster group he had started. During his final year there, his academic record improved but fell short of excellence. Romney was involved in several pranks while attending Cranbrook. He has since apologized for them, stating that some of them may have gone too far. In March of his senior year, he began dating Ann Davies; she attended the private Kingswood School, Cranbrook&#x27;s sister school. The two became informally engaged around the time he graduated from high school in June 1965.

===College, France mission, marriage, and children===

Romney attended Stanford University during the 1965–1966 academic year. He was not part of the counterculture of the 1960s then taking form in the San Francisco Bay Area. As opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War grew, a group staged a May 1966 sit-in at Stanford&#x27;s administration building to demonstrate against draft status tests; Romney joined a counterprotest against that group. He continued to enjoy occasional pranks.

In July 1966, he began a 30-month stint in France as a Mormon missionary, a traditional rite of passage in his family. He arrived in Le Havre, where he shared cramped quarters under meager conditions. Rules against drinking, smoking, and dating were strictly enforced.

On average, individual Mormon missionaries do not gain many converts and Romney was no exception: he later estimated 10 to 20 for his entire mission. He initially became demoralized and later recalled it as the only time when &quot;most of what I was trying to do was rejected.&quot;

Romney soon gained recognition within the mission for the many homes he called on and the repeat visits he was granted. He became a zone leader in Bordeaux in early 1968, and soon thereafter became an assistant to the mission president in Paris. While in Paris, Romney resided at the Mission Home for several months, and enjoyed a mansion far more comfortable than the accommodations he experienced elsewhere in the country.

When the French expressed opposition to the U.S. role in the Vietnam War, Romney debated them. Those who yelled at him and slammed their doors in his face merely reinforced his resolve.

In June 1968, while in southern France and driving an automobile that was hit by another vehicle, Romney was seriously injured. The crash killed one of his passengers, the wife of the mission president.

Romney then became co-president of a mission that had become demoralized and disorganized after the May 1968 general strike and student uprisings and the car accident. With Romney rallying the others, the mission met its goal of 200 baptisms for the year, the most in a decade. By the end of his stint in December 1968, he was overseeing the work of 175 others. As a result of his experience there, Romney developed a lifelong affection for France and its people, and has remained fluent in French.

At their first meeting following his return, Romney and Ann Davies reconnected and decided to get married. Before their wedding, Romney moved to Utah and enrolled at Brigham Young University, where Ann had been studying. They married on March 21, 1969, in a civil ceremony in Bloomfield Hills and the next day, they flew to Utah for a Mormon wedding ceremony at the Salt Lake Temple; Ann had converted to the faith while he was away.

Romney had missed much of the tumultuous anti-Vietnam War movement in America while in France. Upon his return, he was surprised to learn that his father had joined that movement during his unsuccessful 1968 presidential campaign. George was now serving in President Richard Nixon&#x27;s cabinet as United States Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. In a June 1970 newspaper profile of children of cabinet members, Mitt said that U.S. involvement in the war had been misguided – &quot;If it wasn&#x27;t a political blunder to move into Vietnam, I don&#x27;t know what is&quot; – but supported Nixon&#x27;s ongoing Cambodian Incursion as a sincere attempt to end the war. During the U.S. military draft for the Vietnam War, Romney sought and received two 2-S student deferments, then a 4-D ministerial deferment while living in France as a missionary. He later sought and received two additional student deferments. When those ran out, he drew number 300 in the December 1969 draft lottery, ensuring he would not be drafted.

At culturally conservative BYU, Romney remained separated from much of the upheaval of that era. He became president of the Cougar Club booster organization and showed a newfound discipline in his studies. During his senior year, he took a leave of absence to work as driver and advance man for his mother&#x27;s unsuccessful U.S. Senate campaign; together, they visited all 83 Michigan counties. Romney graduated from BYU in 1971 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in English and a 3.97 GPA. He gave commencement addresses to both the College of Humanities and the whole of BYU.

The Romneys&#x27; first son, Taggart, was born in 1970 while they were undergraduates at BYU and living in a basement apartment. Their son Matthew was born in 1971 and Joshua in 1975. Benjamin (1978) and Craig (1981) were born after Romney had begun his career.

Romney wanted to pursue a business career, but his father advised him that a law degree (Juris Doctor) would be valuable to his career even if he never practiced law. As a result, he enrolled in the recently created four-year joint Juris Doctor/Master of Business Administration program coordinated between Harvard Law School and Harvard Business School. He readily adapted to the business school&#x27;s pragmatic, data-driven case study method of teaching. Living in a Belmont, Massachusetts, house with Ann and their two children, his social experience differed from that of most of his classmates. He was nonideological and did not involve himself in the political issues of the day. Romney graduated from Harvard in 1975. He was named a Baker Scholar for graduating in the top 5% of his business school class and received his Juris Doctor degree &quot;cum laude&quot; for ranking in the top third of his law school class.

==Business career==
===Management consulting===
After receiving his JD–MBA from Harvard, Romney passed the Michigan bar exam but decided to pursue a career in business rather than law. He was recruited by several large companies but joined the Boston Consulting Group (BCG), reasoning that working as a management consultant for a variety of companies would better prepare him for a future position as a chief executive. Part of a 1970s wave of top graduates who chose to go into consulting rather than join a large company directly, he found his legal and business education useful in his job. He applied BCG principles such as the growth-share matrix, and executives viewed him as having a bright future there. At BCG, he was a colleague of Benjamin Netanyahu, with whom he formed a friendship that has lasted for more than 50 years.

In 1977, he was hired by Bain &amp; Company, a management consulting firm in Boston formed a few years earlier by Bill Bain and several other ex-BCG employees. Bain later said of the 30-year-old Romney, &quot;He had the appearance of confidence of a guy who was maybe ten years older.&quot; Unlike other consulting firms, which issued recommendations and then departed, Bain &amp; Company immersed itself in a client&#x27;s businesses and worked with them until changes were implemented. Romney became a vice president of the firm in 1978, working with such clients as the Monsanto Company, Outboard Marine Corporation, Burlington Industries, and Corning Incorporated. Within a few years, the firm considered him one of its best consultants. In fact, clients sometimes preferred to use him rather than more-senior partners.

===Minor political issues===
Two family incidents during this time later surfaced during Romney&#x27;s political campaigns. A state park ranger in 1981 told Romney his motorboat had an insufficiently visible license number and that he would face a $50 fine if he took the boat onto the lake. Disagreeing about the license and wanting to continue a family outing, Romney took it out anyway, saying he would pay the fine. The ranger arrested him for disorderly conduct. The charges were dropped several days later. In 1983, on a 12-hour family road trip, he placed the family&#x27;s dog in a windshield-equipped carrier on the roof of their car, and then washed the car and carrier after the dog suffered a bout of diarrhea. The dog incident in particular later became fodder for Romney&#x27;s critics and political opponents.

===Private equity===
In 1984, Romney left Bain &amp; Company to co-found and lead the spin-off private equity investment firm Bain Capital. He initially refrained from accepting Bill Bain&#x27;s offer to head the new venture until Bain rearranged the terms in a complicated partnership structure so that there was no financial or professional risk to Romney. Bain and Romney raised the $37 million needed to start the new operation, which had seven employees. Romney held the titles of president and managing general partner. Though he was the sole shareholder of the firm, publications also called him managing director or CEO.

Initially, Bain Capital focused on venture capital investments. Romney set up a system in which any partner could veto one of these potential opportunities, and he personally saw so many weaknesses that few venture capital investments were approved in the initial two years. The firm&#x27;s first significant success was a 1986 investment to help start Staples Inc., after founder Thomas G. Stemberg convinced Romney of the market size for office supplies and Romney convinced others; Bain Capital eventually reaped a nearly sevenfold return on its investment, and Romney sat on Staples&#x27;s board of directors for over a decade.

Romney soon switched Bain Capital&#x27;s focus from startups to the relatively new business of leveraged buyouts: buying existing companies with money mostly borrowed from banking institutions using the newly bought companies&#x27; assets as collateral, taking steps to improve the companies&#x27; value, and then selling those companies when their value peaked, usually within a few years. Bain Capital lost money in many of its early leveraged buyouts, but then found deals that made large returns. The firm invested in or acquired Accuride Corporation, Brookstone, Domino&#x27;s Pizza, Sealy Corporation, Sports Authority, and Artisan Entertainment, as well as some lesser-known companies in the industrial and medical sectors. Much of the firm&#x27;s profit was earned from a relatively small number of deals; Bain Capital&#x27;s overall success-to-failure ratio was about even.

Romney discovered few investment opportunities himself (and those that he did often failed to make money for the firm). Instead, he focused on analyzing the merits of possible deals that others brought forward and on recruiting investors to participate in them once approved. At Bain Capital, Romney spread profits from deals widely within the firm to keep people motivated, often keeping less than 10% for himself. Data-driven, he often played the role of a devil&#x27;s advocate during exhaustive analysis of whether to go forward with a deal. He wanted to drop a Bain Capital hedge fund that initially lost money, but other partners disagreed with him and it eventually made billions. He opted out of the Artisan Entertainment deal, not wanting to profit from a studio that produced R-rated films. Romney served on the board of directors of Damon Corporation, a medical testing company later found guilty of defrauding the government; Bain Capital tripled its investment before selling off the company, and the fraud was discovered by the new owners (Romney was never implicated). In some cases, Romney had little involvement with a company once Bain Capital acquired it.

Bain Capital&#x27;s leveraged buyouts sometimes led to layoffs, either soon after acquisition or later after the firm had concluded its role. Exactly how many jobs Bain Capital added compared to those lost because of these investments and buyouts is unknown, owing to a lack of records and Bain Capital&#x27;s penchant for privacy for itself and its investors. Maximizing the value of acquired companies and the return to Bain&#x27;s investors, not job creation, was the firm&#x27;s primary investment goal. Bain Capital&#x27;s acquisition of Ampad exemplified a deal where it profited handsomely from early payments and management fees, even though the subject company itself later went into bankruptcy. Dade Behring was another case where Bain Capital received an eightfold return on its investment but the company itself was saddled with debt and laid off over a thousand employees before Bain Capital exited (the company subsequently went into bankruptcy, with more layoffs, before recovering and prospering). Referring to the layoffs that sometimes occurred, Romney said in 2007: &quot;Sometimes the medicine is a little bitter but it is necessary to save the life of the patient. My job was to try and make the enterprise successful, and in my view the best security a family can have is that the business they work for is strong.&quot;

In 1990, facing financial collapse, Bain &amp; Company asked Romney to return. Announced as its new CEO in January 1991, he drew a symbolic salary of one dollar (remaining managing general partner of Bain Capital during this time). He oversaw an effort to restructure Bain &amp; Company&#x27;s employee stock-ownership plan and real-estate deals, while rallying the firm&#x27;s 1,000 employees, imposing a new governing structure that excluded Bain and the other founding partners from control, and increasing fiscal transparency. He got Bain and other initial owners who had removed excessive amounts of money from the firm to return substantial amounts, and persuaded creditors, including the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, to accept less than full payment. Within about a year, he led Bain &amp; Company to a return to profitability. He then turned it over to new leadership and returned to Bain Capital in December 1992.

Romney took a leave of absence from Bain Capital from November 1993 to November 1994 to run for U.S. Senate. During that time, Ampad workers went on strike and asked Romney to intervene. Against the advice of Bain Capital lawyers, Romney met the strikers, but told them he had no position of active authority in the matter.

By 1999, Bain Capital was on its way to becoming one of the foremost private equity firms in the nation, having increased its number of partners from 5 to 18, with 115 employees and $4 billion under management. The firm&#x27;s average annual internal rate of return on realized investments was 113% and its average yearly return to investors was around 50–80%.

Starting in February 1999, Romney took a paid leave of absence from Bain Capital in order to serve as the president and CEO of the 2002 Salt Lake City Olympic Games Organizing Committee. Billed in some public statements as keeping a part-time role, Romney remained the firm&#x27;s sole shareholder, managing director, CEO, and president, signing corporate and legal documents, attending to his interests within the firm, and conducting prolonged negotiations for the terms of his departure. He did not involve himself in the firm&#x27;s day-to-day operations or the investment decisions of its new private equity funds. He retained his position on several boards of directors during this time and regularly returned to Massachusetts to attend meetings.

In August 2001, Romney announced that he would not return to Bain Capital. His separation from the firm concluded in early 2002; he transferred his ownership to other partners and negotiated an agreement that allowed him to receive a share of the profits as a retired partner in some Bain Capital entities, including buyout and investment funds. The private equity business continued to thrive, earning him millions of dollars in annual income.

==LDS Church service==
During his business career, Romney held several positions in the church&#x27;s local lay clergy. In the early 1970s, he served in a ward bishopric. He then served for a time as a seminary teacher and then as a member of the stake high council of the Boston Stake while Richard L. Bushman was stake president.

In 1977, he became a counselor to the president of the Boston Stake. He served as bishop of the ward at Belmont, Massachusetts, from 1981 to 1986. As such, in addition to home teaching, he also formulated Sunday services and classes using LDS scriptures to guide the congregation. After the destruction of the Belmont meetinghouse by a fire of suspicious origins in 1984, he forged links with other religious institutions, allowing the congregation to rotate its meetings to other houses of worship during the reconstruction of the Belmont building.

From 1986 to 1994, Romney was president of the Boston Stake, which included more than a dozen wards in eastern Massachusetts and almost 4,000 church members. He organized a team to handle financial and management issues, sought to counter anti-Mormon sentiment, and tried to solve social problems among poor Southeast Asian converts. An unpaid position, his local church leadership often took 30 or more hours a week of his time, and he became known for his considerable energy in the role. He also earned a reputation for avoiding any overnight travel that might interfere with his church responsibilities.

Romney took a hands-on role in the Boston Stake&#x27;s matters, helping in domestic maintenance efforts, visiting the sick, and counseling burdened church members. A number of local church members later credited him with turning their lives around or helping them through difficult times. Others, rankled by his leadership style, desired a more consensus-based approach. Romney tried to balance the conservative directives from church leadership in Utah with the desire of some Massachusetts members to have a more flexible application of religious doctrine. He agreed with some requests from a liberal women&#x27;s group that published &quot;Exponent II&quot; calling for changes in the way the church dealt with women, but he clashed with women he felt were departing too much from doctrine. In particular, he counseled women not to have abortions except in the rare cases allowed by LDS doctrine and encouraged unmarried women facing unplanned pregnancies to give their babies up for adoption. Romney later said that the years spent as an LDS minister gave him direct exposure to people struggling financially and empathy for those with family problems.

==1994 United States Senate campaign in Massachusetts==

For much of his business career, Romney did not take public political stances. He had kept abreast of national politics since college, and the circumstances of his father&#x27;s presidential campaign loss had irked him for decades. He registered as an Independent and voted in the 1992 presidential primaries for the Democratic former senator from Massachusetts, Paul Tsongas.

By 1993, Romney had begun thinking about entering politics, partly on Ann&#x27;s urging and also to follow in his father&#x27;s footsteps. He decided to challenge incumbent Democratic U.S. senator Ted Kennedy, who was seeking reelection to a sixth term. Political pundits viewed Kennedy as vulnerable that year, in part because of the unpopularity of the Democratic Congress as a whole, and in part because this was Kennedy&#x27;s first election since the William Kennedy Smith trial in Florida, in which Kennedy&#x27;s reputation had suffered. Romney changed his affiliation to Republican in October 1993 and formally announced his candidacy in February 1994. In addition to his leave from Bain Capital, Romney also stepped down from his church leadership role in 1994.

Radio personality Janet Jeghelian took an early lead in polls among candidates for the Republican nomination for the Senate seat, but Romney proved the most effective fundraiser. He won 68% of the vote at the May 1994 Massachusetts Republican Party convention; businessman John Lakian finished a distant second, eliminating Jeghelian. Romney defeated Lakian in the September 1994 primary with more than 80% of the vote.

In the general election, Kennedy faced the first serious reelection challenge of his career. The younger, telegenic, and well-funded Romney ran as a businessman who said he had created 10,000 jobs and as a Washington outsider with a solid family image and moderate stances on social issues. When Kennedy tried to tie Romney&#x27;s policies to those of Ronald Reagan and George H. W. Bush, Romney responded, &quot;Look, I was an independent during the time of Reagan-Bush. I&#x27;m not trying to take us back to Reagan-Bush.&quot; Romney said, &quot;Ultimately, this is a campaign about change.&quot;

Romney&#x27;s campaign was effective in portraying Kennedy as soft on crime but had trouble establishing its own consistent positions. By mid-September 1994, polls showed the race about even. Kennedy responded with a series of ads that focused on Romney&#x27;s seemingly shifting political views on issues such as abortion; Romney responded, &quot;I believe that abortion should be safe and legal in this country.&quot; Other Kennedy ads centered on layoffs of workers at the Ampad plant owned by Bain Capital. The latter was effective in blunting Romney&#x27;s momentum. Kennedy and Romney held a widely watched late October debate that had no clear winner, but by then, Kennedy had pulled ahead in polls and remained so. Romney spent $3 million of his own money on the race and more than $7 million overall. Despite a disastrous showing for Democrats nationwide, Kennedy won the election with 58% of the vote to Romney&#x27;s 41%, the smallest margin in any of Kennedy&#x27;s reelection campaigns for the Senate.

The day after the election, Romney returned to Bain Capital, but the loss had a lasting effect; he told his brother, &quot;I never want to run for something again unless I can win.&quot;

===After election===
When his father died in 1995, Mitt donated his inheritance to BYU&#x27;s George W. Romney Institute of Public Management. He also became vice-chair of the board of the Points of Light Foundation, which had embraced his father&#x27;s National Volunteer Center. Romney felt restless as the decade neared a close; making more money held little attraction for him. Although no longer in a local leadership position in his church, he still taught Sunday School. During the long and controversial approval and construction process for the $30-million Mormon temple in Belmont, he feared that, as a political figure who had opposed Kennedy, he would become a focal point for opposition to the structure. He thus kept to a limited, behind-the-scenes role in attempts to ease tensions between the church and local residents.

==2002 Winter Olympics==
In 1998, Ann Romney learned that she had multiple sclerosis; Mitt described watching her fail a series of neurological tests as the worst day of his life. After experiencing two years of severe difficulties with the disease, she found – while living in Park City, Utah, where the couple had built a vacation home – a combination of mainstream, alternative, and equestrian therapies that enabled her to lead a lifestyle mostly without limitations. When her husband received a job offer to take over the troubled organization responsible for the 2002 Winter Olympics and Paralympics, to be held in Salt Lake City in Utah, she urged him to accept it; eager for a new challenge, as well as another chance to prove himself in public life, he did. On February 11, 1999, the Salt Lake Organizing Committee for the Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games of 2002 hired Romney as its president and CEO.

Before Romney took over, the event was $379 million short of its revenue goals. Officials had made plans to scale back the Games to compensate for the fiscal crisis, and there were fears it might be moved away entirely. In addition, the Games&#x27; image had been damaged by allegations of bribery against top officials including prior committee president and CEO Frank Joklik. The Salt Lake Organizing Committee forced Joklik and committee vice president Dave Johnson to resign. Utah power brokers, including Governor Mike Leavitt, searched for someone with a scandal-free reputation to take charge of the Olympics. They chose Romney based on his business and legal expertise as well as his connections to both the LDS Church and the state. The appointment faced some initial criticism from both non-Mormons and Mormons that it represented cronyism and made the Games seem too Mormon-dominated. Romney donated to charity the $1.4 million in salary and severance payments he received for his three years as president and CEO, and also donated $1 million to the Olympics.

Romney restructured the organization&#x27;s leadership and policies. He reduced budgets and boosted fundraising, alleviating corporate sponsors&#x27; concerns while recruiting new ones. Romney worked to ensure the Games&#x27;s safety after the September 11 attacks by coordinating a $300 million security budget. He oversaw a $1.32 billion budget, 700 employees, and 26,000 volunteers. The federal government provided approximately $400 million to $600 million of that budget, much of it a result of Romney&#x27;s having aggressively lobbied Congress and federal agencies. It was a record level of federal funding for the staging of a U.S. Olympics. An additional $1.1 billion of indirect federal funding came to the state in the form of highway and transit projects.

Romney emerged as the local public face of the Olympic effort, appearing in photographs, in news stories, on collectible Olympics pins depicting him wrapped by an American flag, and on buttons carrying phrases like &quot;Hey, Mitt, we love you!&quot; Organizing committee chair Robert H. Garff later said, &quot;It was obvious that he had an agenda larger than just the Olympics&quot;, and that Romney wanted to use the Olympics to propel himself into the national spotlight and a political career. Garff believed the initial budget situation was not as bad as Romney portrayed, given there were still three years to reorganize. Utah Senator Bob Bennett said that much of the needed federal money was already in place. A &quot;Boston Globe&quot; analysis later found that the committee had nearly $1 billion in committed revenues at that time. Olympics critic Steve Pace, who led Utahns for Responsible Public Spending, thought Romney exaggerated the initial fiscal state to lay the groundwork for a well-publicized rescue. Kenneth Bullock, another board member of the organizing committee and also head of the Utah League of Cities and Towns, often clashed with Romney at the time, and later said that Romney deserved some credit for the turnaround but not as much as he claimed. Bullock said: &quot;He tried very hard to build an image of himself as a savior, the great white hope. He was very good at characterizing and castigating people and putting himself on a pedestal.&quot;

Despite the initial fiscal shortfall, the Games ended up with a surplus of $100 million. President George W. Bush praised Romney&#x27;s efforts and 87% of Utahns approved of his performance as Olympics head. It solidified his reputation as a &quot;turnaround artist&quot;, and Harvard Business School taught a case study based around his actions. U.S. Olympic Committee head William Hybl credited Romney with an extraordinary effort in overcoming a difficult time for the Olympics, culminating in &quot;the greatest Winter Games I have ever seen&quot;. Romney wrote a book about his experience, &quot;&quot;, published in 2004. The role gave him experience in dealing with federal, state, and local entities, a public persona he had previously lacked, and the chance to relaunch his political aspirations.

==2002 Massachusetts gubernatorial campaign==
In 2002, plagued by political missteps and personal scandals, the administration of Republican acting governor of Massachusetts Jane Swift appeared vulnerable, and many Republicans viewed her as unable to win a general election. Prominent party figures – as well as the White House – wanted Romney to run for governor and the opportunity appealed to him for reasons including its national visibility. A &quot;Boston Herald&quot; poll showed Republicans favoring Romney over Swift by more than 50 percentage points. On March 19, 2002, Swift announced she would not seek her party&#x27;s nomination, and hours later Romney declared his candidacy, for which he would face no opposition in the primary. In June 2002, the Massachusetts Democratic Party challenged Romney&#x27;s eligibility to run for governor, noting that state law required seven years&#x27; consecutive residence and that Romney had filed his state tax returns as a Utah resident in 1999 and 2000. In response, the bipartisan Massachusetts State Ballot Law Commission unanimously ruled that he had maintained sufficient financial and personal ties to Massachusetts to be an eligible candidate.

Romney again ran as a political outsider. He played down his party affiliation, saying he was &quot;not a partisan Republican&quot; but rather a &quot;moderate&quot; with &quot;progressive&quot; views. He said he would observe a moratorium on changes to the state&#x27;s laws on abortion, but reiterated that he would &quot;preserve and protect a woman&#x27;s right to choose&quot; and that his position was &quot;unequivocal&quot;. He touted his private sector experience as qualifying him for addressing the state&#x27;s fiscal problems and stressed his ability to obtain federal funds for the state, offering his Olympics record as evidence. He proposed to reorganize the state government while eliminating waste, fraud, and mismanagement. The campaign innovatively utilized microtargeting techniques, identifying like-minded groups of voters and reaching them with narrowly tailored messaging.

In an attempt to overcome the image that had damaged him in the 1994 Senate race – that of a wealthy corporate buyout specialist out of touch with the needs of regular people – the campaign staged a series of &quot;work days&quot;, in which Romney performed blue-collar jobs such as herding cows and baling hay, unloading a fishing boat, and hauling garbage. Television ads highlighting the effort, as well as one portraying his family in gushing terms and showing him shirtless, received a poor public response and were a factor in his Democratic opponent, Massachusetts State Treasurer Shannon O&#x27;Brien, leading in the polls as late as mid-October. He responded with ads that accused O&#x27;Brien of being a failed watchdog for state pension fund losses in the stock market and that associated her husband, a former lobbyist, with the Enron scandal. These were effective in capturing independent voters. O&#x27;Brien said that Romney&#x27;s budget plans were unrealistic; the two also differed on capital punishment and bilingual education, with Romney supporting the former and opposing the latter.

During the election, Romney contributed more than $6 million – a state record at the time – to the nearly $10 million raised for his campaign. On November 5, 2002, he won the election with 50% of the vote to O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s 45%.

==Governor of Massachusetts (2003–2007)==

Romney was sworn in as the 70th governor of Massachusetts on January 2, 2003. He faced a Massachusetts state legislature with large Democratic majorities in both houses, and had picked his cabinet and advisors based more on managerial abilities than partisan affiliation. He declined a governor&#x27;s salary of $135,000 during his term. Upon entering office in the middle of a fiscal year, he faced an immediate $650 million shortfall and a projected $3 billion deficit for the next year. Unexpected revenue of $1.0–1.3 billion from a previously enacted capital gains tax increase and $500 million in new federal grants decreased the deficit to $1.2–1.5 billion. Through a combination of spending cuts, increased fees, and removal of corporate tax loopholes, the state achieved surpluses of around $600–700 million during Romney&#x27;s last two full fiscal years in office, although it began running deficits again after that.
Romney supported raising various fees, including those for drivers&#x27; licenses and gun licenses, to raise more than $300 million. He increased a special gasoline retailer fee by , generating about $60 million per year in additional revenue. Opponents said the reliance on fees sometimes imposed a hardship on those who could least afford them. Romney also closed tax loopholes that brought in another $181 million from businesses over the next two years and over $300 million for his term. He did so in the face of conservative and corporate critics who viewed these actions as tax increases.

The state legislature, with the governor&#x27;s support, cut spending by $1.6 billion, including $700 million in reductions in state aid to cities and towns. The cuts also included a $140 million reduction in state funding for higher education, which led state-run colleges and universities to increase fees by 63% over four years. Romney sought additional cuts in his last year as governor by vetoing nearly 250 items in the state budget; the legislature overrode all the vetoes.

The cuts in state spending put added pressure on localities to reduce services or raise property taxes, and the share of town and city revenues coming from property taxes rose from 49% to 53%. The combined state and local tax burden in Massachusetts increased during Romney&#x27;s governorship. He did propose a reduction in the state income tax rate, but the legislature rejected it.

Romney sought to bring near-universal health insurance coverage to the state. This came after Staples founder Tom Stemberg told him at the start of his term that doing so would be the best way he could help people. Another factor was that the federal government, owing to the rules of Medicaid funding, threatened to cut $385 million in those payments to Massachusetts if the state did not reduce the number of uninsured recipients of health care services. Although the idea of universal health insurance had not come to the fore during the campaign, Romney decided that because people without insurance still received expensive health care, the money spent by the state for such care could be better used to subsidize insurance for the poor.
Determined that a new Massachusetts health insurance measure not raise taxes or resemble the previous decade&#x27;s failed &quot;Hillarycare&quot; proposal at the federal level, Romney formed a team of consultants from diverse political backgrounds to apply those principles. Beginning in late 2004, they devised a set of proposals that were more ambitious than an incremental one from the Massachusetts Senate and more acceptable to him than one from the Massachusetts House of Representatives that incorporated a new payroll tax. In particular, Romney pushed for incorporating an individual mandate at the state level. Past rival Ted Kennedy, who had made universal health coverage his life&#x27;s work and who, over time, had developed a warm relationship with Romney, gave the plan a positive reception, which encouraged Democratic legislators to cooperate. The effort eventually gained the support of all major stakeholders within the state, and Romney helped break a logjam between rival Democratic leaders in the legislature.

On April 12, 2006, Romney signed the resulting Massachusetts health reform law, commonly called &quot;Romneycare&quot;, which requires nearly all Massachusetts residents to buy health insurance coverage or face escalating tax penalties, such as the loss of their personal income tax exemption. The bill also established means-tested state subsidies for people who lacked adequate employer insurance and whose income was below a threshold, using funds that had covered the health costs of the uninsured. He vetoed eight sections of the health care legislation, including a controversial $295-per-employee assessment on businesses that do not offer health insurance and provisions guaranteeing dental benefits to Medicaid recipients. The legislature overrode all eight vetoes, but the governor&#x27;s office said the differences were not essential. The law was the first of its kind in the nation and became the signature achievement of Romney&#x27;s term in office.

At the beginning of his governorship, Romney opposed same-sex marriage and civil unions but advocated tolerance and supported some domestic partnership benefits. A November 2003 Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court decision, &quot;Goodridge v. Department of Public Health&quot;, required the state to recognize same-sex marriages. Romney reluctantly backed a state constitutional amendment in February 2004 that would have banned those marriages but still allowed civil unions, viewing it as the only feasible way to comply with the court&#x27;s ruling. In May 2004 and per the court decision, he instructed town clerks to begin issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples. But citing a 1913 law that barred out-of-state residents from getting married in Massachusetts if their union would be illegal in their home state, he said no marriage licenses were to be issued to people not planning to move to Massachusetts. In June 2005, Romney abandoned his support for the compromise amendment, stating that it confused voters who opposed both same-sex marriage and civil unions. Instead, he endorsed a ballot initiative led by the Coalition for Marriage and Family (an alliance of socially conservative organizations) that would have banned same-sex marriage and made no provisions for civil unions. In 2004 and 2006, he urged the U.S. Senate to vote for the Federal Marriage Amendment.

In 2005, Romney revealed a change of view regarding abortion, moving from the abortion rights positions expressed during his 1994 and 2002 campaigns to an anti-abortion one in opposition to &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot;. He attributed his conversion to an interaction with Harvard University biologist Douglas Melton, an expert on embryonic stem cell biology, although Melton vehemently disputed Romney&#x27;s recollection of their conversation. Romney subsequently vetoed a bill on pro-life grounds that expanded access to emergency contraception in hospitals and pharmacies; the legislature overrode the veto. He also amended his position on embryonic stem cell research.
Romney used a bully pulpit approach towards promoting his agenda, staging well-organized media events to appeal directly to the public rather than pushing his proposals in behind-doors sessions with the state legislature. He dealt with a public crisis of confidence in Boston&#x27;s Big Dig project after a fatal ceiling collapse in 2006 by wresting control of the project from the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority. After two years of negotiating the state&#x27;s participation in the landmark Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative that instituted a cap-and-trade arrangement for power plant emissions in the Northeast, Romney pulled Massachusetts out of the initiative shortly before its signing in December 2005, citing a lack of cost limits for industry.

In 2004, Romney spent considerable effort trying to bolster the state Republican Party, but it failed to gain any seats in the legislative elections that year. Given a prime-time appearance at the 2004 Republican National Convention, he began to be discussed as a potential 2008 presidential candidate. Midway through his term, Romney decided that he wanted to stage a full-time run for president, and on December 14, 2005, he announced that he would not seek reelection as governor. As chair of the Republican Governors Association, Romney traveled around the country, meeting prominent Republicans and building a national political network; he spent more than 200 days out of state in 2006, preparing for his run.

Romney had a 61 percent job approval rating after his initial fiscal actions in 2003, but it subsequently declined, driven in part by his frequent out-of-state travel. It stood at 34 percent in November 2006, ranking 48th of the 50 U.S. governors. In the 2006 Massachusetts gubernatorial election, Democratic nominee Deval Patrick beat Romney&#x27;s lieutenant governor, Kerry Healey, by 20 points, with the win partially due to dissatisfaction with Romney&#x27;s administration and the weak condition of the state Republican party.

Romney filed to register a presidential campaign committee with the Federal Election Commission on his penultimate day in office as governor. His term ended on January 4, 2007.

==2008 presidential campaign==

Romney formally announced his candidacy for the 2008 Republican nomination for president on February 13, 2007, in Dearborn, Michigan. Again casting himself as a political outsider, his speech frequently invoked his father and his family, and stressed experiences in the private, public, and voluntary sectors that had brought him to this point.

The campaign emphasized Romney&#x27;s highly profitable career in the business world and his stewardship of the 2002 Olympics. He also had political experience as a governor, together with a political pedigree courtesy of his father (as well as many biographical parallels with him). Ann Romney, who had become an advocate for those with multiple sclerosis, was in remission and was an active participant in his campaign, helping to soften his political personality. Media stories called the Romney handsome; a number of commentators noted that with his square jaw and ample hair graying at the temples, he matched a common image of what a president should look like.

Romney&#x27;s liabilities included having run for senator and serving as governor in one of the nation&#x27;s most liberal states and having taken positions in opposition to the party&#x27;s conservative base during that time. Late during his term as governor, he had shifted positions and emphases to better align with traditional conservatives on social issues. Skeptics, including some Republicans, charged Romney with opportunism and a lack of core principles. As a Mormon, he faced suspicion and skepticism by some in the Evangelical wing of the party.

For his campaign, Romney assembled a veteran group of Republican staffers, consultants, and pollsters. But he was little-known nationally, and hovered around 10% support in Republican preference polls for the first half of 2007. He proved the most effective fundraiser of any of the Republican candidates and also partly financed his campaign with his own personal fortune. These resources, combined with the mid-year near-collapse of nominal front-runner John McCain&#x27;s campaign, made Romney a threat to win the nomination and the focus of the other candidates&#x27; attacks. Romney&#x27;s staff suffered from internal strife; Romney himself was at times indecisive, often asking for more data before making a decision.

During all his political campaigns, Romney has avoided speaking publicly about Mormon doctrines, referring to the U.S. Constitution&#x27;s prohibition of religious tests for public office. But persistent questions about the role of religion in his life, as well as Southern Baptist minister and former Governor of Arkansas Mike Huckabee&#x27;s rise in the polls based on an explicitly Christian-themed campaign, led to Romney&#x27;s December 6, 2007, &quot;Faith in America&quot; speech. In it, Romney declared, &quot;I believe in my Mormon faith and endeavor to live by it. My faith is the faith of my fathers. I will be true to them and to my beliefs.&quot; He added that he should be neither elected nor rejected because of his religion, and echoed Senator John F. Kennedy&#x27;s famous speech during his 1960 presidential campaign in saying, &quot;I will put no doctrine of any church above the plain duties of the office and the sovereign authority of the law.&quot; Instead of discussing the specific tenets of his faith, he said he would be informed by it, saying: &quot;Freedom requires religion just as religion requires freedom. Freedom and religion endure together, or perish alone.&quot; Academics later studied the role religion played in the campaign.

The campaign&#x27;s strategy called for winning the initial two contests – the January 3, 2008, Iowa Republican caucuses and the January 8 New Hampshire primary – to propel Romney nationally. But he took second place in both, losing Iowa to Huckabee, who received more than twice the evangelical Christian votes, and New Hampshire to the resurgent McCain. Huckabee and McCain criticized Romney&#x27;s image as a flip-flopper and this label stuck to Romney through the campaign (one that Romney rejected as unfair and inaccurate, except for his acknowledged change of mind on abortion). Romney seemed to approach the campaign as a management consulting exercise, and showed a lack of personal warmth and political feel; journalist Evan Thomas wrote that Romney &quot;came off as a phony, even when he was perfectly sincere&quot;. The fervor with which Romney adopted his new stances and attitudes contributed to the perception of inauthenticity that hampered the campaign. His staff concluded that competing as a candidate of social conservatism and ideological purity rather than of pragmatic competence had been a mistake.

McCain&#x27;s win in South Carolina and Romney&#x27;s in his childhood home Michigan set up a pivotal battle in the January 29 Florida primary. Romney campaigned intensively on economic issues and the burgeoning subprime mortgage crisis, while McCain attacked Romney on Iraq policy and benefited from endorsements from Florida officeholders. McCain won by five points. Although many Republican officials were now lining up behind McCain, Romney persisted through the nationwide Super Tuesday contests on February 5. There he won primaries or caucuses in several states, but McCain won in more and in larger-population ones. Trailing McCain in delegates by a more than two-to-one margin, Romney announced the end of his campaign on February 7.

Altogether, Romney had won 11 primaries and caucuses, receiving about 4.7 million votes and garnering about 280 delegates. He spent $110 million during the campaign, including $45 million of his own money.

Romney endorsed McCain for president a week later, and McCain had Romney on a short list for running mate, where his business experience would have balanced one of McCain&#x27;s weaknesses. Behind in the polls, McCain opted instead for a high-risk, high-reward &quot;game changer&quot;, Alaska Governor Sarah Palin. McCain lost the election to Democratic senator Barack Obama.

==Activity between presidential campaigns==
Romney supported the Bush administration&#x27;s Troubled Asset Relief Program in response to the 2007–2008 financial crisis, later saying that it prevented the U.S. financial system from collapsing. During the U.S. automotive industry crisis of 2008–2010, he opposed a bailout of the industry in the form of direct government intervention, and argued that a managed bankruptcy of struggling automobile companies should instead be accompanied by federal guarantees for post-bankruptcy financing from the private sector.

After the 2008 election, Romney laid the groundwork for a 2012 presidential campaign by using his Free and Strong America political action committee (PAC) to raise money for other Republican candidates and pay his existing political staff&#x27;s salaries and consulting fees. A network of former staff and supporters around the nation were eager for him to run again. He continued to give speeches and raise funds for Republicans, but fearing overexposure, turned down many potential media appearances. He also spoke before business, educational, and motivational groups. From 2009 to 2011, he served on the board of directors of Marriott International, founded by his namesake J. Willard Marriott. He had previously served on it from 1993 to 2002.

In 2009, the Romneys sold their primary residence in Belmont and their ski chalet in Utah, leaving them an estate along Lake Winnipesaukee in Wolfeboro, New Hampshire, and an oceanfront home in the La Jolla district of San Diego, California, which they had bought the year before. The La Jolla home proved beneficial in location and climate for Ann Romney&#x27;s multiple sclerosis therapies and for recovering from her late 2008 diagnosis of mammary ductal carcinoma in situ and subsequent lumpectomy. Both it and the New Hampshire estate were near some of their grandchildren. Romney maintained his voting registration in Massachusetts, however, and bought a smaller condominium in Belmont during 2010. In February 2010, Romney had a minor altercation with LMFAO member Skyler Gordy, known as Sky Blu, on an airplane flight.

Romney released his book, &quot;No Apology: The Case for American Greatness&quot;, in March 2010, and undertook an 18-state book tour to promote it. In the book, he writes of his belief in American exceptionalism, and presents his economic and geopolitical views rather than anecdotes about his personal or political life. It debuted atop &quot;The New York Times&quot; Best Seller list. Romney donated his earnings from the book to charity.

Immediately after the March 2010 passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Romney attacked the landmark legislation as &quot;an unconscionable abuse of power&quot; and said it should be repealed. The antipathy Republicans felt for it created a potential problem for Romney, since the new federal law was in many ways similar to the Massachusetts health care reform passed during his gubernatorial tenure; as one Associated Press article stated, &quot;Obamacare ... looks a lot like Romneycare.&quot; While acknowledging that his plan was an imperfect work in progress, Romney did not back away from it. He defended the state-level health insurance mandate that underpinned it, calling the bill the right answer to Massachusetts&#x27;s problems at the time.

In nationwide opinion polling for the 2012 Republican presidential primaries, Romney led or placed in the top three with Palin and Huckabee. A January 2010 &quot;National Journal&quot; survey of political insiders found that a majority of Republican insiders and a plurality of Democratic insiders predicted Romney would be the party&#x27;s 2012 nominee. Romney campaigned heavily for Republican candidates in the 2010 midterm elections, raising more money than the other prospective 2012 Republican presidential candidates. Beginning in early 2011, he presented a more relaxed image, including more casual attire.

==2012 presidential campaign==

===Primary election===

On April 11, 2011, Romney announced, in a video taped outdoors at the University of New Hampshire, that he had formed an exploratory committee for a run for the Republican presidential nomination. Quinnipiac University political science professor Scott McLean said, &quot;We all knew that he was going to run. He&#x27;s really been running for president ever since the day after the 2008 election.&quot;

Romney stood to benefit from the Republican electorate&#x27;s tendency to nominate candidates who had previously run for president, and thus appeared to be next in line to be chosen. The early stages of the race found him as the apparent front-runner in a weak field, especially in terms of fundraising prowess and organization. Perhaps his greatest hurdle in gaining the Republican nomination was party opposition to the Massachusetts health care reform law that he had shepherded five years earlier. As many potential Republican candidates with star power and fundraising ability decided not to run (including Mike Pence, John Thune, Haley Barbour, Mike Huckabee, and Mitch Daniels), Republican party figures searched for plausible alternatives to Romney.

On June 2, 2011, Romney formally announced the start of his campaign. Speaking on a farm in Stratham, New Hampshire, he focused on the economy and criticized Obama&#x27;s handling of it. He said, &quot;In the campaign to come, the American ideals of economic freedom and opportunity need a clear and unapologetic defense, and I intend to make it – because I have lived it.&quot;

Romney raised $56 million in 2011, more than double the amount raised by any of his Republican opponents, and refrained from spending his own money on the campaign. He initially pursued a low-key, low-profile strategy. Michele Bachmann staged a brief surge in polls, which preceded a poll surge in September 2011 by Rick Perry, who had entered the race the month before. Perry and Romney exchanged sharp criticisms of each other during a series of debates among the Republican candidates. The October 2011 decisions of Palin and Chris Christie not to run effectively settled the field of candidates. Perry faded after poor performances in those debates, while Herman Cain&#x27;s &quot;long-shot&quot; bid gained popularity until allegations of sexual misconduct derailed it.
Romney continued to seek support from a wary Republican electorate; at this point in the race, his poll numbers were relatively flat and at a historically low level for a Republican front-runner. After the charges of flip-flopping that marked his 2008 campaign began to accumulate again, Romney said in November 2011: &quot;I&#x27;ve been as consistent as human beings can be.&quot; In the month before voting began, Newt Gingrich experienced a significant surge – taking a solid lead in national polls and most of the early caucus and primary states – before settling back into parity or worse with Romney following a barrage of negative ads from Restore Our Future, a pro-Romney Super PAC.

In the initial contest, the Iowa caucuses of January 3, election officials announced Romney as ahead with 25% of the vote, edging out a late-gaining Rick Santorum by eight votes (Ron Paul finished third). Sixteen days later, however, they certified Santorum as the winner by 34 votes. A week after the Iowa caucuses, Romney earned a decisive win in the New Hampshire primary with 39% of the vote; Paul finished second and Jon Huntsman Jr. third.

In the run-up to the South Carolina Republican primary, Gingrich launched ads criticizing Romney for causing job losses while at Bain Capital, Perry referred to Romney&#x27;s role there as &quot;vulture capitalism&quot;, and Palin pressed Romney to prove his claim that he created 100,000 jobs during that time. Romney also faced accusations of asset stripping. Many conservatives rallied in defense of Romney, rejecting what they took to be criticism of free-market capitalism. During two debates in the state, Romney fumbled questions about releasing his income tax returns, while Gingrich gained support with audience-rousing attacks on the debate moderators. Romney&#x27;s double-digit lead in state polls evaporated; he lost the January 21 primary to Gingrich by 13 points. Combined with the delayed loss in Iowa, Romney&#x27;s poor week represented a lost chance to end the race early, and he quickly decided to release two years of his tax returns. The race turned to the Florida primary, where in debates, appearances, and advertisements, Romney launched a sustained barrage against Gingrich&#x27;s record, associations and electability. Romney enjoyed a large spending advantage from both his campaign and his aligned Super PAC, and after a record-breaking rate of negative ads from both sides, Romney won Florida on January 31, with 46% of the vote to Gingrich&#x27;s 32%.

Several caucuses and primaries took place during February, and Santorum won three in a single night early in the month, propelling him into the lead in national and some state polls and positioning him as Romney&#x27;s chief rival. Days later, Romney told the Conservative Political Action Conference that he had been a &quot;severely conservative governor&quot; (while in 2005 he had maintained that his positions were moderate and characterized reports that he was shifting to the right to attract conservative votes as a media distortion). He sought Donald Trump&#x27;s endorsement, and received it in February 2012, with a speech by Trump and Romney in which Romney joked that he had spent his &quot;life in the private sector, not quite as successful as this guy [Trump] but successful nonetheless&quot;. Romney won the other five February contests, including a closely fought one in Michigan at the end of the month. In the Super Tuesday primaries and caucuses of March 6, Romney won six of ten contests, including a narrow victory in Ohio over a vastly outspent Santorum. Although his victories were not enough to end the race, they were enough to establish a two-to-one delegate lead over Santorum. Romney maintained his delegate margin through subsequent contests, and Santorum suspended his campaign on April 10. Following a sweep of five more contests on April 24, the Republican National Committee put its resources to work for Romney as the party&#x27;s presumptive nominee.

===General election===
Polls consistently indicated a tight race for the November general election. Negative ads from both sides dominated the campaign, with Obama&#x27;s proclaiming that Romney shipped jobs overseas while at Bain Capital and kept money in offshore tax havens and Swiss bank accounts. A related issue dealt with Romney&#x27;s purported responsibility for actions at Bain Capital after taking the Olympics post. Romney faced demands from Democrats to release additional years of his tax returns, an action a number of Republicans also felt would be wise; after being adamant that he would not do that, he released summaries of them in late September. During May and June, the Obama campaign spent heavily and was able to paint a negative image of Romney in voters&#x27; minds before the Romney campaign could construct a positive one.

In July 2012, Romney visited the United Kingdom, Israel, and Poland, meeting leaders in an effort to raise his credibility as a world statesman. Comments he made about the readiness of the 2012 Summer Olympics were perceived as undiplomatic by the British press. Israeli Prime Minister (and former BCG colleague) Benjamin Netanyahu embraced Romney, though some Palestinians criticized him for suggesting that Israel&#x27;s culture led to their greater economic success.

On August 11, 2012, the Romney campaign announced Representative Paul Ryan of Wisconsin as his running mate. On August 28, 2012, the 2012 Republican National Convention in Tampa, Florida, officially nominated Romney for president. Romney became the first LDS Church member to be a major-party presidential nominee.

In mid-September, a video surfaced of Romney speaking before a group of supporters in which he said that 47% of the nation pays no income tax, are dependent on the federal government, see themselves as victims, and will support Obama unconditionally. He went on to say, &quot;And so my job is not to worry about those people. I&#x27;ll never convince them that they should take personal responsibility and care for their lives.&quot; After facing criticism about the tone and accuracy of these comments, he at first characterized them as &quot;inelegantly stated&quot;, then a couple of weeks later commented: &quot;I said something that&#x27;s just completely wrong.&quot; Exit polls published following the election showed that voters never saw Romney as someone who cared about people like them.

In an interview on CNN with Wolf Blitzer, Romney called Russia &quot;our number one geopolitical foe&quot;. At the time an innocuous response to a foreign policy question, it became a focal point for Democratic attacks on Romney during the campaign. Hillary Clinton, then secretary of state, called Romney&#x27;s position &quot;dated&quot; and said Russia had been an ally in solving problems, while Joe Biden, then vice president, accused Romney of having a &quot;Cold War mentality&quot; and being &quot;uninformed&quot; on foreign policy. John Kerry, then a senator, called Romney&#x27;s comments &quot;breathtakingly off target&quot; and reiterated that position at the Democratic National Convention, saying, &quot;He&#x27;s even blurted out the preposterous notion that Russia is our number one political geopolitical foe.&quot; Romney defended his remarks, saying, &quot;The nation which consistently opposes our actions at the United Nations has been Russia... Russia is a geopolitical foe in that regard&quot;, and continued to defend his position in the presidential debates.

The first of three 2012 presidential election debates took place on October 3, in Denver. Media figures and political analysts widely viewed Romney as having delivered a stronger and more focused presentation than Obama. That debate overshadowed Obama&#x27;s improved presentation in the next two debates later in October, and Romney maintained a small advantage in the debates when seen as a whole.

The election took place on November 6, and Obama was projected the winner at about 11:14 pm Eastern Standard Time. He won 332 electoral votes to Romney&#x27;s 206. Romney lost all but one of nine battleground states and received 47% of the popular vote to Obama&#x27;s 51%. Media accounts described Romney as &quot;shellshocked&quot; by the result. He and his senior campaign staff had disbelieved public polls showing Obama narrowly ahead and had thought they were going to win until the vote tallies began to be reported on election night. But Romney&#x27;s get out the vote operation had been inferior to Obama&#x27;s, both in person-to-person organization and in voter modeling and outreach technology (the latter exemplified by the failure of the Project Orca application). In his concession speech to his supporters, he said, &quot;Like so many of you, Paul and I have left everything on the field. We have given our all to this campaign. I so wish that I had been able to fulfill your hopes to lead this country in a different direction, but the nation chose another leader.&quot; Reflecting on his defeat during a conference call to hundreds of fundraisers and donors a week after the election, Romney attributed the outcome to Obama&#x27;s having secured the votes of specific interest groups, including African Americans, Hispanic Americans, young people, and women, by offering them what Romney called &quot;extraordinary financial gifts&quot;. The remark drew heavy criticism from prominent members of the Republican party.

==Subsequent activities==
During the first year after his defeat, Romney generally kept a low profile, with his ordinary daily activities around San Diego captured via social media glimpses. In December 2012, he joined the board of Marriott International for a third stint as a director. In March 2013, Romney gave a reflective interview on &quot;Fox News Sunday&quot;, saying, &quot;It kills me not to be there, not to be in the White House doing what needs to be done.&quot; He again expressed regret at the &quot;47 percent&quot; remark, saying &quot;There&#x27;s no question that hurt and did real damage to my campaign.&quot; (He echoed both those sentiments a year later.) Romney began working as executive partner group chairman for Solamere Capital, a private capital firm in Boston owned by his son Tagg. He was also involved in supporting several charitable causes.

The Romneys bought a home in the Deer Valley area of Park City, Utah, and a property in Holladay, Utah, where they planned to tear down an existing house and build a new one. They also gained long-sought permission to replace their La Jolla home with a much bigger one, including a car elevator that had brought some derision during the 2012 campaign. Romney and his siblings continued to own a cottage in a gated community called Beach O&#x27; Pines south of Grand Bend, Ontario, which has been in the family for more than 60 years. With the new acquisitions the couple briefly had five homes, near each of their five sons and their families, and the couple continued to spend considerable time with their grandchildren, who by 2013 numbered 22. They then sold the condominium in Belmont and decided to make their main residence in Utah, switching their voter registration. The 2014 documentary film &quot;Mitt&quot; showed a behind-the-scenes, family-based perspective on both of Romney&#x27;s presidential campaigns and received positive reviews for humanizing Romney and illustrating the toll campaigning takes.

Romney thought he might be branded a &quot;loser for life&quot; and fade into an obscurity like his fellow former Massachusetts governor Michael Dukakis (a similar figure with no obvious base of political support who had lost what his party considered a winnable presidential election) but, to the surprise of many political observers, that did not happen. Romney reemerged onto the political scene in the run-up to the 2014 U.S. midterm elections, endorsing, campaigning, and fundraising for a number of Republican candidates, especially those running for the U.S. Senate.

Romney was treated for prostate cancer in summer 2017.

===2016 presidential election===
By early 2014, the lack of a clear mainstream Republican candidate for the 2016 presidential election led some supporters, donors, and pollsters to suggest that Romney stage a third run. Regarding such a possibility, Romney at first refused. Nevertheless, speculation continued: Obama&#x27;s declining popularity led to remorse among some voters; the 2014 Russian military intervention in Ukraine made Romney&#x27;s &quot;number one geopolitical foe&quot; remark look prescient; and an August 2014 poll of Iowa Republicans showed Romney with a large lead there over other potential 2016 candidates. A July 2014 CNN poll showed Romney with a 53% to 44% lead over Obama in a hypothetical election &quot;redo&quot;.

By early 2015, Romney was considering the idea and contacting his network of supporters. In doing so he was positioning himself in the invisible primary – the preliminary jockeying for the backing of party leaders, donors, and political operatives – against former Florida governor Jeb Bush, who had already set a likely campaign in motion and would be a rival to Romney for establishment Republican support. Despite support in some quarters for a third bid for the presidency, there was a backlash from conservatives who wanted a fresher face without a history of presidential losses, and many of Romney&#x27;s past donors were not willing to commit to him again. On January 30, 2015, Romney announced that he would not run for president in 2016, saying that while he thought he could win the nomination, &quot;one of our next generation of Republican leaders&quot; would be better positioned to win the general election.

===Relationship with Donald Trump===
As the presidential election went into primary season, Romney had not endorsed anyone but was one of the Republican establishment figures who were becoming increasingly concerned about the front-runner status of New York businessman Donald Trump. Romney publicly criticized Trump for not releasing his taxes, saying there might be a &quot;bombshell&quot; in them. Trump responded by calling Romney &quot;one of the dumbest and worst candidates in the history of Republican politics&quot;. In a March 3, 2016 speech at the Hinckley Institute of Politics, Romney made a scathing attack on Trump&#x27;s personal behavior, business performance, and domestic and foreign policy stances. He called him a &quot;con man&quot; who relied on his father&#x27;s loans and &quot;a phony, a fraud&quot;, adding: &quot;He&#x27;s playing members of the American public for suckers. If we Republicans choose Donald Trump as our nominee, the prospects for a safe and prosperous future are greatly diminished&quot;. In response, Trump called Romney a &quot;choke artist&quot;. Romney&#x27;s speech represented an unprecedented attack by a major U.S. party&#x27;s most recent presidential nominee against the party&#x27;s current front-runner for the nomination.

Romney encouraged Republicans to engage in tactical voting, by supporting whichever of the remaining rivals had the best chance to beat Trump in any given state. As such, Romney announced he was voting for, although not endorsing, Ted Cruz for president in the March 22 Utah caucus. As the race went on, there was some evidence that tactical voting was occurring, and some partial arrangements were formed among candidates, but by May 3, Trump had defeated all his opponents and became the party&#x27;s presumptive nominee. Romney announced that he would not support Trump in the general election, saying, &quot;I am dismayed at where we are now. I wish we had better choices.&quot;

In June, Romney said that he would not vote for Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton, saying: &quot;It&#x27;s a matter of personal conscience. I can&#x27;t vote for either of those two people.&quot; He suggested that he might vote for a third-party candidate, or write in his wife&#x27;s name, saying she would be &quot;an ideal president&quot;. When pressed on which of Trump and Clinton was more qualified to be president, Romney quoted P. J. O&#x27;Rourke: &quot;Hillary Clinton is wrong on every issue, but she&#x27;s wrong within the normal parameters.&quot;

Romney considered voting for the Libertarian ticket of former Republican governors Gary Johnson and Bill Weld (the latter, like Romney, also a former governor of Massachusetts), saying that he would &quot;get to know Gary Johnson better and see if he&#x27;s someone who I could end up voting for&quot;, adding that &quot;if Bill Weld were at the top of the ticket, it would be very easy for me to vote for Bill Weld for president.&quot; In September, he called for Johnson to be included in the presidential debates and in October it emerged that Independent candidate Evan McMullin was using an email list of 2.5 million Romney supporters to raise money. McMullin&#x27;s chief strategist said that it was purchased from Romney for President and that &quot;we&#x27;ll let other folks discuss what that may mean and certainly never speak for [Romney].&quot; A spokeswoman for Romney said that the list had been &quot;rented by several political candidates in the presidential primary, and by countless other political and commercial users in the time since the 2012 campaign&quot; and Romney made no public comment on McMullin&#x27;s candidacy. Romney and his wife cast early ballots in Utah, but he declined to say who he voted for. In May 2018, Romney revealed that he had cast a write-in vote for his wife Ann.

After Trump won the election, Romney congratulated him by phone and on Twitter. On November 19, Romney met with him at the Trump National Golf Club in Bedminster, New Jersey, reportedly to discuss the position of Secretary of State, which ultimately went to Rex Tillerson. In February 2017, Romney said that Trump was &quot;off to a very strong start&quot; in fulfilling his campaign promises, although he had &quot;no regrets&quot; about his anti-Trump speech. The next year, Trump endorsed Romney&#x27;s 2018 senate campaign.

===2018 United States Senate campaign in Utah===

September and October 2017 press reports said that should U.S. Senator Orrin Hatch retire, Romney would run for that seat in 2018. On January 2, 2018, after Hatch announced that he would retire, Romney changed his Twitter location from Massachusetts to Holladay, Utah, contributing to speculation that he was considering a Senate campaign. On February 16, 2018, Romney formally launched his campaign with a video message posted on Facebook and Twitter.

At the state Republican nominating convention held on April 21, 2018, Romney received 1,585 delegate votes (49.1%), finishing second to State Representative Mike Kennedy, with 1,642 delegate votes (50.9%). Since neither Romney nor Kennedy garnered the 60% of delegate votes necessary to claim the endorsement, they competed in a June 26 primary election. In the primary, Romney defeated Kennedy, 71.7–28.3%.

Romney was elected U.S. Senator from Utah on November 6, defeating Democratic nominee Jenny Wilson, 62.6% to 30.9%.

With his election, Romney became the third person to have served as governor of one state and senator from another state. (The other two were William W. Bibb, who served as a U.S. senator from Georgia and then the first governor of Alabama, and Sam Houston, who was the sixth governor of Tennessee before becoming a U.S. senator from Texas.)

==U.S. Senate (2019–2025)==

===Tenure===

Shortly before assuming office, Romney wrote a &quot;Washington Post&quot; editorial strongly criticizing Trump&#x27;s character. Ronna McDaniel, Romney&#x27;s niece and the chair of the Republican National Committee, called his comments &quot;disappointing and unproductive&quot;, while Trump wrote that he &quot;[w]ould much prefer that Mitt focus on Border Security and so many other things where he can be helpful&quot;. By November 9, 2019, Romney was just one of three Republican senators, along with Susan Collins of Maine and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, who declined to co-sponsor a resolution opposing the impeachment inquiry process into Trump. He was one of two Republicans (with Collins) who joined all Democrats voting to allow impeachment witnesses.

Romney condemned the 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings, saying: &quot;As we celebrate the miracle of Easter, we hold in our hearts the victims of the senseless violence in Sri Lanka and their loved ones.&quot;

After many called for Representative George Santos to step down after being investigated by the House Ethics Committee, Romney confronted Santos during President Biden&#x27;s 2023 State of the Union Address, saying he &quot;shouldn&#x27;t be in Congress&quot;.

====Social media====
In the October 2019 issue of &quot;The Atlantic&quot;, Romney revealed that he used a secret Twitter account to keep tabs on political conversation there, saying, &quot;What do they call me, a lurker?&quot; Shortly thereafter, &quot;Slate&quot; found a Twitter account with the name Pierre Delecto. The account was registered in July 2011, followed about 700 people, and had eight followers at the time it was discovered. It had tweeted 10 times, always in reply to other tweets. The next day, Romney confirmed ownership of the account.

====First impeachment of Donald Trump (2019–2020)====
On February 5, 2020, after Romney read a prepared text on the Senate floor decrying &quot;corrupting an election to keep oneself in office&quot; as &quot;perhaps the most abusive and destructive violation of one&#x27;s oath of office that I can imagine&quot;, he broke ranks with the Republican majority as the sole Republican senator to vote to convict Trump in his first impeachment trial, thereby becoming, according to press reports, the first U.S. senator in United States history to vote to convict a president of the same political party.

Fallout from the vote included Romney&#x27;s being formally censured by various Republican organizations outside of Utah; in comparison, anger against Romney among Republicans within Utah was more muted, and his impeachment vote, according to opinion polling, was supported by Utah Democrats. Jason Perry, director of the University of Utah&#x27;s Hinckley Institute of Politics, said, &quot;Democrats in Utah were more excited about Mitt Romney&#x27;s vote than [Utah] Republicans were disappointed.&quot; Republicans for the Rule of Law ran various ads thanking Romney.

==== March with Black Lives Matter ====
On June 7, 2020, in response to the murder of George Floyd and the worldwide protests against police brutality, Romney became the first Republican senator to participate in a protest alongside Black Lives Matter. He said, &quot;We need many voices against racism and against brutality, and we need to make sure that people understand that Black Lives Matter.&quot; This act drew praise and admiration from the left and right, with some Republicans questioning why other congressional Republicans were not showing support for the movement. On Twitter, Senator Kamala Harris praised Romney&#x27;s actions, saying, &quot;We need more of this.&quot; Trump mocked Romney, saying, &quot;Tremendous sincerity, what a guy. Hard to believe, with this kind of political talent, his numbers would &#x27;tank&#x27; so badly in Utah!&quot;

====2020 presidential election====
Romney did not endorse Trump&#x27;s 2020 reelection campaign and told reporters that he did not vote for him. In a &quot;Washington Post&quot; op-ed, Romney wrote that Trump &quot;has not risen to the mantle of the office&quot;. After the victory of Joe Biden and his running mate, Kamala Harris, Romney was the first Republican senator to extend his congratulations to them.

====2021 U.S. Capitol attack====
On the morning of January 5, 2021, Romney was heckled and harassed at the airport on his way to Washington, D.C., to certify Joe Biden&#x27;s election win in the Senate. Cellphone footage of the incident showed Trump supporters accusing Romney of not supporting Trump&#x27;s baseless claims of election fraud, and chanting &quot;Traitor! Traitor! Traitor!&quot; as Romney boarded his flight.

On the morning of January 6, protesters assembled at the &quot;Save America&quot; rally on the Ellipse, where Trump, Donald Trump Jr., Rudy Giuliani, and several members of Congress addressed the crowd fueling the conspiracy theories about election fraud. Trump said, &quot;We will never give up, we will never concede. You don&#x27;t concede when there&#x27;s theft&quot;, and encouraged his supporters to &quot;fight like hell&quot; to &quot;take back our country&quot; and to march to the Capitol. Later that day, while the Senate was in session certifying the 2021 United States Electoral College vote count within the United States Capitol, hundreds of Trump supporters violently attacked the Capitol, where they looted senators&#x27; offices and broke into the chamber of the United States Senate. Police evacuated the senators and Vice President Mike Pence to an undisclosed area. As they were evacuating Romney, he yelled at Ted Cruz and other Republican congressmen, &quot;This is what you&#x27;ve gotten, guys!&quot; According to &quot;New York Times&quot; reporter Jonathan Martin, Romney told him with &quot;fury in his voice&quot;, &quot; is what the president has caused today, this insurrection!&quot; Romney fully rebuked Trump and condemned the actions of the attackers. Later that night, when Congress had reconvened, Romney said on the Senate floor:
On February 10, 2021, new video was released during Trump&#x27;s second impeachment trial that showed capitol police officer Eugene Goodman saving Romney from running into the Capitol rioters. During a break in the hearing, Romney said, &quot;It was very troubling seeing the great violence the capitol police were subjected to. It tears at your heart and brings tears to your eyes. It was overwhelmingly distressing and emotional.&quot; Romney also said he didn&#x27;t know how close he was and didn&#x27;t know it had been Goodman who diverted him away from the rioters, but that he looked forward to thanking Goodman.

On May 27, 2021, along with five other Republicans and all present Democrats, Romney voted to establish a bipartisan commission to investigate the January 6 attack. The vote failed for lack of 60 required &quot;yes&quot; votes.

====Second impeachment of Donald Trump (2021)====
On January 13, 2021, the House voted to impeach Trump a second time for incitement of insurrection. On January 26, Republican senator Rand Paul of Kentucky introduced a motion to dismiss the impeachment charge. The objection was defeated on a 55–45 vote; Romney was one of the five Republicans to vote against it, along with Susan Collins, Lisa Murkowski, Ben Sasse and Pat Toomey.

On February 13, 2021, Romney and five other Republican senators voted to allow other witnesses in the impeachment trial. Republican senator and Trump ally Ron Johnson, who was &quot;visibly upset&quot;, got in a heated exchange with Romney for his vote, saying, &quot;We never should&#x27;ve had this impeachment trial.&quot; Later that day Romney voted to convict Trump for the second time along with six of his Republican colleagues. The final vote was 57 to convict and 43 to acquit. He wrote a statement that read in part:
===Committee assignments===
During the 117th Congress, Romney sat on the following committees:

* Committee on Foreign Relations
** Subcommittee on East Asia, the Pacific and International Cybersecurity Policy &quot;(Ranking Member)&quot;
** Subcommittee on Europe and Regional Security Cooperation
** Subcommittee on Near East, South Asia, Central Asia and Counterterrorism
* Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
** Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Spending Oversight
** Subcommittee on Governmental Operations and Border Management
* Committee on Budget (2021–present)
* Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
** Subcommittee on Children and Families
** Subcommittee on Employment and Workplace Safety

==Political positions==


In addition to calling for cuts in federal government spending to help reduce the national debt, Romney proposed measures intended to limit the growth of entitlement programs, such as introducing means testing and gradually raising the eligibility ages for receipt of Social Security and Medicare. He supported substantial increases in military spending and promised to invest more heavily in military weapons programs while increasing the number of active-duty military personnel. He was very supportive of the directions taken by the budget proposals of Paul Ryan, though he later proposed his own budget plan.

Romney pledged to lead an effort to repeal the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (&quot;Obamacare&quot;) and replace it with a system that gives states more control over Medicaid and makes health insurance premiums tax-advantaged for individuals in the same way they are for businesses. He favored repeal of the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and the Sarbanes–Oxley Act and intended to replace them with what he called a &quot;streamlined, modern regulatory framework&quot;.

He also promised to seek income tax law changes that he said would help to lower federal deficits and would stimulate economic growth. These included reducing individual income tax rates across the board by 20%, maintaining the Bush administration-era tax rate of 15% on investment income from dividends and capital gains (and eliminating this tax entirely for those with annual incomes less than $200,000), cutting the top tax rate on corporations from 35% to 25%, and eliminating the estate tax and the Alternative Minimum Tax. He promised that the loss of government revenue from these tax cuts would be offset by closing loopholes and placing limits on tax deductions and credits available to taxpayers with the highest incomes, but said that that aspect of the plan could not yet be evaluated because details would have to be worked out with Congress.

Romney opposed the use of mandatory limits on greenhouse gas emissions to deal with global warming. He stated that he believed climate change is occurring, but that he did not know how much of it could be linked to human activity. He was a proponent of increased domestic oil drilling, hydraulic fracturing (&quot;fracking&quot;), building more nuclear power plants, and reducing the regulatory authority of the Environmental Protection Agency. He believed North American energy independence could be achieved by 2020.

Romney called Russia America&#x27;s &quot;number one geopolitical foe&quot;, a position many ridiculed him for, including former secretary of state Madeleine Albright, who later publicly apologized to him. He has asserted that preventing Iran from obtaining nuclear capability should be America&#x27;s &quot;highest national security priority&quot;. Romney stated his strong support for Israel. He planned to formally label China a currency manipulator and take associated counteractions unless China changed its trade practices. Romney supported the Patriot Act, the continued operation of the Guantanamo Bay detention camp, and use of enhanced interrogation techniques against suspected terrorists. He described same-sex marriage as a &quot;state issue&quot; while running for Senate in 1994 and opposed a constitutional ban on same-sex marriage in 2002. Romney opposed same-sex marriage and civil unions, but favored domestic partnership legislation that gives certain legal rights to same-sex couples, such as hospital visitation. In 2011, he signed a pledge promising to seek passage of an amendment to the U.S. Constitution to define marriage as the union of one man and one woman. In 2022, Romney reversed his previous position on federal marriage, and was one of 12 Republicans voting to advance legislation to codify same-sex marriage into federal law by voting for the Respect for Marriage Act.
Since 2005, Romney has described himself as &quot;pro-life&quot;. That year, he wrote: &quot;I believe that abortion is the wrong choice except in cases of incest, rape, and to save the life of the mother.&quot; During his 1994 Senate campaign, Romney had said, &quot;I believe that abortion should be safe and legal in this country&quot;, a stance he reiterated during his 2002 campaign for governor. While Romney would prefer to see passage of a constitutional amendment that would outlaw abortion, he did not believe the public would support such an amendment; as an alternative, he promised to nominate Supreme Court justices who would help overturn &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot;, allowing each state to decide on the legality of abortion. His earlier pro-abortion rights stance in particular and support for some gay rights and gun restrictions as governor of Massachusetts earned him the criticism of some conservatives; the conservative magazine &quot;Human Events&quot; labeled him one of the top ten RINOs in 2005.

Romney said he would appoint federal judges in the mold of U.S. Supreme Court justices John Roberts, Clarence Thomas, Antonin Scalia, and Samuel Alito. He advocated judicial restraint and strict constructionism as judicial philosophies.

Romney declared his support for the Black Lives Matter international human rights movement by attending the rally, and then joining the &quot;Faith Works&quot; march, on June 7, 2020, from southeast Washington, past the Trump International Hotel, and Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool, over the murder of George Floyd.

In July 2020, Romney, along with Pat Toomey, was one of two Republican U.S. Senators who condemned Trump&#x27;s decision to commute the sentence of Roger Stone, which Romney described as &quot;Unprecedented, historic corruption: an American president commutes the sentence of a person convicted by a jury of lying to shield that very president.&quot;

In September 2020, Romney said the Republicans&#x27; decision to nominate and confirm Amy Coney Barrett as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States before the 2020 presidential election was fair: &quot;the circumstance where a nominee of a president is from a different party than the Senate then, more often than not, the Senate does not confirm. So the Garland decision was consistent with that. On the other hand, when there&#x27;s a nominee of a party that is in the same party as the Senate, then typically they do confirm.&quot;

In June 2024, Romney proposed a framework to mitigate the existential risk from artificial general intelligence along with Senators Jack Reed, Jerry Moran, and Angus King. Romney said he would like to see regulation that &quot;would restrict the types of actions that could lead to existential, or health, or other serious consequences&quot;.

On July 21, 2024, when President Biden dropped out of the 2024 presidential election, Romney posted a statement reading: &quot;Others will judge his presidency. However, having worked with him these past few years, I respect President Biden. His decision to withdraw from the race was right and is in the best interest of the country.&quot; He added, &quot;Ann and I send warm personal wishes to the President and First Lady.&quot;

== Electoral history ==

===U.S. senator from Massachusetts===






=== Governor of Massachusetts ===





===2012 Republican nominee for President of the United States===


===U.S. Senator from Utah===






==Awards and honors==
===Honorary degrees===
===Non-academic awards and honors===
&quot;People&quot; magazine included Romney in its 50 Most Beautiful People list for 2002, and in 2004, a foundation that promotes the Olympic truce gave him its inaugural Truce Ideal Award. The Cranbrook School gave him its Distinguished Alumni Award in 2005. In 2008, he shared with his wife Ann the Canterbury Medal from The Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, for &quot;refus[ing] to compromise their principles and faith&quot; during the presidential campaign. In 2012, &quot;Time&quot; magazine included Romney in their List of The 100 Most Influential People in the World.

In 2021, Romney received the Profile in Courage Award for being the only member of his party to vote to convict Donald Trump during his first impeachment trial.

In 2024, Romney received the annual Legislative Achievement Award from the National Emergency Management Association for his efforts in creating the Wildland Fire Mitigation and Management Commission in Utah.

==Published works==
* 
==See also==
* List of governors of Massachusetts
* List of United States senators from Utah
* List of United States Republican Party presidential tickets
* President of the Organising Committee for the Olympic Games
==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading and viewing==
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* Official U.S. Senate website
* Mitt Romney for U.S. Senate Official campaign site
* 
* Video of his explanation to the Senate why he plans to vote to convict President Trump in the Senate impeachment trial from CNN



|-



|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="0" end="19" title="Mitt Romney" label="Willard Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="108" end="129" title="United States Senate" label="United States senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="135" end="139" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="174" end="199" title="governor of Massachusetts" label="governor of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="230" end="246" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="269" end="300" title="2012 United States presidential election" label="2012 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q520275" start="327" end="343" title="George W. Romney" label="George W. Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="366" end="374" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q885355" start="386" end="412" title="Bloomfield Hills, Michigan" label="Bloomfield Hills, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q627754" start="455" end="472" title="Mormon missionary" label="Mormon missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100946" start="485" end="495" title="Ann Romney" label="Ann Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="536" end="583" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917468" start="641" end="647" title="Bishop (Latter Day Saints)" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968929" start="655" end="659" title="Ward (LDS Church)" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388229" start="675" end="690" title="Stake (LDS Church)" label="stake president"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="854" end="870" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q27968" start="874" end="881" title="English studies" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="887" end="911" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059789" start="944" end="950" title="JD–MBA" label="JD–MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="963" end="970" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q764850" start="1025" end="1043" title="Bain &amp;amp; Company" label="Bain &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1047" end="1053" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="1070" end="1093" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q803873" start="1207" end="1219" title="Bain Capital" label="Bain Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q476115" start="1223" end="1237" title="private equity" label="private equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634956" start="1277" end="1296" title="List of private equity firms" label="largest of its kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891631" start="1468" end="1472" title="1994 United States Senate election in Massachusetts" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="1500" end="1511" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405890" start="1635" end="1665" title="Salt Lake Organizing Committee for the Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games of 2002" label="Salt Lake Organizing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9668" start="1674" end="1694" title="2002 Winter Olympics" label="2002 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784437" start="1775" end="1779" title="2002 Massachusetts gubernatorial election" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784440" start="1822" end="1840" title="Massachusetts health care reform" label="health care reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691100" start="1973" end="2014" title="health insurance mandate" label="individual mandates to purchase insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q329303" start="2172" end="2185" title="tax loopholes" label="tax loopholes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784438" start="2217" end="2221" title="2006 Massachusetts gubernatorial election" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q11700469" start="2256" end="2319" title="2008 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="for the Republican nomination in the 2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="2346" end="2357" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q937607" start="2445" end="2471" title="2012 Republican presidential nomination" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738353" start="2518" end="2529" title="major party" label="major party"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="2580" end="2592" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="2649" end="2660" title="U.S. Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221099" start="2664" end="2668" title="2018 United States Senate election in Utah" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694439" start="2873" end="2916" title="Moderate Republican (modern United States)" label="moderate or more neoconservative Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="2968" end="2980" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q79077052" start="2988" end="3011" title="First impeachment trial of Donald Trump" label="first impeachment trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q104830111" start="3159" end="3171" title="Second impeachment trial of Donald Trump" label="second trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600530" start="3202" end="3220" title="Black Lives Matter" label="Black Lives Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q111345400" start="3242" end="3271" title="Ketanji Brown Jackson Supreme Court nomination" label="confirm Ketanji Brown Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="3279" end="3292" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q112728299" start="3304" end="3315" title="Bipartisan Safer Communities Act" label="gun control"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="3360" end="3364" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="3369" end="3373" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745298" start="3441" end="3445" title="Iran–United States relations" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280045" start="3447" end="3452" title="China–United States relations" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631417" start="3458" end="3464" title="Russia–United States relations" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="3481" end="3487" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365273" start="3580" end="3603" title="Republican in Name Only" label="Republican In Name Only"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371013" start="3652" end="3670" title="2024 United States Senate election in Utah" label="reelection in 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663450" start="3837" end="3863" title="Harper University Hospital" label="Harper University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="3867" end="3874" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q520275" start="3936" end="3952" title="George W. Romney" label="George W. Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247018" start="3979" end="3992" title="Lenore Romney" label="Lenore Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q482657" start="4035" end="4046" title="Logan, Utah" label="Logan, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8348023" start="4097" end="4110" title="Mormon colonies in Mexico" label="Mormon colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="4114" end="4123" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851502" start="4276" end="4293" title="Miles Park Romney" label="Miles Park Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851529" start="4324" end="4336" title="Miles Romney" label="Miles Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465604" start="4419" end="4434" title="Parley P. Pratt" label="Parley P. Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775834" start="4443" end="4464" title="Quorum of the Twelve" label="lead the early church"/>
<link wikidata="Q716147" start="4623" end="4642" title="J. Willard Marriott" label="J. Willard Marriott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861422" start="4674" end="4704" title="Milton Romney" label="Milton &amp;quot;Mitt&amp;quot; Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q205033" start="4735" end="4748" title="Chicago Bears" label="Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q885355" start="4924" end="4940" title="Bloomfield Hills, Michigan" label="Bloomfield Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q202708" start="4987" end="5002" title="American Motors" label="American Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="5223" end="5240" title="elementary school" label="elementary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177118" start="5301" end="5307" title="Mormons" label="Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181958" start="5320" end="5336" title="Cranbrook Schools" label="Cranbrook School"/>
<link wikidata="Q428602" start="5367" end="5385" title="University-preparatory school" label="preparatory school"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5611" end="5647" title="George W. Romney#Governor of Michigan" label="1962 Michigan gubernatorial campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579713" start="5813" end="5830" title="Michigan State Capitol" label="the state capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="5872" end="5882" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215303" start="5904" end="5913" title="pep squad" label="pep squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q500050" start="5953" end="5974" title="cross country running" label="cross country running"/>
<link wikidata="Q988108" start="6024" end="6035" title="school club" label="school club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238998" start="6069" end="6082" title="booster club" label="booster group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100946" start="6380" end="6390" title="Ann Romney" label="Ann Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181958" start="6417" end="6433" title="Cranbrook Schools" label="Kingswood School"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="6633" end="6652" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="6712" end="6739" title="counterculture of the 1960s" label="counterculture of the 1960s"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="6764" end="6786" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="6791" end="6849" title="opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War" label="opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147337" start="6882" end="6888" title="sit-in" label="sit-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="7111" end="7117" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q627754" start="7123" end="7140" title="Mormon missionary" label="Mormon missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="7201" end="7209" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="7770" end="7778" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q10655750" start="7841" end="7858" title="mission president" label="mission president"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="8110" end="8121" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743" start="8540" end="8585" title="May 1968 events in France" label="May 1968 general strike and student uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="9085" end="9089" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="9106" end="9130" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122206" start="9306" end="9322" title="Salt Lake Temple" label="Salt Lake Temple"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9332" end="9354" title="Religious conversion#Latter Day Saint movement" label="converted to the faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="9416" end="9452" title="Opposition to the U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War" label="anti-Vietnam War movement in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544024" start="9561" end="9604" title="George Romney presidential campaign, 1968" label="his unsuccessful 1968 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9621" end="9670" title="George W. Romney#Secretary of Housing and Urban Development" label="serving in President Richard Nixon&amp;#x27;s cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419581" start="9674" end="9730" title="United States Secretary of Housing and Urban Development" label="United States Secretary of Housing and Urban Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994973" start="9996" end="10015" title="Cambodian Incursion" label="Cambodian Incursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162775" start="10064" end="10083" title="Conscription in the United States" label="U.S. military draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750391" start="10136" end="10158" title="Class 1-A" label="2-S student deferments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750391" start="10167" end="10192" title="Class 1-A" label="4-D ministerial deferment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304775" start="10343" end="10370" title="Draft lottery (1969)" label="December 1969 draft lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238998" start="10543" end="10563" title="Booster club" label="booster organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178004" start="10686" end="10697" title="advance man" label="advance man"/>
<link wikidata="Q588061" start="10778" end="10802" title="List of counties in Michigan" label="all 83 Michigan counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="10845" end="10861" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q27968" start="10872" end="10879" title="English studies" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10891" end="10894" title="Grading (education)#United States" label="GPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675210" start="11013" end="11020" title="Tagg Romney" label="Taggart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866704" start="11093" end="11111" title="basement apartment" label="basement apartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="11336" end="11348" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059789" start="11473" end="11478" title="JD–MBA" label="joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="11479" end="11491" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="11492" end="11525" title="Master of Business Administration" label="Master of Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="11554" end="11572" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49126" start="11577" end="11600" title="Harvard Business School" label="Harvard Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054095" start="11674" end="11703" title="Case method" label="case study method of teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q816096" start="11717" end="11739" title="Belmont, Massachusetts" label="Belmont, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="12077" end="12089" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12103" end="12112" title="Latin honors#United States" label="cum laude"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059789" start="12242" end="12248" title="JD–MBA" label="JD–MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q97671298" start="12290" end="12298" title="Bar examination in the United States" label="bar exam"/>
<link wikidata="Q135635" start="12418" end="12441" title="Boston Consulting Group" label="Boston Consulting Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q130286" start="12477" end="12498" title="management consultant" label="management consultant"/>
<link wikidata="Q795722" start="12807" end="12826" title="growth-share matrix" label="growth-share matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q43723" start="12917" end="12935" title="Benjamin Netanyahu" label="Benjamin Netanyahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q764850" start="13036" end="13054" title="Bain &amp;amp; Company" label="Bain &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="13088" end="13094" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908004" start="13125" end="13134" title="Bill Bain (consultant)" label="Bill Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q207983" start="13584" end="13600" title="Monsanto Company" label="Monsanto Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041902" start="13602" end="13629" title="Outboard Marine Corporation" label="Outboard Marine Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q924995" start="13631" end="13652" title="Burlington Industries" label="Burlington Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5842736" start="13658" end="13678" title="Corning Incorporated" label="Corning Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q816318" start="14284" end="14302" title="disorderly conduct" label="disorderly conduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883416" start="14417" end="14478" title="Mitt Romney dog incident" label="dog in a windshield-equipped carrier on the roof of their car"/>
<link wikidata="Q476115" start="14757" end="14771" title="private equity" label="private equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="15327" end="15342" title="venture capital" label="venture capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q785943" start="15645" end="15657" title="Staples Inc." label="Staples Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7789881" start="15673" end="15691" title="Thomas G. Stemberg" label="Thomas G. Stemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058381" start="16020" end="16037" title="leveraged buyouts" label="leveraged buyouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672920" start="16459" end="16479" title="Accuride Corporation" label="Accuride Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975128" start="16481" end="16491" title="Brookstone" label="Brookstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q839466" start="16493" end="16512" title="Domino&amp;#x27;s Pizza" label="Domino&amp;#x27;s Pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131835" start="16514" end="16531" title="Sealy Corporation" label="Sealy Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579688" start="16533" end="16549" title="Sports Authority" label="Sports Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865801" start="16555" end="16576" title="Artisan Entertainment" label="Artisan Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q278773" start="17268" end="17289" title="devil&amp;#x27;s advocate" label="devil&amp;#x27;s advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q105611" start="17388" end="17398" title="hedge fund" label="hedge fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="17595" end="17608" title="Motion Picture Association of America film rating system" label="R-rated films"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748032" start="18528" end="18533" title="Ampad" label="Ampad"/>
<link wikidata="Q581398" start="18690" end="18702" title="Dade Behring" label="Dade Behring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879195" start="19469" end="19489" title="One-dollar salary" label="salary of one dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345065" start="20024" end="20061" title="Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation" label="Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q507477" start="20830" end="20853" title="internal rate of return" label="internal rate of return"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405890" start="21086" end="21135" title="Salt Lake City Olympic Games Organizing Committee" label="Salt Lake City Olympic Games Organizing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22252" end="22268" title="Laity#The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="local lay clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388229" start="22397" end="22402" title="Stake (LDS Church)" label="stake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757522" start="22403" end="22415" title="High council (Latter Day Saints)" label="high council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324486" start="22442" end="22460" title="Richard L. Bushman" label="Richard L. Bushman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917468" start="22565" end="22583" title="Bishop (Latter Day Saints)" label="bishop of the ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q11872832" start="22654" end="22667" title="home teaching" label="home teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847515" start="22722" end="22736" title="Standard works" label="LDS scriptures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22801" end="22813" title="Meetinghouse#Religious meeting houses" label="meetinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388229" start="23064" end="23073" title="stake president" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774237" start="23273" end="23284" title="anti-Mormon" label="anti-Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q56746440" start="24286" end="24297" title="Exponent II" label="Exponent II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567308" start="25110" end="25121" title="Independent (voter)" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255750" start="25139" end="25166" title="Democratic Party presidential primaries, 1992" label="1992 presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="25175" end="25185" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q283884" start="25221" end="25233" title="Paul Tsongas" label="Paul Tsongas"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="25433" end="25444" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25692" end="25719" title="William Kennedy Smith#Sexual assault accusations" label="William Kennedy Smith trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="25815" end="25825" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q803873" start="25927" end="25939" title="Bain Capital" label="Bain Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784337" start="26226" end="26256" title="Massachusetts Republican Party" label="Massachusetts Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243840" start="26281" end="26292" title="John Lakian" label="John Lakian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="26781" end="26794" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="26799" end="26816" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387981" start="27850" end="27893" title="Republican Revolution" label="disastrous showing for Democrats nationwide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28328" end="28375" title="Marriott School of Management#Organization and research" label="George W. Romney Institute of Public Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270138" start="28423" end="28449" title="Points of Light Foundation" label="Points of Light Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971386" start="28488" end="28513" title="National Volunteer Center" label="National Volunteer Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q285184" start="28697" end="28710" title="Sunday School (LDS Church)" label="Sunday School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659083" start="28800" end="28824" title="Boston Massachusetts Temple" label="Mormon temple in Belmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="29138" end="29156" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q482993" start="29350" end="29359" title="Park City, Utah" label="Park City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9668" start="29641" end="29661" title="2002 Winter Olympics" label="2002 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q591627" start="29666" end="29677" title="2002 Winter Paralympics" label="Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="29693" end="29707" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405890" start="29865" end="29947" title="Salt Lake Organizing Committee for the Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games of 2002" label="Salt Lake Organizing Committee for the Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games of 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081777" start="30263" end="30285" title="2002 Winter Olympic bid scandal" label="allegations of bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q879432" start="30507" end="30519" title="Mike Leavitt" label="Mike Leavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="31304" end="31324" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141620" start="31938" end="31963" title="Pin trading" label="collectible Olympics pins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105925" start="32107" end="32122" title="Robert H. Garff" label="Robert H. Garff"/>
<link wikidata="Q715787" start="32471" end="32482" title="Bob Bennett (politician)" label="Bob Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="32556" end="32568" title="The Boston Globe" label="Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902378" start="32940" end="32971" title="Utah League of Cities and Towns" label="Utah League of Cities and Towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="33412" end="33426" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418438" start="33660" end="33682" title="United States Olympic Committee" label="U.S. Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34261" end="34293" title="Acting governor#Massachusetts" label="acting governor of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q449745" start="34294" end="34304" title="Jane Swift" label="Jane Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q773802" start="34575" end="34588" title="Boston Herald" label="Boston Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784247" start="34883" end="34913" title="Massachusetts Democratic Party" label="Massachusetts Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840396" start="36103" end="36117" title="microtargeting" label="microtargeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836752" start="36782" end="36811" title="Treasurer and Receiver-General of Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts State Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488921" start="36812" end="36832" title="Shannon O&amp;#x27;Brien (Massachusetts politician)" label="Shannon O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723024" start="37065" end="37078" title="Enron scandal" label="Enron scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="37697" end="37728" title="Massachusetts state legislature" label="Massachusetts state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="37986" end="37997" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q687591" start="38163" end="38180" title="capital gains tax" label="capital gains tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q785943" start="40095" end="40102" title="Staples Inc." label="Staples"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789881" start="40111" end="40123" title="Tom Stemberg" label="Tom Stemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141363" start="40286" end="40294" title="Medicaid" label="Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134288" start="40867" end="40890" title="Clinton health care plan of 1993" label="&amp;quot;Hillarycare&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494665" start="41134" end="41154" title="Massachusetts Senate" label="Massachusetts Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="41200" end="41238" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691100" start="41326" end="41344" title="Health insurance mandate" label="individual mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784440" start="41825" end="41856" title="Massachusetts health reform law" label="Massachusetts health reform law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357620" start="42098" end="42110" title="Means test" label="means-tested"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002625" start="42922" end="42958" title="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court" label="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072607" start="42975" end="43015" title="Goodridge v. Department of Public Health" label="Goodridge v. Department of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784162" start="43433" end="43441" title="Massachusetts 1913 law" label="1913 law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110619" start="44102" end="44128" title="Federal Marriage Amendment" label="Federal Marriage Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="44209" end="44224" title="abortion rights" label="abortion rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="44286" end="44299" title="anti-abortion" label="anti-abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="44327" end="44338" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038025" start="44427" end="44441" title="Douglas A. Melton" label="Douglas Melton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151519" start="44456" end="44483" title="Embryonic stem cell" label="embryonic stem cell biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q741027" start="44649" end="44672" title="emergency contraception" label="emergency contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997097" start="44813" end="44825" title="bully pulpit" label="bully pulpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457237" start="44888" end="44899" title="media event" label="media event"/>
<link wikidata="Q858785" start="45082" end="45089" title="Big Dig" label="Big Dig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112947" start="45106" end="45136" title="Big Dig ceiling collapse" label="fatal ceiling collapse in 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q731271" start="45181" end="45213" title="Massachusetts Turnpike Authority" label="Massachusetts Turnpike Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423541" start="45293" end="45327" title="Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative" label="Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q8348417" start="45346" end="45359" title="emissions trading" label="cap-and-trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q359662" start="45752" end="45787" title="2004 Republican National Convention" label="2004 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314590" start="46055" end="46087" title="Republican Governors Association" label="Republican Governors Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784438" start="46527" end="46568" title="2006 Massachusetts gubernatorial election" label="2006 Massachusetts gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11100" start="46589" end="46602" title="Deval Patrick" label="Deval Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195506" start="46643" end="46655" title="Kerry Healey" label="Kerry Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705072" start="46874" end="46901" title="Federal Election Commission" label="Federal Election Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q430464" start="47130" end="47148" title="Dearborn, Michigan" label="Dearborn, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551013" start="48351" end="48393" title="Social conservatism in the United States" label="traditional conservatives on social issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="48558" end="48569" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979905" start="48763" end="48817" title="Nationwide opinion polling for the Republican Party 2008 presidential candidates" label="Republican preference polls for the first half of 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="49046" end="49057" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044887" start="49426" end="49503" title="No Religious Test Clause" label="the U.S. Constitution&amp;#x27;s prohibition of religious tests for public office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="49581" end="49597" title="Southern Baptist" label="Southern Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q777346" start="49618" end="49638" title="Governor of Arkansas" label="Governor of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q158813" start="49639" end="49652" title="Mike Huckabee" label="Mike Huckabee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257911" start="49767" end="49802" title="Mitt Romney&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;Faith in America&amp;quot; speech" label="&amp;quot;Faith in America&amp;quot; speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="50076" end="50091" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50120" end="50150" title="John F. Kennedy#1960 presidential election" label="his 1960 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506022" start="50679" end="50703" title="2008 Iowa Republican caucuses" label="Iowa Republican caucuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511887" start="50722" end="50743" title="United States presidential election in New Hampshire, 2008" label="New Hampshire primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459640" start="50995" end="51007" title="Flip-flop (politics)" label="flip-flopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415555" start="51313" end="51324" title="Evan Thomas" label="Evan Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893083" start="51726" end="51743" title="2008 United States presidential election in South Carolina" label="in South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837661" start="51762" end="51792" title="Michigan Republican primary, 2008" label="in his childhood home Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461574" start="51835" end="51850" title="Florida Republican primary, 2008" label="Florida primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q844541" start="51920" end="51944" title="subprime mortgage crisis" label="subprime mortgage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155580" start="52186" end="52199" title="Super Tuesday, 2008" label="Super Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280006" start="52737" end="52747" title="short list" label="short list"/>
<link wikidata="Q575942" start="52946" end="52961" title="Governor of Alaska" label="Alaska Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43144" start="52962" end="52973" title="Sarah Palin" label="Sarah Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="53022" end="53034" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097742" start="53129" end="53158" title="Troubled Asset Relief Program" label="Troubled Asset Relief Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="53178" end="53204" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250635" start="53291" end="53335" title="Effects of the 2008–2010 automotive industry crisis on the United States" label="U.S. automotive industry crisis of 2008–2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095288" start="53526" end="53544" title="Loan guarantee" label="federal guarantees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="53659" end="53685" title="2012 U.S. presidential election" label="2012 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101438" start="53723" end="53749" title="political action committee" label="political action committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141173" start="54231" end="54253" title="Marriott International" label="Marriott International"/>
<link wikidata="Q224872" start="54471" end="54489" title="Lake Winnipesaukee" label="Lake Winnipesaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q601652" start="54493" end="54517" title="Wolfeboro, New Hampshire" label="Wolfeboro, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q840668" start="54549" end="54557" title="La Jolla" label="La Jolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="54570" end="54591" title="San Diego" label="San Diego, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671685" start="54794" end="54818" title="mammary ductal carcinoma" label="mammary ductal carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q216681" start="54819" end="54826" title="in situ" label="in situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q48978" start="55110" end="55115" title="LMFAO" label="LMFAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537152" start="55123" end="55135" title="Sky Blu (rapper)" label="Skyler Gordy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="55211" end="55254" title="No Apology: The Case for American Greatness" label="No Apology: The Case for American Greatness"/>
<link wikidata="Q464148" start="55368" end="55391" title="American exceptionalism" label="American exceptionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="55518" end="55565" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;The New York Times&amp;quot; Best Seller list"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="55670" end="55712" title="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" label="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="56051" end="56067" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109451" start="56400" end="56473" title="Nationwide opinion polling for the 2012 United States presidential election" label="nationwide opinion polling for the 2012 Republican presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336905" start="56559" end="56575" title="National Journal" label="National Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351781" start="56811" end="56833" title="2010 United States elections" label="2010 midterm elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q49207" start="57139" end="57166" title="University of New Hampshire" label="University of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472370" start="57190" end="57211" title="exploratory committee" label="exploratory committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030044" start="57266" end="57287" title="Quinnipiac University" label="Quinnipiac University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784440" start="57896" end="57928" title="Massachusetts health care reform" label="Massachusetts health care reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q24313" start="58086" end="58096" title="Mike Pence" label="Mike Pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q462981" start="58098" end="58108" title="John Thune" label="John Thune"/>
<link wikidata="Q361450" start="58110" end="58123" title="Haley Barbour" label="Haley Barbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q158813" start="58125" end="58138" title="Mike Huckabee" label="Mike Huckabee"/>
<link wikidata="Q351330" start="58144" end="58157" title="Mitch Daniels" label="Mitch Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417239" start="58325" end="58348" title="Stratham, New Hampshire" label="Stratham, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q160582" start="58832" end="58848" title="Michele Bachmann" label="Michele Bachmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q215057" start="58929" end="58939" title="Rick Perry" label="Rick Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="59142" end="59156" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q491019" start="59273" end="59284" title="Herman Cain" label="Herman Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459640" start="59605" end="59618" title="Flip-flop (politics)" label="flip-flopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q182788" start="59805" end="59818" title="Newt Gingrich" label="Newt Gingrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316237" start="60036" end="60054" title="Restore Our Future" label="Restore Our Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q124708886" start="60069" end="60078" title="Super PAC" label="Super PAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q106611681" start="60109" end="60122" title="United States presidential election in Iowa, 2012" label="Iowa caucuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q155985" start="60230" end="60243" title="Rick Santorum" label="Rick Santorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15257" start="60260" end="60268" title="Ron Paul" label="Ron Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892942" start="60430" end="60455" title="New Hampshire Republican primary, 2012" label="the New Hampshire primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11607" start="60503" end="60519" title="Jon Huntsman Jr." label="Jon Huntsman Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q125447131" start="60549" end="60582" title="South Carolina Republican primary, 2012" label="South Carolina Republican primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7943597" start="60723" end="60741" title="vulture capitalist" label="vulture capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894831" start="60873" end="60888" title="Asset Stripping" label="asset stripping"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61507" end="61522" title="United States presidential election in Florida, 2012#Republican primary" label="Florida primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994465" start="62172" end="62212" title="Conservative Political Action Conference" label="Conservative Political Action Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="62628" end="62642" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100257" start="62779" end="62809" title="Michigan Republican primary, 2012" label="closely fought one in Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481153" start="62842" end="62889" title="Super Tuesday, 2012" label="Super Tuesday primaries and caucuses of March 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100309" start="62935" end="62957" title="Ohio Republican primary, 2012" label="narrow victory in Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145369" start="63292" end="63321" title="Republican National Committee" label="Republican National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240907" start="63379" end="63398" title="presumptive nominee" label="presumptive nominee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109451" start="63424" end="63452" title="Nationwide opinion polling for the 2012 United States presidential election" label="Polls consistently indicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q674304" start="63682" end="63701" title="Banking in Switzerland" label="Swiss bank accounts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63868" end="63911" title="United States presidential election#Financial disclosures" label="release additional years of his tax returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="64286" end="64300" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="64302" end="64308" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="64314" end="64320" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="64442" end="64462" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q43723" start="64566" end="64584" title="Benjamin Netanyahu" label="Benjamin Netanyahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q203966" start="64789" end="64798" title="Paul Ryan" label="Paul Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462432" start="64857" end="64892" title="2012 Republican National Convention" label="2012 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="64896" end="64910" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="65859" end="65862" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q49079" start="65868" end="65880" title="Wolf Blitzer" label="Wolf Blitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892647" start="66946" end="66980" title="United States presidential election debates, 2012" label="2012 presidential election debates"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="67420" end="67441" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="Eastern Standard Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="67524" end="67542" title="battleground state" label="battleground state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554342" start="67888" end="67904" title="get out the vote" label="get out the vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072914" start="68080" end="68092" title="Project Orca" label="Project Orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="69010" end="69019" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476841" start="69212" end="69227" title="Fox News Sunday" label="Fox News Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021172" start="69775" end="69786" title="Deer Valley" label="Deer Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q482993" start="69795" end="69810" title="Park City, Utah" label="Park City, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q482520" start="69830" end="69844" title="Holladay, Utah" label="Holladay, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q75848" start="70150" end="70165" title="gated community" label="gated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875734" start="70173" end="70192" title="Beach O&amp;#x27; Pines" label="Beach O&amp;#x27; Pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542518" start="70202" end="70221" title="Grand Bend, Ontario" label="Grand Bend, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253293" start="70649" end="70653" title="Mitt (film)" label="Mitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q319099" start="70996" end="71011" title="Michael Dukakis" label="Michael Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892464" start="71279" end="71306" title="2014 United States elections" label="2014 U.S. midterm elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528150" start="71398" end="71431" title="2014 United States Senate elections" label="those running for the U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="71457" end="71472" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="71598" end="71624" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="71874" end="71919" title="2014 Russian military intervention in Ukraine" label="2014 Russian military intervention in Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899277" start="72372" end="72389" title="invisible primary" label="invisible primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q221997" start="72519" end="72527" title="Jeb Bush" label="Jeb Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="73431" end="73443" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q23013731" start="73692" end="73705" title="Mitt Romney&amp;#x27;s 2016 anti-Trump speech" label="March 3, 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711575" start="73720" end="73750" title="Hinckley Institute of Politics" label="Hinckley Institute of Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752663" start="73930" end="73947" title="Fred Trump" label="his father&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141155" start="74485" end="74500" title="tactical voting" label="tactical voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036942" start="74673" end="74681" title="Ted Cruz" label="Ted Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018339" start="74703" end="74723" title="United States presidential election in Utah, 2016" label="March 22 Utah caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="75193" end="75208" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479497" start="75387" end="75395" title="Write-in candidate" label="write in"/>
<link wikidata="Q730017" start="75563" end="75582" title="P. J. O&amp;#x27;Rourke" label="P. J. O&amp;#x27;Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q352123" start="75772" end="75784" title="Gary Johnson" label="Gary Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q720242" start="75789" end="75798" title="Bill Weld" label="Bill Weld"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988085" start="76184" end="76204" title="United States presidential election debates, 2016" label="presidential debates"/>
<link wikidata="Q26236468" start="76258" end="76271" title="Evan McMullin" label="Evan McMullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847773" start="77126" end="77150" title="Trump National Golf Club (Bedminster, New Jersey)" label="Trump National Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q813922" start="77154" end="77176" title="Bedminster, New Jersey" label="Bedminster, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="77216" end="77234" title="United States Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q331401" start="77261" end="77274" title="Rex Tillerson" label="Rex Tillerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q381157" start="77653" end="77664" title="Orrin Hatch" label="Orrin Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q482520" start="77835" end="77849" title="Holladay, Utah" label="Holladay, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q910613" start="78172" end="78192" title="Utah House of Representatives" label="State Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730723" start="78193" end="78205" title="Mike Kennedy (politician)" label="Mike Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78456" end="78463" title="2018 United States Senate election in Utah#Results 3" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179531" start="78531" end="78543" title="Jenny Wilson (politician)" label="Jenny Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q729018" start="78704" end="78719" title="William Wyatt Bibb" label="William W. Bibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q501431" start="78737" end="78762" title="List of United States senators from Georgia" label="U.S. senator from Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q558677" start="78782" end="78801" title="List of governors of Alabama" label="governor of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="78807" end="78818" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589724" start="78838" end="78859" title="governor of Tennessee" label="governor of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q498650" start="78878" end="78901" title="List of United States senators from Texas" label="U.S. senator from Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="79001" end="79016" title="The Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q27899325" start="79078" end="79092" title="Ronna McDaniel" label="Ronna McDaniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145369" start="79135" end="79164" title="Republican National Committee" label="Republican National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q22279" start="79455" end="79468" title="Susan Collins" label="Susan Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q22360" start="79482" end="79496" title="Lisa Murkowski" label="Lisa Murkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q63245644" start="79732" end="79762" title="2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings" label="2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q115170395" start="79956" end="79969" title="George Santos" label="George Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889967" start="80015" end="80037" title="House Ethics Committee" label="House Ethics Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q116200193" start="80094" end="80125" title="2023 State of the Union Address" label="2023 State of the Union Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="80237" end="80249" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q432335" start="80395" end="80401" title="lurker" label="lurker"/>
<link wikidata="Q60497" start="80429" end="80446" title="Slate (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Slate&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q79077052" start="81161" end="81184" title="First impeachment trial of Donald Trump" label="first impeachment trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q131110" start="81258" end="81279" title="United States history" label="United States history"/>
<link wikidata="Q168515" start="81663" end="81681" title="University of Utah" label="University of Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711575" start="81689" end="81719" title="Hinckley Institute of Politics" label="Hinckley Institute of Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q85756204" start="81848" end="81879" title="Republicans for the Rule of Law" label="Republicans for the Rule of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q95579249" start="81990" end="82012" title="murder of George Floyd" label="murder of George Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q95965839" start="82021" end="82039" title="George Floyd protests" label="worldwide protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600530" start="82147" end="82165" title="Black Lives Matter" label="Black Lives Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="82513" end="82526" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q28805633" start="82853" end="82877" title="Donald Trump 2020 presidential campaign" label="2020 reelection campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="82938" end="82953" title="The Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="83067" end="83076" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q526488" start="83297" end="83308" title="Salt Lake City International Airport" label="the airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="83323" end="83339" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="83352" end="83381" title="2020 United States Presidential election" label="Joe Biden&amp;#x27;s election win"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83677" end="83707" title="January 6 United States Capitol attack#January 6 Trump rally" label="&amp;quot;Save America&amp;quot; rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731820" start="83711" end="83722" title="the Ellipse" label="the Ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3713655" start="83737" end="83753" title="Donald Trump Jr." label="Donald Trump Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q212648" start="83755" end="83768" title="Rudy Giuliani" label="Rudy Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q104706517" start="84184" end="84231" title="2021 United States Electoral College vote count" label="2021 United States Electoral College vote count"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="84243" end="84264" title="United States Capitol" label="United States Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q104705419" start="84305" end="84325" title="January 6 United States Capitol attack" label="attacked the Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="84387" end="84422" title="United States Senate" label="chamber of the United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q24313" start="84458" end="84483" title="Vice President Mike Pence" label="Vice President Mike Pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036942" start="84553" end="84561" title="Ted Cruz" label="Ted Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="84666" end="84680" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q55615288" start="84696" end="84711" title="Jonathan Martin (journalist)" label="Jonathan Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104830111" start="85041" end="85078" title="second impeachment trial of Donald Trump" label="Trump&amp;#x27;s second impeachment trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q104786110" start="85114" end="85128" title="Eugene Goodman (police officer)" label="Eugene Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q104713215" start="85930" end="85957" title="Second impeachment of Donald Trump" label="impeach Trump a second time"/>
<link wikidata="Q463557" start="86024" end="86033" title="Rand Paul" label="Rand Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="86037" end="86045" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q22279" start="86215" end="86228" title="Susan Collins" label="Susan Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q22360" start="86230" end="86244" title="Lisa Murkowski" label="Lisa Murkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192221" start="86246" end="86255" title="Ben Sasse" label="Ben Sasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q971308" start="86260" end="86270" title="Pat Toomey" label="Pat Toomey"/>
<link wikidata="Q970272" start="86428" end="86439" title="Ron Johnson" label="Ron Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806257" start="86898" end="86928" title="United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations" label="Committee on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891318" start="86932" end="87009" title="United States Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on East Asia, The Pacific, and International Cybersecurity Policy" label="Subcommittee on East Asia, the Pacific and International Cybersecurity Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891322" start="87102" end="87174" title="United States Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on Near East, South Asia, Central Asia, and Counterterrorism" label="Subcommittee on Near East, South Asia, Central Asia and Counterterrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489338" start="87177" end="87232" title="United States Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs" label="Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891330" start="87236" end="87291" title="United States Senate Homeland Security Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Spending Oversight" label="Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Spending Oversight"/>
<link wikidata="Q142538" start="87359" end="87378" title="United States Senate Committee on the Budget" label="Committee on Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495438" start="87396" end="87447" title="United States Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions" label="Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891324" start="87451" end="87488" title="United States Senate Health Subcommittee on Children and Families" label="Subcommittee on Children and Families"/>
<link wikidata="Q17044454" start="87492" end="87539" title="United States Senate Health Subcommittee on Employment and Workplace Safety" label="Subcommittee on Employment and Workplace Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357620" start="87763" end="87773" title="means test" label="means test"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184791" start="87835" end="87850" title="Social Security (United States)" label="Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q559392" start="87855" end="87863" title="Medicare (United States)" label="Medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756335" start="88099" end="88132" title="The Path to Prosperity" label="the budget proposals of Paul Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="88228" end="88270" title="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" label="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141363" start="88360" end="88368" title="Medicaid" label="Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234044" start="88502" end="88559" title="Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act" label="Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q856418" start="88568" end="88586" title="Sarbanes–Oxley Act" label="Sarbanes–Oxley Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001455" start="88921" end="88953" title="Bush tax cuts" label="Bush administration-era tax rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q181201" start="88987" end="88995" title="dividend" label="dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850816" start="89001" end="89013" title="capital gain" label="capital gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400691" start="89179" end="89189" title="Estate tax in the United States" label="estate tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736466" start="89198" end="89221" title="Alternative Minimum Tax" label="Alternative Minimum Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q8348417" start="89577" end="89593" title="emissions trading" label="mandatory limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="89597" end="89621" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q890794" start="89837" end="89857" title="hydraulic fracturing" label="hydraulic fracturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="89963" end="89994" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892472" start="90008" end="90042" title="North American energy independence" label="North American energy independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q174438" start="90219" end="90237" title="Madeleine Albright" label="Madeleine Albright"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567180" start="90503" end="90523" title="currency manipulator" label="currency manipulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q221689" start="90622" end="90633" title="Patriot Act" label="Patriot Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q357" start="90666" end="90695" title="Guantanamo Bay detention camp" label="Guantanamo Bay detention camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516835" start="90708" end="90741" title="enhanced interrogation techniques" label="enhanced interrogation techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="90943" end="90960" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="90965" end="90976" title="civil union" label="civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315878" start="91450" end="91474" title="Respect for Marriage Act" label="Respect for Marriage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="92136" end="92147" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="92226" end="92245" title="Abortion-rights movements" label="pro-abortion rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025062" start="92429" end="92441" title="Human Events" label="Human Events"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365273" start="92479" end="92484" title="Republican In Name Only" label="RINOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="92554" end="92572" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11153" start="92582" end="92594" title="John Roberts" label="John Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11142" start="92596" end="92611" title="Clarence Thomas" label="Clarence Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="92613" end="92627" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Antonin Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11138" start="92633" end="92645" title="Samuel Alito" label="Samuel Alito"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151311" start="92660" end="92678" title="judicial restraint" label="judicial restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623615" start="92683" end="92705" title="strict constructionism" label="strict constructionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600530" start="92769" end="92787" title="Black Lives Matter" label="Black Lives Matter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92953" end="92978" title="Old Post Office (Washington, D.C.)#Trump International Hotel Washington, D.C." label="Trump International Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q585532" start="92984" end="93016" title="Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool" label="Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q95579249" start="93027" end="93049" title="murder of George Floyd" label="murder of George Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q971308" start="93085" end="93095" title="Pat Toomey" label="Pat Toomey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358961" start="93200" end="93211" title="Roger Stone" label="Roger Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q99760721" start="93469" end="93477" title="Amy Coney Barrett Supreme Court nomination" label="nominate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29863844" start="93490" end="93507" title="Amy Coney Barrett" label="Amy Coney Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="93514" end="93573" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="93585" end="93611" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022010" start="93781" end="93797" title="Merrick Garland Supreme Court nomination" label="Garland decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q21715237" start="94020" end="94073" title="existential risk from artificial general intelligence" label="existential risk from artificial general intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q528979" start="94094" end="94103" title="Jack Reed (Rhode Island politician)" label="Jack Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365787" start="94105" end="94116" title="Jerry Moran" label="Jerry Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q544464" start="94122" end="94132" title="Angus King" label="Angus King"/>
<link wikidata="Q127688165" start="94345" end="94352" title="Withdrawal of Joe Biden from the 2024 United States presidential election" label="dropped"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="94364" end="94390" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="95037" end="95043" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="95082" end="95111" title="People Magazine&amp;#x27;s 100 Most Beautiful People" label="50 Most Beautiful People list"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938523" start="95166" end="95179" title="Olympic truce" label="Olympic truce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716225" start="95333" end="95349" title="The Canterbury Medal" label="Canterbury Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716225" start="95355" end="95392" title="The Becket Fund for Religious Liberty" label="The Becket Fund for Religious Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="95511" end="95515" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="95556" end="95608" title="Time 100" label="List of The 100 Most Influential People in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q219070" start="95640" end="95664" title="Profile in Courage Award" label="Profile in Courage Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="96021" end="96055" title="List of governors of Massachusetts" label="List of governors of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q498769" start="96058" end="96098" title="List of United States senators from Utah" label="List of United States senators from Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248443" start="96101" end="96160" title="List of United States Republican Party presidential tickets" label="List of United States Republican Party presidential tickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241353" start="96163" end="96222" title="President of the Organising Committee for the Olympic Games" label="President of the Organising Committee for the Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="96556" end="96559" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="426209" wikidata="Q530970" url="?curid=426209" title="Virginia General Assembly">
<text>The Virginia General Assembly is the legislative body of the Commonwealth of Virginia, the oldest continuous law-making body in the Western Hemisphere, and the first elected legislative assembly in the New World. It was established on July 30, 1619.

The General Assembly is a bicameral body consisting of a lower house, the Virginia House of Delegates, with 100 members, and an upper house, the Senate of Virginia, with 40 members. Senators serve terms of four years, and delegates serve two-year terms. Combined, the General Assembly consists of 140 elected representatives from an equal number of constituent districts across the commonwealth. The House of Delegates is presided over by the speaker of the House, while the Senate is presided over by the lieutenant governor of Virginia. The House and Senate each elect a clerk and sergeant-at-arms. The Senate of Virginia&#x27;s clerk is known as the clerk of the Senate (instead of as the secretary of the Senate, the title used by the U.S. Senate).

Following the 2019 election, the Democratic Party held a majority of seats in both the House and the Senate for the first time since 1996. They were sworn into office on January 8, 2020, at the start of the 161st session. In the 2021 election, the Republican Party recaptured a majority in the House of Delegates, then lost it after the 2023 election, when the Democratic Party secured majorities in both chambers of the General Assembly.

==Capitol==
The General Assembly meets in Virginia&#x27;s capital of Richmond. When sitting in Richmond, the General Assembly holds sessions in the Virginia State Capitol, designed by Thomas Jefferson in 1788 and expanded in 1904. During the American Civil War, the building was used as the capitol of the Confederate States, housing the Confederate Congress. The building was renovated between 2005 and 2006. Senators and delegates have their offices in the General Assembly Building across the street directly north of the Capitol, which have been rebuilt and opened in 2023. The Governor of Virginia lives across the street directly east of the Capitol in the Virginia Executive Mansion.

==History==
The Virginia General Assembly is described as &quot;the oldest continuous law-making body in the New World.&quot; Its existence dates to its establishment at Jamestown on July 30, 1619, by instructions from the Virginia Company of London to the new Governor Sir George Yeardley. It was initially a unicameral body composed of the Company-appointed Governor and Council of State, plus 22 burgesses elected by the settlements and Jamestown. The Assembly became bicameral in 1642 upon the formation of the House of Burgesses. The Assembly had a judicial function of hearing cases both original and appellate. At various times it may have been referred to as the Grand Assembly of Virginia. The General Assembly met in Jamestown from 1619 until 1699, when it first moved to the College of William &amp; Mary near Williamsburg, Virginia, and from 1705 met in the colonial Capitol building. It became the General Assembly in 1776 with the ratification of the Virginia Constitution. The government was moved to Richmond in 1780 during the administration of Governor Thomas Jefferson.

==Salary and qualifications==
The annual salary for senators is $18,000. The annual salary for delegates is $17,640, with the exception that the Speaker&#x27;s salary is $36,321. Members and one staff member also receive a per diem allowance for each day spent attending to official duties such as attending session in Richmond or attending committee meetings. Transportation expenses are reimbursed.

Under the Constitution of Virginia, senators and delegates must be twenty-one years of age at the time of the election, residents of the district they represent, and qualified to vote for members of the General Assembly. Under the Constitution, &quot;a senator or delegate who moves his residence from the district for which he is elected shall thereby vacate his office.&quot;

The state constitution specifies that the General Assembly shall meet annually, and its regular session is a maximum of 60 days long in even-numbered years and 30 days long in odd-numbered years, unless extended by a two-thirds vote of both houses. The Governor of Virginia may convene a special session of the General Assembly &quot;when, in his opinion, the interest of the Commonwealth may require&quot; and must convene a special session &quot;upon the application of two-thirds of the members elected to each house.&quot;

==Redistricting reform==
Article II, section 6 on apportionment states, &quot;Members of the . . . Senate and of the House of Delegates of the General Assembly shall be elected from electoral districts established by the General Assembly. Every electoral district shall be composed of contiguous and compact territory and shall be so constituted as to give, as nearly as is practicable, representation in proportion to the population of the district.&quot; The Redistricting Coalition of Virginia proposes either an independent commission or a bipartisan commission that is not polarized. Member organizations include the League of Women Voters of Virginia, AARP of Virginia, OneVirginia2021, the Virginia Chamber of Commerce and Virginia Organizing. Governor Bob McDonnell&#x27;s Independent Bipartisan Advisory Commission on Redistricting for the Commonwealth of Virginia made its report on April 1, 2011. It made two recommendations for each state legislative house that showed maps of districts more compact and contiguous than those adopted by the General Assembly. However, no action was taken after the report was released.

In 2011 the Virginia College and University Redistricting Competition was organized by Professors Michael McDonald of George Mason University and Quentin Kidd of Christopher Newport University. About 150 students on sixteen teams from thirteen schools submitted plans for legislative and U.S. Congressional Districts. They created districts more compact than the General Assembly&#x27;s efforts. The &quot;Division 1&quot; maps conformed with the Governor&#x27;s executive order, and did not address electoral competition or representational fairness. In addition to the criteria of contiguity, equipopulation, the federal Voting Rights Act and communities of interest in the existing city and county boundaries, &quot;Division 2&quot; maps in the competition did incorporate considerations of electoral competition and representational fairness. Judges for the cash award prizes were Thomas Mann of the Brookings Institution and Norman Ornstein of the American Enterprise Institute.

In January 2015 Republican state senator Jill Holtzman Vogel of Winchester and Democratic state senator Louise Lucas of Portsmouth sponsored a Senate Joint Resolution to establish additional criteria for the Virginia Redistricting Commission of four identified members of political parties, and three other independent public officials. The criteria began with respecting existing political boundaries, such as cities and towns, counties and magisterial districts, election districts and voting precincts. Districts are to be established on the basis of population, in conformance with federal and state laws and court cases, including those addressing racial fairness. The territory is to be contiguous and compact, without oddly shaped boundaries. The commission is prohibited from using political data or election results to favor either political party or incumbent. It passed with a two-thirds majority of 27 to 12 in the Senate, and was then referred to committee in the House of Delegates.

In 2015, in &quot;Vesilind v. Virginia State Board of Elections&quot; in a Virginia state court, plaintiffs sought to overturn the General Assembly&#x27;s redistricting in five House of Delegates and six state Senate districts as violations of both the Virginia and U.S. Constitutions because they failed to represent populations in &quot;continuous and compact territory&quot;.

In 2020, a constitutional amendment moved redistricting power to a commission consisting of eight lawmakers, four from each party, and eight citizens. The amendment passed with all counties and cities supporting the measure except Arlington. The commission failed to reach an agreement on new state and congressional districts by an October 25, 2021, deadline, and relied upon the amendment&#x27;s provision that lets the state Supreme Court of Virginia draw the districts in the event that the commission could not do so. The Supreme Court did so and approved newly drawn districts on December 28, 2021. While newly drawn districts will currently first be used in 2023, a federal lawsuit is pending that calls for an election to be held using newly drawn districts as immediately as November 2022. If the lawsuit was successful, it would have required all House districts, which just held elections under the previous districts in 2021, to hold back-to-back elections in 2022 and 2023 under the newly drawn districts.

==See also==

*Senate of Virginia
*Virginia House of Delegates
*Virginia State Capitol
* List of Virginia state legislatures

==References==
==External links==
* Virginia General Assembly
* Legislative Information System</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="4" end="29" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270264" start="37" end="53" title="State legislature (United States)" label="legislative body"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="61" end="85" title="Virginia" label="Commonwealth of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="132" end="150" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="202" end="211" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="277" end="286" title="bicameralism" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q375928" start="308" end="319" title="lower house" label="lower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="325" end="352" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="Virginia House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="379" end="390" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747983" start="396" end="414" title="Senate of Virginia" label="Senate of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597988" start="694" end="714" title="List of Speakers of the Virginia House of Delegates" label="speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q931202" start="757" end="788" title="Lieutenant Governor of Virginia" label="lieutenant governor of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611907" start="834" end="850" title="sergeant-at-arms" label="sergeant-at-arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444428" start="943" end="966" title="secretary of the Senate" label="secretary of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="990" end="1001" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q56042666" start="1019" end="1032" title="2019 Virginia elections" label="2019 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255726" start="1038" end="1054" title="Democratic Party of Virginia" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q85719770" start="1212" end="1225" title="161st Virginia General Assembly" label="161st session"/>
<link wikidata="Q105082118" start="1234" end="1247" title="2021 Virginia House of Delegates election" label="2021 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314664" start="1253" end="1269" title="Republican Party of Virginia" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q113581469" start="1342" end="1355" title="2023 Virginia House of Delegates election" label="2023 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="1514" end="1522" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537798" start="1593" end="1615" title="Virginia State Capitol" label="Virginia State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="1629" end="1645" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1687" end="1705" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="1751" end="1769" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States"/>
<link wikidata="Q628728" start="1783" end="1803" title="Congress of the Confederate States" label="Confederate Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q878942" start="2027" end="2047" title="Governor of Virginia" label="Governor of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419842" start="2108" end="2134" title="Virginia Executive Mansion" label="Virginia Executive Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="2307" end="2316" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061207" start="2360" end="2386" title="London Company" label="Virginia Company of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546596" start="2411" end="2426" title="George Yeardley" label="George Yeardley"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="2447" end="2457" title="Unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934286" start="2510" end="2526" title="Virginia Governor&amp;#x27;s Council" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q920609" start="2652" end="2670" title="House of Burgesses" label="House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="2744" end="2753" title="appellate" label="appellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="2923" end="2952" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q492346" start="2958" end="2980" title="Williamsburg, Virginia" label="Williamsburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357190" start="3016" end="3023" title="Capitol (Williamsburg, Virginia)" label="Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q193170" start="3082" end="3094" title="ratification" label="ratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995091" start="3102" end="3123" title="Virginia Constitution" label="Virginia Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q878942" start="3199" end="3207" title="Governor of Virginia" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="3208" end="3224" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306789" start="3450" end="3458" title="per diem" label="per diem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995091" start="3639" end="3663" title="Constitution of Virginia" label="Constitution of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q878942" start="4261" end="4281" title="Governor of Virginia" label="Governor of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q333034" start="5080" end="5090" title="bipartisan" label="bipartisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092674" start="5091" end="5101" title="redistricting commission" label="commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369894" start="5158" end="5180" title="League of Women Voters" label="League of Women Voters"/>
<link wikidata="Q463410" start="5194" end="5198" title="AARP" label="AARP"/>
<link wikidata="Q28226205" start="5212" end="5227" title="OneVirginia2021" label="OneVirginia2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800288" start="5242" end="5261" title="United States Chamber of Commerce" label="Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934440" start="5266" end="5285" title="Virginia Organizing" label="Virginia Organizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q456924" start="5296" end="5309" title="Bob McDonnell" label="Bob McDonnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411222" start="5786" end="5809" title="George Mason University" label="George Mason University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444675" start="5830" end="5860" title="Christopher Newport University" label="Christopher Newport University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338798" start="6131" end="6146" title="executive order" label="executive order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="6291" end="6308" title="Voting Rights Act of 1965" label="Voting Rights Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543895" start="6553" end="6564" title="Thomas E. Mann" label="Thomas Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="6572" end="6593" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052657" start="6598" end="6613" title="Norman Ornstein" label="Norman Ornstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q464135" start="6621" end="6650" title="American Enterprise Institute" label="American Enterprise Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6192872" start="6694" end="6713" title="Jill Holtzman Vogel" label="Jill Holtzman Vogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q492355" start="6717" end="6727" title="Winchester, Virginia" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688832" start="6757" end="6769" title="Louise Lucas" label="Louise Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q342803" start="6773" end="6783" title="Portsmouth, Virginia" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356374" start="8040" end="8066" title="2020 Virginia Question 1" label="a constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="8262" end="8271" title="Arlington County, Virginia" label="Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398783" start="8459" end="8484" title="Supreme Court of Virginia" label="Supreme Court of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747983" start="9066" end="9084" title="Senate of Virginia" label="Senate of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="9086" end="9113" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="Virginia House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537798" start="9115" end="9137" title="Virginia State Capitol" label="Virginia State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q65084983" start="9140" end="9175" title="List of Virginia state legislatures" label="List of Virginia state legislatures"/>
</links>
</doc>
