<doc id="880525" wikidata="Q903766" url="?curid=880525" title="Breaker Morant">
<text>Harry Harbord &quot;Breaker&quot; Morant (born Edwin Henry Murrant, 9 December 1864 – 27 February 1902) was an English horseman, bush balladist, military officer, and war criminal who was convicted and executed for murdering nine prisoners-of-war (POWs) and three captured civilians in three separate incidents during the Second Boer War.

Morant travelled to the Australian colonies in 1883 and for more than fifteen years he worked in a variety of occupations in Queensland, New South Wales and South Australia, during which time he developed a reputation as a horseman and bush balladist. In 1899 he enlisted in the second contingent of the South Australian Mounted Rifles to be sent by the government of that colony to serve as part of the British Empire forces fighting in South Africa during the Second Boer War. Morant embarked as a corporal and ended his term of service as a sergeant, having spent much of his time as a despatch rider. He then returned to England for six months while he unsuccessfully sought to clear some debts.

Returning to South Africa, Morant received a commission as a lieutenant with an irregular regimentthe Bushveldt Carbineers. He was arrested and court-martialled for committing murder on active serviceone of the first such prosecutions in British military history. According to military prosecutors, Morant retaliated for the death in combat of his squadron commandera close friendwith a series of revenge killings against both Boer POWs and many civilian residents of the Northern Transvaal. Morant&#x27;s defence attorney, Major James Francis Thomas, asserted that his clients should be acquitted, claiming that they were acting in accordance with superior orders not to take prisoners. Despite this, Thomas was unable to establish that an order to that effect had been issued.

Morant was accused of the summary execution of Floris Visser, a wounded POW, and the slaying of four Afrikaners and four Dutch schoolteachers who had surrendered at the Elim Hospital, five of whom were members of the Soutpansberg Commando. Morant was found guilty and sentenced to death. Morant and Lieutenant Peter Handcock were then court-martialled for the murder of the Reverend Carl August Daniel Heese, a South African-born Minister of the Berlin Missionary Society. Heese had spiritually counselled the Dutch and Afrikaner victims at Elim Hospital and had been shot to death the same afternoon. Morant and Handcock were acquitted of the Heese murder, but their sentences for murdering Visser, the eight victims at Elim Hospital, and three others were implemented by a firing squad from the Cameron Highlanders on 27 February 1902.

Morant and Handcock have become folk heroes in modern Australia, representing a turning point for Australians&#x27; self-determination and independence from British rule. Their court-martial and death have been the subject of books, a stage play and an award-winning Australian New Wave film by director Bruce Beresford. Upon its release during 1980, Beresford&#x27;s film both brought Morant&#x27;s life story to a worldwide audience and &quot;hoisted the images of the accused officers to the level of Australian icons and martyrs&quot;. Despite the seriousness of the evidence and charges against them, some modern Australians regard Morant and Handcock as scapegoats or even as victims of judicial murder. They continue to attempt, with some public support, to obtain a posthumous pardon or even a new trial.

According to South African historian Charles Leach, &quot;In the opinion of many South Africans, particularly descendants of victims as well as other involved persons in the far Northern Transvaal, justice was only partially achieved by the trial and the resultant sentences. The feeling still prevails that not all the guilty parties were dealt with – the notorious Captain Taylor being the most obvious one of all.&quot;

==Early life in England==
Edwin Henry Murrant was born at Bridgwater, Somerset, England, on 9 December 1864. According to his Queensland marriage record, he was the son of Edwin Murrant and Catherine Murrant (née O&#x27;Reilly). Edwin and Catherine were master and matron of the Union Workhouse at Bridgwater. Morant&#x27;s father died in August 1864, four months before Edwin Henry was born. Despite her reduced circumstances following her husband&#x27;s death, after four applications and help from her contacts Catherine was able send her son to the local Royal Masonic Institution for Boys. He received prizes for French, German, classics, dictation and elocution, but also constantly misbehaved and influenced other boys to join him in his misdemeanours. Catherine continued as matron of the workhouse until her retirement in early 1882, having completed 21 year service. She died in July 1899.

==Australia (1883–1899)==
Morant (still using the name Edwin Murrant) arrived in Queensland aboard the SS &quot;Waroonga&quot; when it docked in Townsville on 5 June 1883. At the time, there was no difference in legal status, in either country, between people born in the UK and British subjects born overseas – a category that included a vast majority of people born in the Australian colonies. This did not change until the Australian nationality law of 1948. Morant did not regard himself as Australian. His former defence counsel, Major James Francis Thomas, later &quot;reacted strongly&quot; whenever his former client was described as such. In a letter to &quot;The Sydney Morning Herald&quot; on 16 June 1923, Thomas wrote, &quot;Morant was not an Australian, he was an Englishman, who came to this country for &#x27;colonial experience&#x27;.&quot;
Soon after arriving in north Queensland, Murrant joined a travelling circus/rodeo which was making its way to the mining town of Charters Towersabout south west of Townsvilleand upon arrival he made an immediate impression on the locals with his drinking, jokes, ballads, horse riding and pursuit of women. He was employed as a stockman at Fanning Downs Station on the Burdekin Riverabout east of Charters Towerswhere he met the governess, Daisy May O&#x27;Dwyer. A brief courtship resulted in marriage at Charters Towers on 13 March 1884the marriage registration gives his name as Edwin Henry Murrantbut this was short-lived, as he failed to pay the officiating minister his fee of five pounds and his new wife threw him out. Murrant had promised the minister that the necessary funds would be arriving soon from his aristocratic family in England, but the money never came.

Four weeks after their marriage, Murrant was charged with stealing a saddle and thirty-two pigs. When arrested, he began denying writing false cheques until he realised he was being arrested for stealing instead. He then used two chequeswhich were soon dishonouredto buy two horses. He went to the town of Wintonabout further to the south west, but was acquitted of the stealing charges. His wife, who later became Daisy Batesa noted anthropologistnever divorced him or revealed her early connection to Murrant/Morant.

After this, Murrant assumed the name Harry Harbord Morant, but was also known to use the surname alias Harbord to avoid creditors. He often claimed to have been born in 1865 in Devon, and to be the son of Admiral Sir George Digby Morant of the Royal Navy, a claim repeated as fact in a book published soon after his execution. Admiral Morant released a statement in 1902 that the executed man was not his son and was not in any way related to him. The author Nick Bleszynski uses circumstantial evidence to theorise that Admiral Morant could have been Edwin Murrant&#x27;s biological father, predominantly citing geographic proximity and questions about the funding of Murrant&#x27;s education. Other recent books such as the 2020 biography of Morant by Peter FitzSimons dismiss as fictitious Morant&#x27;s claims that he was the son of Admiral Morant. Morant also claimed to have studied at the Royal Naval College, but none of his names appear in naval records.

During the next fifteen years, Morant travelled around southern Queensland, New South Wales and South Australia, being employed variously as a horse-breaker, drover, rouseabout, rough rider, horse trader, bush newspaperman, bookkeeper and storeman. He gained a reputation for his horsemanship, including as a steeplechaser and polo player, and also as drinker and womaniser. A contemporary described him thus:

Morant shamelessly drew upon the generosity of othersoften claiming to have been robbedand routinely failed to pay back loans or pay bills he owed, moving on before the debts caught up with him. In 1889, while in Blackall in central western Queensland, Morant was arrested, charged and convicted of obtaining money under false pretences from a man in Muttaburrafor selling the same horse to two different menand was sentenced to three months hard labour in Rockhampton jail. The warrant for his arrest described him as tall, stout build, with brown hair and moustache, slight stammer in speech and &quot;boasts of aristocratic friends in England&quot;.

Along with his propensity to avoid repaying loans and paying debts, Morant also had a reputation for animal cruelty and for goading Aboriginal stockmen into bare-knuckle fistfights. Morant would encourage an Aboriginal stockman to fight a few rounds with him by initially hiding his true boxing skills, then reveal them by beating him severely. He developed skills as a bush balladist, and from 1891 many of his ballads or poems were published in &quot;The Bulletin&quot;, using the sobriquets &quot;The Breaker&quot;, &quot;The B&quot;, &quot;B&quot;, Harry Morant, HM, and &quot;Apollo Beledere&quot;. Through this work, which helped fund his drinking, he made the acquaintance of the famous Australian bush poets Henry Lawson, Banjo Paterson, and Will Ogilvie. The bond between Morant and Ogilvie was quite strong, and Ogilvie wrote several pieces about Morant both before and after his death.

One of the most well-known demonstrations of Morant&#x27;s horsemanship occurred in 1897 at the Hawkesbury Show, north west of Sydney in New South Wales. A rough rider had brought a notoriously wild brumby called &quot;Dargin&#x27;s Grey&quot; to the show, an eight-year-old but very muscular horse known to throw all who attempted to ride it. For over a minute, Morant rode the violently bucking horse into submission, popularising his nickname &quot;The Breaker&quot;. In 1898, while still working in the Hawkesbury region, Morant associated with the Sydney hunt club set, through which he first made the acquaintance of a prominent Sydney solicitor, Robert Lenehan, the Mahdist War and Burma veteran Lieutenant Colonel Henry Parke Airey, and Thomaswho later became Morant&#x27;s defence lawyer when he was court martialed in South Africa. Thomas had travelled from his home in Tenterfield to participate in a hunt. On 5 November 1898 one of Morant&#x27;s other acquaintances was convicted by the Penrith Police Court for being drunk and disorderly at Springwood in the nearby Blue Mountains. A summons had been issued for Morant to appear on the same charge, but it had not been served because he had fled to Gunnedah in north eastern New South Wales.

Around this time, Morant&#x27;s personal circumstances were increasingly straitened, and this continued until early 1900 as he reached his mid-30s. Pursued by many creditors, he was no longer young, his clothes were shabby, he looked careworn, and his alcohol-affected facial features were less attractive to women. He had to flee Melbourne in Victoria after only a month, and travelled to Adelaide in South Australia where he also quickly wore out his welcome. He retreated to a cattle station outside Renmark on the Murray River north east of Adelaide, where he obtained free food and accommodation by convincing a local member of the Morant clan that he was a relative. Having few prospects if he remained in Australia, Morant soon gathered a few members of the local rifle club and rode back to Adelaide to enlist for service in the Second Boer War.

==To South Africa==

On 13 January 1900, Morant enlistedunder the name Henry Horland Morrantwith the second contingent of the South Australian Mounted Rifles (SAMR) in Adelaide, for service in the Second Boer War. According to a report in &quot;The Advertiser&quot;a daily newspaperMorant, like the other volunteers, read and signed a declaration that he would faithfully serve until 17 October 1900, be subject to the Queen&#x27;s rules and regulations and the rules and articles of war. Along with the rest of the contingent, Morant visited the summer residence of South Australia&#x27;s governor, Hallam, Lord Tennysonthe son of Alfred, Lord Tennysonat Marble Hill and regaled the governor and his wife with stories. After completing his training, he was appointed as a corporal and the contingent embarked for the Transvaal on 26 January 1900.

The contingent disembarked at Cape Town on 27 February 1900, and were at first sent to Prieska in the Cape Colony to join a force under the command of Major General Baron Kitchener. It was then sent back to De Aar on the railway line between Cape Town and Kimberley from where it was moved up to Bloemfontein where it joined other Australian troops as part of the main advance to Pretoria under Field Marshal Baron Roberts. Lieutenant General John French commanded the Cavalry Division, which was struggling with the quantity and quality of the horses it had been supplied, many of which came from Argentina and Hungary. The British had not anticipated the tactics the Boer commandos would use, and were ill-prepared for the war of mobility forced upon them. French became aware of Morant&#x27;s knowledge and skill with horses, and arranged for him to be transferred to his remount section, where he broke in newly arrived horses, and by non-regulation methods obtained better horses for the staff, often under the cover of darkness. French also utilised Morant as a despatch rider for his staff.

After the capture of Pretoria, South Australian Colonel Joseph Gordon recommended Morant as a despatch rider to Bennet Burleigh, the war correspondent of the London &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot;, and Morant took up this position in late June 1900. He was employed directly by the newspaper, and his final pay from the British Army was on 31 July 1900. Morant&#x27;s physical bravery and horse riding skills ensured he performed well in his new role as a despatch rider for Burleigh, riding hard with the war correspondent&#x27;s reports to the nearest telegraph station. Burleigh and Morant followed closely behind Lord Roberts&#x27; advance from Pretoria to the border with Portuguese East Africa, and Burleigh was present with Roberts in Durban when the latter had declared that the war was practically over.

==Visit to England==
By late September 1900, with Burleigh accepting Roberts&#x27; contention that the war was almost over, Morant decided to travel to England with the war correspondent when he returned home. To keep his options open for a return to South Africa, he attempted to secure a place with the police force being established by Major General Robert Baden-Powellthe South African Constabularyto safeguard law and order in the occupied Boer republics. For help with this task Morant looked to useful bureaucrats in the administration. One of these was Lieutenant Percy Hunt, a regular British Army officer formerly of the 13th Hussars who, like Morant, was a lover of both horses and polo.

The two quickly struck up a friendship. At the time, Hunt was a marriage registrar in the administration, and had served with the scouts of Lieutenant General John French&#x27;s cavalry division earlier in the war, but had seen little action. Hunt, an aristocratic officer with excellent social connectionswho was nearly ten years Morant&#x27;s juniorgave Morant some contacts of his to get in touch with when he arrived in London. The Second Contingent of the SAMR returned to South Australia in October, and the commanding officer wrote a farewell letter of recommendation for Morant noting his satisfaction with Morant&#x27;s &quot;soldierly behaviour and continual alertness&quot; while part of the contingent.

Morant and Burleigh arrived in Cape Town in late October and stayed at the palatial Mount Nelson Hotel where they wined and dined for several days awaiting the departure of their ship to England. Morant claimed that he did not have the funds immediately available to pay his extensive hotel bill, but that it should be forwarded to Admiral Morant in Devon and would be promptly paid. The manager agreed. Morant and Burleigh departed Cape Town aboard the &quot;Dunvegan Castle&quot;, arriving in London in late November.

As soon as he arrived in London, Morant visited the Agent-General for South Australiathe former premier, Sir John Cockburn, and told him that he had been commissioned in the South African Constabulary as a lieutenant. He then forwarded an account of the meeting to journalist friends in Adelaide, and the &quot;Adelaide Observer&quot; duly printed it a month later. In it, Morant made three false claims: that he was the son of a Colonel Morant of Renmark; that he had been commissioned as a lieutenant in the South African Constabulary; and that he was on six month&#x27;s leave of absence before taking up his appointment back in South Africa.

A letter dated 23 January 1901 was sent to Admiral Morant by the Mount Nelson Hotel stating that Harry Morant had stayed there during November 1900, while claiming to be the Admiral&#x27;s son. Harry Morant had further claimed to be a war correspondent for the &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot; and had &quot;left without discharging his liability&quot; of sixteen pounds and thirteen shillings. The letter concluded, &quot;We shall esteem it a favour if you will let us know the course we had better adopt. We are averse to taking the matter to court till we had heard from you.&quot; This letter arrived at Brockenhurst Park, the home of a branch of the Morant clan, but Admiral Morant did not live there. The letter was received in early February 1901 by Flora Morant, whose late husband was a cousin of the admiral. She consulted with her solicitor and replied with a formal note advising the hotel that the admiral did not know the man referred to in their letter, and would not be held liable for his debts.

In early February, Morant participated in the funeral procession of Queen Victoria wearing the uniform of a lieutenant in the South African Constabulary. He was noticed by an Australian journalist who spoke to him and wrote in a South Australian newspaper published in March that &quot;Lieutenant Morant, of B.P.P.[Baden-Powell&#x27;s Police], who went out with the Second Contingent as [a] corporal, is now in England, and is visiting friends in Devonshire.&quot; In reality, Morant was not at this time a member of the British Army or the South African Constabulary, and held no rank.

Whatever his aims, Morant did not have a very successful visit to England. He mostly stayed with his unmarried sister Annie, who resented his long absence with little communication, and beyond a few trips to London to mix with a few people who knew his exploits, his visit only served to remind him of his unimpressive personal circumstances. According to FitzSimons, he had no future in England and could not return to Australia due to his debts and criminal past. Despite the fact that he did not have a commission in the South African Constabulary, he returned to South Africa in March 1901 hoping that other opportunities might present themselves.

==With the Bushveldt Carbineers==
After their defeats in open battle during 1899–1900, the &quot;bittereinders&quot;the Boers who were willing to fight the British to the &quot;bitter end&quot;began a guerrilla campaign against British forces. In response, Baron Kitchenernow a substantive lieutenant general, local general and overall British commander in South Africaimplemented and expanded several counterinsurgency policies, which included destroying Boer farmsteads which could support the &quot;bittereinders&quot; and interning Afrikaner non-combatants into concentration camps. Family members of known &quot;bittereinders&quot; had their rations in the camps halved. As they were no longer able to receive food and supplies from Boer civilians, the commandos began a practice of derailing trains in order to take and use food and supplies that were intended for British forces.

In response to the depredations of the commandos in the northern Transvaal, some loyalist businessmen in the Zoutpansberg district approached Kitchener and received approval for the raising of an irregular British mounted infantry regiment to consist of loyalist Boers from the district. In mid-February 1901, the provost marshal in Pretoria was tasked with establishing the regiment, initially titled the Bushveldt Mounted Rifles, but quickly renamed the Bushveldt Carbineers (BVC), The numbers of such men who came forward fell far short of the five hundred needed to form the unit, the loyalty of some of those who did was dubious, and the newly appointed commanding officer, the Australian Major Robert Lenehan, received authority to recruit time-served Australians and other colonials still in South Africa. By late March the BVC was ready for actionalthough only 320-strongand was included in Brigadier General Herbert Plumer&#x27;s column as it drove north along the railway line towards Pietersburg north of Pretoriaon 26 March. On 1 April Plumer&#x27;s force entered Nylstroom, about north of Pretoria.

On arrival in South Africa inquiring about opportunities, Morant was referred to Lenehan, and while Lenehan later stated that his impression of Morant in Australia would not have induced him to offer him a commission as an officer, he felt that previous Morant&#x27;s service in South Africa had made him more suitable. Lenehan was also swayed by Morant&#x27;s false claim that he had previously been granted a commission in the South African Constabulary. On 1 April 1901 Lenehan granted Morant a commission as a lieutenant in the BVC and sent him to join the regiment on its advance north.

Between 1 and 8 April, Plumer&#x27;s column, including the BVC, pushed north and occupied Pietersburg. On the advance to Pietersburg, the BVC was tasked with responding to Boer mining of the railway line near Potgietersrus, and developed a practice of placing Boer prisoners in the second and subsequent trucks ahead of a locomotive, with an empty truck leading. When the empty lead truck was blown up by a mine and one of the trucks carrying the prisoners was damaged, the prisoners became more forthcoming about mining of the tracks further along the line. Once Pietersburg was secured, Colonel Francis Hall of the Royal Artillery was appointed as area commandant based in Pietersburg, in overall command of the BVC and two infantry units: the 2nd Battalion, the Gordon Highlanders (2GH); and the 2nd Battalion, the Wiltshire Regiment (2WR). Lenehan also established the BVC headquarters in Pietersburg. As district commissioner responsible for the civil administration, and also intelligence chief for the district, Kitchener appointed Captain Alfred Taylor. Taylor was known as &quot;Bulala&quot; (Killer) by the local African people due to his well-established reputation for ruthless brutality.

The BVC area of operations was the Zoutpansberg districtnearly one third of the Transvaalwas bounded by the Limpopo River to the north and the Waterberg range and Olifants River to the south. On 4 May, Morant led the 22-strong No. 1 Troop of B Squadron of the BVC from Pietersburg to establish themselves at a base occupied by two companies of 2WR at Strydpoort Pass near Potgietersrus, south west of Pietersburg. Morant&#x27;s second-in-command was Sergeant Frank Eland, a settler from the district who Morant considered an excellent non-commissioned officer and with whom he quickly established a warm friendship. In the early morning the day after arriving at Strydpoort, Morant took a patrol out, following receipt of intelligence, and captured five Boers without casualties.

The troop mounted daily patrols and often escorted officers travelling between their base and Pietersburg. No. 2 Troop was established at the nearby Chuniespoort Pass. On 16 May Morant paraded his troop and read a message from Kitchener praising the BVC for its good work. A concentration camp was established near Pietersburg on 11 May, and within a month it held 2,000 Boers, and sometimes as many as 4,000. During its brief existence, 88 women prisoners, 523 children and 46 men held in the camp died. On 22 May the BVC were ordered to move their camp some out from the pass, and Eland directed the establishment of the defences while Morant took nine BVC men to escort a party of Boers to the concentration camp, returning three days later.

On 1 June, Morant and Eland unsuccessfully sought permission from the major in charge of the 2WR troops at Strydpoort to conduct a patrol. Morant travelled several times between the new camp near Strydpoort and Pietersburg in the first half of June. In mid-June, Morant&#x27;s friend Hunt, whose service as a marriage registrar with the civil administration had come to an end, used his contacts at the Pretoria Club to secure himself a position as a captain with the BVC, although he did not reach Pietersberg until early July. At the end of June, both troops of B Squadron concentrated at Pietersburg to prepare to move further north, and they were replaced by 40 men from C Squadron reinforced with a few troopers from B Squadron who remained.

On 4 July, a platoon of 2GH led by Lieutenant Alexander Best were guarding a train which was blown up near Potgietersrus then attacked by a force of Boers numbering around 150. Holding out for as long as they could, ten of the Gordons, including Best, were killed, and eleven wounded. Eland recorded in a letter to his wife that Morant was very upset by the news of Best&#x27;s death, as Best had been a friend of Morant. Morant led a fruitless patrol that evening, and Eland wrote that &quot;if we had come up with that party of Boers that night we would not have taken any prisoners&quot;. Hunt was also a friend of Best. The following evening, Morant was member of a night patrol led by the adjutant of the BVC, Lieutenant Edwards, which was accused of overzealousness in searching a house that had been placed under the protection of the British Army to the extent that Edwards was briefly placed under arrest upon his return to Pietersberg. When the patrol returned to camp, Morant was not his usual talkative self. He claimed to Eland that Best and his men had been shot in cold blood by the Boers.

===A Squadron at Sweetwaters Farm===
In early June, Taylor had been accompanied by 60 men of A Squadron of the BVC commanded by Captain James Robertson to establish a base at Sweetwaters Farm about north of Pietersberg in the Spelonken region. One of the officers accompanying A Squadron was Veterinary Lieutenant Peter Handcock. A Boer commando led by Christiaan Frederik Beyers withdrew from the area when it learned of the approach of the BVC, but soon after the BVC established camp, the retired Boer leader Tom Kelly gathered his followers and re-established his own commando, as he was unable to accept British occupation of his territory. Another Boer leader, Ben Viljoen, was also active in the area, and the area of operations was far more active than the relatively quiescent area then being patrolled by B Squadron.

Taylor recruited a team of intelligence operatives drawn from local Boers, and the task of A Squadron was to assist Taylor by following up on intelligence he gathered about Boer movements. Robertson was unsuited to his command, permissive with the men and not respected by them. He distrusted his men to the extent that he kept a loaded pistol at hand at all times. Soon after arriving at Sweetwaters Farm, Taylor was accompanying a BVC patrol when he questioned an African local about the whereabouts of the Boers. When the man failed to provide any information, Taylor shot him in the head at close range.

On 2 July, Taylor received intelligence that a group of six Boers in two covered wagons were approaching Sweetwaters Farm to surrender. After conferring with Taylor and Handcock, Robertson ordered the squadron sergeant major, Kenneth Morrison, to send out a patrol to meet the Boers and shoot them rather than take them prisoner. When questioned by Morrison, Robertson couched the orders as coming from Taylor as the district commander. In fact, Taylor had no military authority to issue such orders, and Robertson was in command. When Morrison passed these orders on to Sergeant Dudley Oldham as coming from Taylor, Oldham initially refused to carry them out, but reluctantly did so when pressed.

Upon approaching the Boers, who were also herding one hundred head of oxen, Oldham&#x27;s advanced patrol of seven men fired a few shots, but no fire was returned and white flags were waved to signify surrender. The Boers, who included 12-year-old Petrus Geyser and a sick old man, were disarmed and then shot by the side of the road, and in the case of the old man, while he lay in a wagon. The Boers offered no resistance at all. Taylor, Robertson and Handcock arrived at the scene some time afterwards to inspect the bodies, and their burial by local Africans was arranged. Taylor visited the nearby African kraal from which the three grave diggers had been drawn, and when he did not get the answers he wanted from them about what they would say about the shooting of the six Boers, they fled the kraal. Taylor sent a BVC patrol to find and shoot them, which they did. The oxen captured by the patrol were soon sent, with Morrison&#x27;s connivance, to Taylor&#x27;s farm in southern Rhodesia, a mere away.

One of the BVC troopers who had been a member of Oldham&#x27;s patrol that shot the six surrendering Boers was Barend van Buuren, himself a Boer. Disturbed by what had happened, that evening he approached relatives of the dead Boers who were being held in at the camp, and pointed out the members of the patrol who had shot them. Several BVC members witnessed this interaction, and Handcock confronted him. The following morning van Buuren spoke to a member of the BVC about his disquiet. That day, Taylor and Robertson ordered Handcock to take out a patrol, to include van Buuren, and during the patrol, kill van Buuren when the opportunity arose, on the basis that he could not be relied upon to keep quiet about the killing of the six Boers. Once in thick bush, Handcock spread the patrol out to the extent that they could not always see the next man on their left or right, and rode up to van Buuren and shot him three times with his revolver. Upon returning to camp, Handcock submitted a report on van Buuren&#x27;s death which Robertson considered unacceptable. He rewrote the report and forwarded it to Lenehan. In usual circumstances a patrol would have been sent out to retrieve van Buuren&#x27;s body so it could be buried, but this was not done. Several BVC members did not believe that Boers were involved in van Buuren&#x27;s death, and concluded that Handcock had murdered him. If Handcock heard anyone dissent from his version of the events surrounding van Buuren&#x27;s death, he threatened to shoot them.

In early July, a report from an intelligence agent operating in the northern Transvaal was received by Hall in Pietersberg alleging &quot;poor discipline, unconfirmed murders, drunkenness, and general lawlessness in the Spelonken&quot;. The report also alleged that Robertson had sexually assaulted a Boer woman. In response, on 11 Julythe afternoon of Best&#x27;s funeralHall sent Hunt, Morant and Lieutenant Charles Hannam, along with about 60 BVC troops of B Squadron, to relieve Robertson and A Squadron, who were to proceed to Pietersberg immediately. Hunt was to assume command of a new base, which was to be established around a portable steel fort about from Sweetwaters Farm, soon dubbed &quot;Fort Edward&quot; after the new king, Edward VII. Hunt&#x27;s command arrived at Sweetwaters Farm on 13 July, and Robertson and most of A Squadron set off for Pietersberg the following day. Only six troopers and a couple of officers from Robertson&#x27;s command remain with Hunt; one of the retained officers was Handcock, based on Taylor&#x27;s recommendation. Eland wrote to his wife that the members of A Squadron had not been glad to see B Squadron, and there were several ugly rumours about the actions of several A squadron members, to the extent that a court martial for murder might be held. Before Hunt left Pietersburg he delivered two polo ponies to Kitchener&#x27;s residence in Pretoria. While there he claimed to have had a discussion with Colonel Hubert Hamilton, Kitchener&#x27;s military secretary, who told him that the Zoutpansberg district was to be cleared of Boers and that no prisoners were to be taken. Once in command of B Squadron, Hunt relayed these instructions to his officers on several occasions, but they continued to bring in prisoners until after his death despite his protestations.

Robertson was given a choice between court martial and resigning his commission. Robertson submitted his resignation and quit the military.

===B Squadron at Fort Edward===

While Fort Edward was being establishedincluding the construction of barbed wire entanglements, picket barricades and entrenchmentspatrolling commenced. A fifteen-man patrol under Hannam departed with four days&#x27; rations on 16 July aiming to deal with restive African people near the Letaba River. On 18 July, a parade and festivities were held to &quot;christen&quot; the fort, and there were several visitors, including the Reverend Fritz Reuter of the Berlin Missionary Society and his family, who ran the nearby Mendingen Mission. Reuter was on good terms with the BVC, probably due to his familiarity with the Eland family. While he was there, Reuter told Hunt that Viljoen&#x27;s commando had established camp in the Duivelskloof (Devil&#x27;s Gully) near the mission, from which they were harassing locals who did not support their cause. This included Eland mother at the family farm at &quot;Ravenshill&quot;. When Reuter and his family returned to the mission, Hunt sent an escort party to protect them and to confirm the location of Viljeon&#x27;s commando. The day after the parade, a twenty-man patrol under Lieutenant Picton left the fort to meet a supply convoy coming from Pietersberg. Upon meeting the convoy, several jars of rum were stolen and two members were arrested. By the time the convoy and accompanying patrol reached Fort Edward, a whole case of rum had been stolen and more arrests were made, including Morrison, who had remained behind as squadron sergeant major of B Squadron when A Squadron departed for Pietersberg. Morrison fled Fort Edward on 24 July, and an eight-man patrol under a Sergeant Gray was sent after him. They caught up with him where the stolen rum had been secreted, and joined him in drinking the rum, after which they rode on to Pietersberg. On arrival at Pietersberg, Lenehan interrogated Morrison and Gray, and after consulting with Hall, he discharged all nine from the BVC, and Morrison and Gray were ordered to leave Pietersberg. However, heavy drinking remained common at Fort Edward under Hunt&#x27;s command.

On 27 July, Hunt and Handcock left Fort Edward in a cart, escorted by Eland and another sergeant. They left just after midday with half an hour&#x27;s notice and headed for the Ellerton gold mine, about from Fort Edward. Hunt expected to meet someone at Fonseca&#x27;s storeabout from Fort Edwardso stayed overnight, but the contact did not appear. They continued on until they encountered the camp of the caretaker of the Ellerton mine, George Anderson, who had recently returned to the district after being expelled by the Boers. He told them of Lobedu people who were causing problems and would not provide any information about Boer movements. He also told them that there was a 300-strong Boer commando on the other side of the Groot Letaba River, and that Viljoen was active in the area. It was decided that Eland would conduct an unarmed liaison mission to the Lobedu people, wearing civilian clothes, as they knew him as a local farmer and were friendly towards him. He would also be able to visit his farm, &quot;Ravenshill&quot; which was in the area, and visit his mother. He received a briefing from one of Taylor&#x27;s intelligence agents, and rode his personal horse which had no military brands. Eland was successful, visited his farm and saw his mother, and also obtained much useful information about Boer movements and some assistance from the Lobedu. On his return to the Ellerton mine camp on 26 July, he was met by a patrol led by Lieutenant Hannam, which escorted him back to Fort Edward, arriving on the morning of 30 July with three Boer prisoners they had collected near Mendingen Mission. When they arrived at Fort Edward, there were few BVC members at the fort, as Morant was out with a patrol to the west and Picton was likewise scouting to the east. Hunt praised Eland&#x27;s work and reported the information he had collected to Taylor who forwarded it to Pietersburg.

When Morant&#x27;s patrol, comprising mixed elements of B Squadron as most of his own troop was otherwise employed, returned to Fort Edward on the morning of 31 July, they brought with them 18 captured Boers, along with their women and children, 15 wagons, 30 rifles and 500 head of cattle. When he reported to Hunt, the squadron commander chastised Morant for bringing them in, and said that if he brought in any more he could feed them with his own rations. Woolmore asserts that Hunt was concerned about depleting his strength with guarding and escort duties, and the impost prisoners made on the limited food available. A day or two later, a BVC scouting patrol located eighteen Boers with twice that number of horses camped about away from Fort Edward, and a large patrol was sent out to engage them.

On 1 August a B Squadron patrol commanded by Picton captured two Boers on horseback about from the fort. The same patrol then set an ambush and subsequently captured seven wagons, two Cape carts, fourteen Boers, about seventeen rifles with ammunition, and about fifty women and children, along with some cattle. Picton&#x27;s patrol then rode after a party of Boers led by a local farmer named Klopper. After stopping at the kraal of a local African chief, they obtained detailed intelligence about the party and caught them completely by surprise, capturing a further thirteen Boers along with many women and children. By this point Picton&#x27;s patrol was from Fort Edward, and on 5 August they began a three-day trek back, slowed down by the wagons and cattle.

In the meantime, on 3 August, Lieutenant George Witton led twenty BVC reinforcementsincluding a replacement for Morrison, Sergeant Major Ernest Hammettfrom Pietersburg to Fort Edward, and they were met a few miles from the fort by Lieutenant Hannam who guided them in. Upon arrival, Witton first met Morant and Handcock. Picton&#x27;s patrol was still on its way back in, and Hunt had just left with seventeen men. During this first month at Fort Edward, Morant and Handcock were cruel to a captured monkeytying it up and shooting at itbut Morant was also kind to Boer children held at Fort Edward prior to their departure for the Pietersburg concentration camp.

===Attack at Duivelskloof and the death of Hunt===
The detachment sent protect Reuter and his family on their return journey had then conducted a reconnaissance patrol to locate Viljoen&#x27;s commando. At dawn on 30 July, BVC Trooper James Christiea New Zealand farmer in his civilian lifehad sent a messenger back to Fort Edward that a Boer laager had been located, with about twenty men with several wagons and carts and livestock to pull them. Information indicated that the laager was being used as a depot for supplies being transferred to a much larger laager in the nearby Modjadji mountains, where Viljoen was camped with between 80 and 100 of his men. It was in response to this information that Hunt had assembled fifteen BVC troops, and set out on the evening of 3 August. Hunt left Morant in command at Fort Edward, and took Eland with him, despite protests from Morant. The initial plan was to ride the due south to Buffelsberg where they would meet Christie, then attack the nearby laager under cover of dark. The force stopped at the Schiel farm, where Hunt arranged for Tony Schiel, one of Taylor&#x27;s intelligence scouts, to accompany them. Shortly after leaving the Schiel farm, some African tribesmen informed Hunt&#x27;s patrol that Viljoen was currently staying at the farmhouse of Wilem Viljoen in the Duivelskloof with a few men. Hunt immediately decided to ride to that location and attack, prioritising killing or capturing Viljoen over attacking the laager Christie&#x27;s patrol had located. In order to strengthen his force, Hunt directed Eland to assemble a force of African tribesmen to assist. Given that Reuter&#x27;s mission was only about from Viljoen&#x27;s farm, the enhanced force then marched and rode through the night to the mission, arriving around 9 pm on 5 August. Upon arrival at Reuter&#x27;s, the missionary was taken aback by Hunt&#x27;s plan to attach the farmhouse, warning Hunt at length about the dangers of attacking the farmhouse, situated as it was in a rocky gully with only two ways in or out. Reuter also told Hunt that not only did Viljoen have fifteen men with him, but there were another forty men at the Botha farm a mere away, who would ride to cut them off as soon as they attacked the Viljoen farm. Hunt thanked Reuter for his assistance and advice, and the force left the mission about 11:30 pm. As they left, Hunt spoke to each of the four sergeants in his patrol, Eland, Gray, Oldham and Robinson, and told them that if he was shot, that they were to get out of the gully containing the Viljoen farmhouse before daylight. 

In the very early hours of the following morning, Hunt&#x27;s force dismounted about away from the Viljoen farmhouse and approached on foot. The building consisted of the living quarters in the centre with stables on either end. Hunt planned to approach the farmhouse, call out to the Boers inside that they were surrounded, and then if they did not do so, he would fire a shot, and Trooper Silke would send the fifty tribesmen forward to rush the farmhouse. In preparation, he sent Silke and his group along the road until they were about behind the farmhouse to await the signal. Another group of tribesmen accompany Schiel to a hill to the rear of the building. With Eland sticking close at his request, Hunt then brought the rest of the force within , and approached the farmhouse himself, accompanied by Eland. Barend Viljoen and his men were aware of the approach of Hunt&#x27;s force, having had scouts watching them for most of the previous day. The Boers were positioned in protected positions around the house and ordered to hold their fire until Viljoen opened fire. Unaware of these preparations, Hunt called on Viljoen to surrender, and firing broke out immediately. Most of the BVC troops immediately took cover, but Hunt ran forward, firing as he went, closely followed by Eland. In the ensuing firefight, Barend Viljoen, his brother Johannes, and another Boer were mortally wounded, and Hunt was about twenty paces from the door of the farmhouse when he was shot in the chest. Eland was also hit, shot through the hips and lower stomach. Silke attempted to send the tribesmen forward to attack, but they retreated instead.

According to the memoirs of Hendrik Adriaan Jacobs, the Viljoen Commando knew that an attack was coming. The members of the Commando, however, were &quot;feverish&quot; from the effects of malaria and fatalistically waited for the arrival of the Bushveldt Carbineers. Jacobs later recalled how he saw Hunt&#x27;s party through a window and began shooting. Possibly mistaking Jacobs&#x27;s first shot for the signal, the BVC and the Lobedu also began shooting and general pandemonium ensued. In an exchange of fire, Captain Hunt was shot through the chest. Sergeant Frank Eland was killed attempting to go to Hunt&#x27;s aid, as was at least one Lobedu warrior. On the Boer side, Barend Viljoen, his brother J.J. Viljoen, and G. Hartzenberg were killed. The dead of both sides were left behind by their retreating comrades.

When the surviving members of the patrol returned to Medingen Mission Station, Rev. Reuter asked them about their officers and &quot;was told a confusing and contradictory story of what had happened&quot;. Decades later, Rev. Reuter&#x27;s daughter recalled in a televised interview, &quot;My father roused on them, asking how they could leave their Captain like that.&quot;

The body of Captain Hunt was later found stripped, with his neck broken, his face stomped on with a hobnailed boot, and with his legs slashed with a knife.

According to Leach, however, Captain Hunt&#x27;s broken neck would be consistent with a fall down the concrete steps after being wounded. The mutilations found on his body were also found on the bodies of the three dead Boers. Both sides blamed the other for the disfigurement of the dead. Hendrik Jacobs, however, believed that Lobedu witch-doctors were to blame. According to historian Charles Leach, accounts by French anthropologist Henri Junod reveal that the traditional practice of the Lobedu people was to disembowel dead and dying warriors on the battlefield to set their spirits free.

The body of Captain Percy Hunt was buried at the Medingen Mission Station, where a cross was later installed by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission. Sergeant Eland was buried at his family&#x27;s homestead, the Ravenshill Farm, after a burial service was read by Rev. Reuter.

==Revenge killings==

When news of Hunt&#x27;s death reached the fort, Morant immediately ordered every available man out on patrol and broke down and cried while giving the news to the men. Captain Taylor then ordered the patrol to avenge the combat death of their captain and to, &quot;Give no quarter&quot;.

Significantly, Morant did not see Hunt&#x27;s body himself; according to Witton, Morant arrived about an hour after the burial. He questioned the men about Hunt&#x27;s death and, convinced that he had been murdered in cold blood, he again vowed to take no prisoners. Witton alleges that Morant then declared that he had, on occasion, ignored Hunt&#x27;s orders to this effect in the past, but that he would carry them out in the future.

===Floris Visser===
On the morning of 9 August 1901, Morant assigned a few men to guard the Mendingen Mission, which George Witton alleges the Boers had threatened to burn down in reprisal for Rev. Reuter&#x27;s ties to the British.

This was true, according to South African historian Arthur Davey; Rev. Reuter, who had served with the Prussian Army during the recent war against France, had repeatedly displeased the Boer Commandos by violating the neutrality expected of missionaries. Even though the missionary had opposed their involvement, some of the Lobedu warriors who fought with Captain Hunt during the attack on the Viljoen Farm were converts to Lutheranism and members of Rev. Reuter&#x27;s congregation. Furthermore, according to a letter from Bushveldt Carbineers officer Alfred Haserick to the mother of Sergeant Frank Eland, Rev. Reuter had supplied the ammunition used in the same attack. According to Davey, it should therefore come as no surprise that General Christian Frederick Beyers, the Commanding Officer of the Soutpansberg and Waterberg Commandos, had threatened Rev. Reuter with dire consequences if he continued to aid the British Army.

After leaving the Mendingen Mission, Lt. Morant led his men back to the Viljoen farmhouse. It had been abandoned, so they tracked the retreating Letaba Commando all day.

Morant continued, leading a patrol consisting of both members of the Bushveldt Carbineers and warriors from the local Lobedu people. That evening, after coming upon the Commando&#x27;s encampment &quot;outspanned in a gully&quot;, the patrol prepared to attack. Morant&#x27;s Afrikaner adjutant, Trooper Theunis Botha, later recalled, &quot;I may say here that for Morant&#x27;s own cowardice the whole of the [Commando] party would have been caught as every other man in the patrol will testify. Instead of going close up as he could easily have done and so closing the cordon, he started firing at 2000 yards and would not go nearer.&quot;

Hearing the shots, the Viljoen Commando scattered. As his comrades fled, 20-year-old Floris Visser, who was unable to walk or ride, was left behind. The Bushveldt Carbineers found him lying under one of the wagons.

Trooper Botha later recalled, &quot;I generally acted as interpreter for Lt Morant. On the evening on which Visser was captured, I acted in that capacity. I asked Visser by Lieutenant Morant&#x27;s request how Capt. Hunt was killed. He replied that he was killed in a fair fight, shot through the chest. Lieutenant Morant said his neck was broken. Visser vehemently denied it. Before commencing to ask these questions, Lieutenant Morant said, &#x27;If you tell the truth your life will be spared; if you tell lies you will be shot.&#x27; He then asked as to the plans of the Boers. Visser replied that the Boers did not intend to stay around there (Little Letaba) but were trekking to the Woodbush to join Beyers&#x27; Commando.&quot;

As the patrol continued their pursuit of the Letaba Commando, Visser was carried along. Trooper Botha continues: &quot;In the morning similar questions were again asked him by Lieutenant Morant, who again promised to spare his life if he answered truthfully. Visser answered every question truthfully as subsequent events proved.&quot;

According to BVC Trooper Edward Powell, &quot;After being captured he was conveyed in a cape cart about fifteen miles. When we outspanned, I heard that Lieutenants Morant, Handcock, and Picton would hold a court-martial and that Visser would probably be shot. Visser was in the cart all the time to the best of my belief and was not present at the court-martial.&quot;

According to Trooper Botha, &quot;When [Henry] Ledeboer told Visser he was about to be shot, I heard Visser remind Lieutenant Morant through the interpreter that he had promised to spare his life if he had answered all his questions. Lieutenant Morant said, &#x27;It is idle talk. We are going to shoot you,&#x27; or words to that effect.&quot;

According to Trooper James Christie, a New Zealander from Clutha on the South Island, when Morant ordered the patrol to form a firing squad, the men objected and one of the Lieutenants shouted, &quot;If you&#x27;re so damn chicken-hearted, I&#x27;ll shoot him myself.&quot;

Before taking his place in the firing squad, Trooper Botha told Trooper Christie about Visser, &quot;I know him good. I went to school with him. I don&#x27;t like to do it, but they will shoot me if I don&#x27;t.&quot;

The squad consisted of BVC Troopers A.J. Petrie, J.J. Gill, Wild, and T.J. Botha. Trooper Christie watched as the Lobedu lifted Visser out of the cape cart in a blanket and laid him down twenty yard away in a sitting position with his back to the firing squad.

Trooper Powell further alleged that the Lobedu danced &quot;the war dance before Visser before he was shot&quot;.

A volley rang out and Visser fell backwards from his sitting position. A coup de grâce was delivered by BVC Lt. Harry Picton.

Lieutenant Morant then approached Trooper Christie and said, &quot;I know it&#x27;s hard times for him, but it&#x27;s got to be done, see how the Boers knocked Captain Hunt about.&quot;

According to Trooper Christie, &quot;I said that Captain Hunt had died a soldier&#x27;s death—that he was killed in a &#x27;fair go&#x27; and beyond being stripped, there was no maltreatment of him and how the Kaffirs might have stripped him. He said no; that Captain Hunt&#x27;s tunic and trousers had been found in the Cape cart. &#x27;But,&#x27; I said, &#x27;the boy was not wearing them.&#x27; &#x27;Anyhow,&#x27; he said, &#x27;its got to be done. It&#x27;s unfortunate that he should be the first to suffer.&#x27; I still held that it was not right to shoot him after carrying him for so far. But as up to this time Morant and I had been good friends, I said no more, but tore off my &#x27;B.V.C.&#x27; badge and cursed such a form of soldiering. Then we saddled up and trekked for home.&quot;

On the orders of the officers, Visser was buried by the Lobedu in a shallow grave near Blas Perreira&#x27;s Shop along the Koedoes River.

Even though Floris Visser had revealed information that placed his comrades at risk, his name was posthumously added to the Soutpansberg Commando&#x27;s Roll of Honour.

On the return journey to the fort, Morant&#x27;s unit stopped for the night at the store of a British trader, a Mr Hays, who was well known for his hospitality. After they left, Hays was raided by a party of Boers who looted everything he owned. When Morant and his men arrived back at Fort Edward, they learned that a convoy under Lieutenant Neel had arrived from Pietersburg the previous day, just in time to reinforce Captain Taylor against a strong Boer force that attacked the fort. During the encounter, one Carbineer was wounded and several horses were shot.

In a letter to Major Wilfred Bolton, Australian BVC Trooper R.M. Cochrane recalled the fallout from Visser&#x27;s murder, &quot;After the shooting of the wounded Boer, F. Visser, the faithful Kaffirs refused to reveal the whereabouts of their Boer masters. Presumably, they tended them themselves in the bush. One Kaffir, when commanded by Capt. Taylor to reveal the whereabouts of a wounded Boer, curtly replied, &#x27;Kona&#x27;, which was a direct refusal. Capt. Taylor shot him dead with his revolver.&quot;

Other killings followed.

===The Eight Boers Case===
On 20 August 1901, Captain Taylor received a report from his agent Henry Ledeboer, saying that eight Boer prisoners had surrendered to him and to BVC Trooper A.S. Petrie near the Swiss-run Elim Hospital. BVC Sergeant J.C. Wrench and a patrol of eight men were sent to intercept the party and to take charge of the prisoners. Before they left, Sgt. Wrench was reminded by BVC Corporal Albert van der Westhuizen, an Afrikaner &quot;joiner&quot;, that Morant had ordered that no more prisoners were to be brought in, as the Troopers would then have to share their rations with them. After taking command of the prisoners, Sgt. Wrench and his patrol had made it as far as the Elim Hospital when they were met by Lts. Morant, Handcock, and Witton, along with Sgt.-Maj. Hammett and Troopers A.W.M. Thompson and A. Ducket.

Lt. Morant ordered Sgt. Wrench and his patrol to return to Fort Edward as an advance guard.

Lt. Morant told Sgt. Wrench&#x27;s patrol to ride on about a mile ahead. Morant also said, &quot;If you hear shots in front of you gallop back to the wagon.&quot;

According to BVC Trooper Albert van der Westhuizen, &quot;He told us to scout as we went along as a large number of Boers were close at hand. We did not scout, as we knew this all to be moonshine.&quot;

As they stopped at Elim Hospital, the Troopers were noticed by Rev. Carl August Daniel Heese of the Berlin Missionary Society&#x27;s Station at Potgietersrus.

At the request of a senior Australian Intelligence Officer named Captain Frederick de Bertodano, Rev. Heese and his driver, a member of the Southern Ndebele people, had travelled from Potgietersrus in to bring Mr. Craig, a British shopkeeper and Army Intelligence Scout, to be treated at the Elim Hospital. But as Rev. Heese and his driver began their journey back home to Potgietersrus, the missionary recognized one of his friends among the eight prisoners.

Only four of the eight prisoners were Afrikaners. The rest were Dutch schoolteachers who had come to the Northern Transvaal on a teaching contract funded in Amsterdam. One of them was W.D. Vahrmeijer, the former head teacher at the Emmanuel School in Potgietersrus.

In a letter to the Berlin Missionary Society, Rev. Heese&#x27;s wife Johanna wrote, &quot;As he turned a corner he saw a wagon with 8 Boers who had surrendered—that is given up their arms, and they were now, as they thought, to be taken to some sort of camp. They were guarded by Lieutenants [Morant] and Handcock of the Sweetwaters Camp and some Australian soldiers who were lying in the grass. Rev. Daniel Hesse recognized one of the prisoners as the head schoolmaster of our village, an extremely nice Dutchman named [Vahrmeijer]... Daniel went straight up and spoke to him. The schoolmaster said that he and the other prisoners were very uneasy as to their ultimate fate, although they had surrendered voluntarily. Daniel comforted them by telling them that nothing could happen to them. The guards became angry with Daniel for speaking to the prisoners, and ordered him to get up onto the wagon and consider himself also a prisoner. Daniel refused, saying that they might have prevented him from approaching the prisoners, that he was in possession of a pass from the commander at Pietersburg allowing him to travel freely, and promised to report himself at the camp and bring his passport with him. The prisoners were then removed...&quot;

Trooper van der Westhuizen later recalled, &quot;We rode leisurely along the road. We travelled about three-quarters of a mile when we heard three shots which were fired by Messes Ledeboer and Schwartz of the Intelligence attached to the BVC. We met them with their rifles so we knew they fired the shots. These shots were fired in accordance with a pre-arranged plan in order to simulate a Boer attack. Immediately we heard those three signal shots in front, we heard the volley fired to our rear and we knew the prisoners were being shot... After hearing the shots we rode on. By Sweetwaters Farm we met Capt. Taylor. He asked Sergt. Wrench if he heard any shots. Sergt. Wrench for private reasons said, &#x27;No,&#x27; as he did not know what Capt Taylor would do if he said he had heard them. Capt. Taylor said, &#x27;All right, go the fort and get off saddle.&#x27;&quot;

The known names of the victims were C.P.J. Smit, M. Logenaar, M. Baaukens, W.D. Vahrmeijer, G.K. Westerhof, B. Wouters, and J.J. Du Preez.

In his memoir &quot;Scapegoats of the Empire&quot;, Lt. George Witton alleges that one of the eight victims, &quot;a big powerful Dutchman&quot;, lunged at him moments before the firing squad started shooting. He claims to have been told by Henry Ledeboer after shooting the Dutchman that the man who lunged at him was &quot;a most notorious scoundrel&quot; and &quot;the head of a band of marauders&quot;. The bodies of all eight victims were then buried in a mass grave.

According to South African historian Charles Leach, the man who lunged at Lt. Witton was Carl P.J. Smit, who was in reality a Deacon at his Dutch Reformed parish. In a signed deposition, Trooper van der Westhuizen said that he believed that the only reason why Carl Smit had been included with the other prisoners was that Henry Ledeboer&#x27;s father-in-law, Monty Ash, owed Smit the sum of £130.

Although the Bushveldt Carbineers later alleged that all eight victims were Commando members, in reality, only five of them, Westerhof, Smit, Logenaar, Du Preez, and Pauskie were added to the Soutpansberg Commando&#x27;s Roll of Honour.

===Rev. Daniel Heese===
About a week later, reports began to circulate that Reverend Heese had been found shot along the Pietersburg road about from the fort on his way to Pietersburg to report the activities of Morant and his group to the British authorities.

Captain de Bertodano later wrote, &quot;To my great surprise, about the last week of August 1901, I received a wire from McWilliams to say that the Mission Station at P.P. Rust urgently required the return of the Rev. Heese. I immediately wired from H.Q. to Fort Edward asking for a full explanation as to why Mr. Heese had been detained for several weeks. The reply made some excuse for this, and said that he was leaving the next day, about 26th or 27th of August. About the 29th August a further wire came to say that the Reverend Heese had been shot by Boers near Bandolier Koopjes, 15 miles from Fort Edward on the Pietersburg Road. That a Predicant (or Missionary) had been shot by Boers was a yarn I could &quot;not&quot; swallow!&quot;

As, &quot;rumours had been seeping in to Pietersburg of the behaviour of the Carbineers&quot;, Captain de Bertodano decided to begin an investigation. He later recalled, however, &quot;We could get no further information from Fort Edward about this affair, as the telegraph line was out of order! It always was when it suited Fort Edward not to communicate.&quot;

In response, Captain de Bertodano dispatched, &quot;two splendid native scouts&quot;, to secretly travel to Fort Edward and question the Black South African boys who worked as servants to the Bushveldt Carbineers and to Captain Taylor&#x27;s staff. Nine days later, one of the scouts returned alone and brought back information about the murders of Boer POWs and the assassination of Rev. Heese. The latter killing had been committed, according to the boys at Fort Edward, by Lieut. Peter Handcock under orders from Morant.

Reverend Krause, the Berlin Missionary Society&#x27;s Superintendent in Pietersburg, was just as skeptical of the official explanation as Captain de Bertodano. As a result, Reverend Krause secretly summoned Pastors Sonntag and Endelmann, arranged for them to receive passes, and sent them to the Bandolierkop area to investigate.

The &quot;Reports of November 1901 of the Mission Head Office in Berlin&quot; later announced, &quot;Their investigation lasted from 8–11 September 1901. They found the grave and marked it with stones and a wooden cross, so that later, when the roads were once again open to free travel, they would be able to find the body again for re-burial at the Makapaanspoort Mission Station. In the same way, they also found the body of the Black servant. He had not yet been buried. So they buried him at the same place where they found him—he was a heathen, Ndebele from Chief Hans Mapala&#x27;s location in Malapong. Otherwise, they could find nothing new that could clarify the murder and the reason for this terrible deed.&quot;

The society later wrote in &quot;Missionhaus Berlin&quot;, &quot;On 30 October the burial of the murdered missionary Heese Jnr. took place at the Swiss Mission Station Elim. Two days previously, his body had been exhumed at the scene of his murder by English soldiers in the presence of the Missionary Gottschling and placed in a coffin lined with tin and taken to Elim. Apart from the Swiss brothers there were several of our missionaries present. On 30 October at 10 AM, ceremonial burial took place. The Swiss missionary, De Meuron, conducted the service. Missionary Gottschling told the life story of the deceased. The missionaries, accompanied by their Swiss brothers and sisters sang funeral songs. An abundance of wreaths came from far and wide. The officers of the English troops in the vicinity also attended the service.&quot;

According to South African historian Charles Leach, &quot;Several eminent South African historians, local enthusiasts and commentators share the opinion that had it not been for the murder of the Reverend Heese, none of the other Bushveldt Carbineers murders would have gone to trial.&quot;

===The Three Boers Case===
Soon afterwards, acting on a report that three armed Boer commandos were travelling to the fort, Morant took Handcock and several other men to intercept them. After the Boers surrendered with a white flag, they were taken prisoner, disarmed and shot.

Later the same day, Major Lenehan arrived at Fort Edward for a rare visit.

Morant persuaded Lenehan to let him command a strong patrol out to search for a small Boer unit commanded by Field-cornet Kelly, an Irish-Boer commando whose farm was in the district. Kelly had fought against the British in the main actions of the war, and after returning to his home he had become a commando rather than surrender.

Morant&#x27;s patrol left Fort Edward on 16 September 1901 with orders from Lenehan that Kelly and his men were to be captured and brought back alive if possible. Covering in a week of hard riding, they left their horses from Kelly&#x27;s laager and went the rest of the way on foot. During the early hours of the next morning, Morant&#x27;s patrol charged the laager, this time taking the Boers completely by surprise; Morant himself arrested Kelly at gunpoint at the door of his tent. A week later, they returned to Fort Edward with the Kelly party and then escorted them safely to Pietersburg. The British commandant, Colonel Hall, sent Morant a message congratulating him on the success of his mission, after which Morant took two weeks&#x27; leave.

===The letter===
On 4 October 1901, a letter signed by 15 members of the Bushveldt Carbineers (BVC) garrison at Fort Edward was dispatched secretly to Col. F.H. Hall, the British Army Officer Commanding at Pietersburg. Written by BVC Trooper Robert Mitchell Cochrane, a former Justice of the Peace from Western Australia, the letter accused members of the Fort Edward garrison of six &quot;disgraceful incidents&quot;:

:1. The shooting of six surrendered Afrikaner men and boys and the theft of their money and livestock at Valdezia on 2 July 1901. The orders had been given by Captains Alfred Taylor and James Huntley Robertson, and relayed by Sgt. Maj. K.C.B. Morrison to Sgt. D.C. Oldham. The actual killing was alleged to have been done by Sgt. Oldham and BVC Troopers Eden, Arnold, Brown, Heath, and Dale.

:2. The shooting of BVC Trooper B.J. van Buuren by BVC Lt. Peter Handcock on 4 July 1901. Trooper van Buuren, an Afrikaner, had &quot;disapproved&quot; of the killings at Valdezia, and had informed the victims&#x27; wives and children, who were imprisoned at Fort Edward, of what had happened.

:3. The revenge killing of Floris Visser, a wounded prisoner of war, near the Koedoes River on 11 August 1901. Visser had been captured by a BVC patrol led by Lieut. Morant two days before his death. After Visser had been exhaustively interrogated and conveyed for 15 miles by the patrol, Lt Morant had ordered his men to form a firing squad and shoot him. The squad consisted of BVC Troopers A.J. Petrie, J.J. Gill, Witton, and T.J. Botha. A coup de grâce was delivered by BVC Lt Harry Picton. The slaying of Floris Visser was in retaliation for the combat death of Morant&#x27;s close friend, BVC Captain Percy Frederik Hunt, at Duivelskloof on 6 August 1901.

:4. The shooting, ordered by Capt. Taylor and Lt. Morant, of four surrendered Afrikaners and four Dutch schoolteachers, who had been captured at the Elim Hospital in Valdezia, on the morning of 23 August 1901. The firing squad consisted of BVC Lt. George Witton, Sgt. D.C. Oldham, and Troopers J.T. Arnold, Edward Brown, T. Dale, and A. Heath. Although Trooper Cochrane&#x27;s letter made no mention of the fact, three Native South African witnesses were also shot dead.

:The ambush and fatal shooting of the Reverend Carl August Daniel Heese of the Berlin Missionary Society near Bandolierkop on the afternoon of 23 August 1901. Rev. Heese had spiritually counselled the Dutch and Afrikaner victims that morning and had angrily protested to Lt Morant at Fort Edward upon learning of their deaths. Trooper Cochrane alleged that the killer of Rev. Heese was BVC Lt Peter Handcock. Although Cochrane made no mention of the fact, Rev. Heese&#x27;s driver, a member of the Southern Ndebele people, was also killed.

:5. The orders, given by BVC Lt Charles H.G. Hannam, to shoot at a wagon train containing Afrikaner women and children who were coming in to surrender at Fort Edward, on 5 September 1901. The ensuing gunfire caused the deaths of two boys, aged five and 13 years, and the wounding of a 9-year-old girl.

:6. The shooting of Roelf van Staden and his sons Roelf and Christiaan, near Fort Edward on 7 September 1901. All were coming in to surrender in the hope of gaining medical treatment for teenaged Christiaan, who was suffering from recurring bouts of fever. Instead, they were met at the Sweetwaters Farm near Fort Edward by a party consisting of Lts. Morant and Handcock, joined by BVC Sgt. Maj. Hammet, Corp. MacMahon, and Troopers Hodds, Botha, and Thompson. Roelf van Staden and both his sons were then shot, allegedly after being forced to dig their own graves.

The letter then accused the Field Commander of the BVC, Major Robert Lenahan, of being &quot;privy to these misdeamenours. It is for this reason that we have taken the liberty of addressing this communication direct to you.&quot; After listing numerous civilian witnesses who could confirm their allegations, Trooper Cochrane concluded, &quot;Sir, many of us are Australians who have fought throughout nearly the whole war while others are Africaners who have fought from Colenso till now. We cannot return home with the stigma of these crimes attached to our names. Therefore we humbly pray that a full and exhaustive inquiry be made by Imperial officers in order that the truth be elicited and justice done. Also we beg that all witnesses may be kept in camp at Pietersburg till the inquiry is finished. So deeply do we deplore the opprobrium which must be inseparably attached to these crimes that scarcely a man once his time is up can be prevailed to reenlist in this corps. Trusting for the credit of thinking you will grant the inquiry we seek.&quot;

===Arrest===
In response to the letter written by Trooper Cochrane, Colonel Hall summoned all Fort Edward officers and noncommissioned officers to Pietersburg on 21 October 1901. All were met by a party of mounted infantry five miles (8 km) outside Pietersburg on the morning of 23 October 1901 and &quot;brought into town like criminals&quot;. Morant was arrested after returning from leave in Pretoria.

Captain de Bertodano later recalled, &quot;One afternoon walking through the Camp, I met Morant out for exercise with a young Lieut. of the Wiltshire Regiment (dark red hair, but whose name I forget)... Morant came up to me and said that his trial for the shooting of the Missionary was a scandal and a disgrace to the Army, that he was innocent, and that he was selected as a victim because he had shot a few damned Boers. &#x27;You are the man who has worked up all the evidence and you ought to be ashamed of yourself for the betrayal of your brother officers.&#x27; I replied very quietly, &#x27;Morant, I am very proud of having been the cause of bringing you to trial. You know in your heart that you and Handcock murdered poor old Heese because you were afraid that he would report the shooting of the Boers in cold blood. But you were such damned fools as not to realise that we had all the evidence without calling on him. We know who is behind it all and has led you by the nose, but we haven&#x27;t got him yet... I don&#x27;t recognize you and that poor fool Handcock as brother officers. You are guilty as Hell and I am glad to help send you there... Where is your boy? He has disappeared. Have you murdered him, too?&#x27; I told the young officer that his prisoner was not allowed to speak to anyone and walked away.&quot;

===Indictments===
The trial transcripts, like all others dating from between 1850 and 1914 but one, were later &quot;destroyed under statute&quot; by the Civil Service. South African historian Arthur Davey, however, considers it far more likely that all the transcripts from those years were &quot;destroyed by the Luftwaffe&quot; during The Blitz. It is known, however, that a Court of Inquiry, the British military&#x27;s equivalent to a grand jury, was convened on 16 October 1901. The president of the court was Col. H.M. Carter, who was assisted by Captain E. Evans and Major Wilfred N. Bolton, the Provost Marshal of Pietersburg. The first session of the court occurred on 6 November 1901 and continued for four weeks. Deliberations continued for further two weeks, at which time it became known that the indictments would be as follows:

:1. In what became known as &quot;The Six Boers Case&quot;, Captains Robertson and Taylor, as well as Sgt. Maj. Morrison, were charged with committing the offence of murder while on active service.

:2. In relation to what was dubbed &quot;The Van Buuren Incident&quot;, Lieut. Handcock was charged with murder and Maj. Lenehan was charged as follows: &quot;When on active service by culpable neglect failing to make a report which it was his duty to make.&quot;

:3. In relation to &quot;The Visser Incident&quot;, Lts. Morant, Handcock, Witton, and Picton were charged with &quot;While on active service committing the offence of murder.&quot;

:4. In relation to what was incorrectly dubbed &quot;The Eight Boers Case&quot;, Lieuts. Morant, Handcock, and Witton were charged with, &quot;While on active service committing the offence of murder.&quot;

:5. In relation to the slaying of Rev Heese, Lts. Morant and Handcock were charged with, &quot;While on active service committing the offence of murder.&quot;

:6. No charges were filed for the three children who had been shot by the Bushveldt Carbineers near Fort Edward.

:7. In relation to what became known as &quot;The Three Boers Case&quot;, Lts. Morant and Handcock were charged with, &quot;While on active service committing the offence of murder.&quot;

In a confidential report to the War Office, Col. J. St. Claire wrote, &quot;I agree generally with the views expressed by the Court of Inquiry in the opinions of the several cases. The idea that no prisoners were to be taken in the Spelonken area appears to have been started by the late Captain Hunt &amp; after his death continued by orders given personally by Captain Taylor.

&quot;The statement that Captain Hunt&#x27;s body had been maltreated is in no way corroborated &amp; the reprisals undertaken by Lt Morant on this idea were utterly unjustifiable.

&quot;Lieut Morant seems to have been the primary mover in carrying out these orders, &amp; Lieut Handcock willingly lent himself out as the principle executioner of them.

&quot;Lieut Morant acquiesced in the illegal execution of the wounded Boer Visser &amp; took a personal part in the massacre of the 8 surrendered Boers on 23 August.

&quot;The two N.C.O.s acted under orders but were not justified in obeying illegal commands. After the murder of Van Buuren, the officers seem to have exercised a reign of terror in the District, which hindered their men from reporting their illegal acts &amp; even prevented their objecting to assist in the crime.&quot;

==Court-martial==
The court-martial of Morant and his co-accused began on 16 January 1902 and was conducted in several stages. Two main hearings were conducted at Pietersburg in relatively relaxed conditions; one concerned the shooting of Visser, the other the &quot;Eight Boers&quot; case. A large number of depositions by members of the BVC were made, giving damning evidence against the accused. For example, a Trooper Thompson stated that, on the morning of the 23rd (1901), he saw a party of soldiers with eight Boers: &quot;Morant gave orders, and the prisoners were taken off the road and shot, Handcock killing two with his revolver. Morant later told me that we had to play into his hands, or else they would know what to expect.&quot; A Corporal Sharp said that he &quot;would walk 100 miles barefoot to serve in a firing squad to shoot Morant and Handcock&quot;.

Soon after the second hearing, the prisoners were put in irons, taken to Pretoria while heavily guarded, and tried on the third main count, that of killing Reverend Heese. Although acquitted of killing Reverend Heese, Morant and his co-accused were quickly sentenced to death on the other two charges. Morant and Handcock were shot 18 hours after sentencing, while Witton&#x27;s sentence was commuted to life imprisonment by Lord Kitchener. Kitchener personally signed Morant&#x27;s and Handcock&#x27;s death warrants. The Field Marshal was absent on tour when the executions occurred.

==Personal life==
Morant claimed, at a Court of Enquiry in South Africa, to have become engaged to a woman in Devonshire, England, with Captain Percy Frederick Hunt becoming engaged to her sister. In 2020, it was revealed through the discovery of four different marriage certificates that Hunt had personally signed, that Morant&#x27;s claims about his trip to England with Hunt were false. Hunt had actually been in Pretoria during Morant&#x27;s given timeline of these events, acting as a marriage commissioner.

==Execution==
On 25 February 1902, Ex-Captain Robertson was sent to personally collect Morant&#x27;s and Handcock&#x27;s death warrants from Lord Kitchener, whose Melrose House Headquarters was very close to Pretoria Prison. According to Robertson, Kitchener signed both death warrants in front of him. As Kitchener handed the documents over, the Commander in Chief glared at the disgraced captain and said, &quot;Think yourself lucky that you&#x27;re not amongst them.

A frantic Major Thomas desperately tried to appeal to Lord Kitchener, but was informed by Major General W.F. Kelly that the Commander-in-Chief was not expected back for several days. Thomas pleaded with Kelly to have the executions stayed until he could appeal to King Edward VII, but the General replied that the sentences had already been referred to England – and confirmed.

According to Charles Leach, &quot;The impact of the sentences was stunning. The Lieutenants requested writing materials, after which letters were immediately written to Kitchener, to family members in Australia, and to the Australian Government. Telegrams were also sent. Some of this mail apparently never even left Pretoria, whilst certain letters did arrive at their destinations.&quot;

When asked if he wanted to see a clergyman, Morant replied indignantly, &quot;No! I&#x27;m a Pagan!&quot; On hearing this, Handcock asked, &quot;What&#x27;s a Pagan?&quot; and after hearing the explanation, declared, &quot;I&#x27;m a Pagan too!&quot;

According to Charles Leach, however, &quot;This is contradictory to the Pretoria Prison Admission Register, where they both indicated their membership in Christian churches: Morant as Ch. of E. (Church of England) and Handcock as R.C. (Roman Catholic).&quot;

As the afternoon wore on, all the prisoners could clearly hear the sound of coffins being built in the nearby workshop. At 16:00 hours, Witton was told he would be leaving for England at five o&#x27;clock the next morning.

Captain de Bertodano later wrote, &quot;The BVC had been abolished. The commanding officer, Major Lenehan, had been sent to Pretoria: Witton says he was under arrest, but I doubt this. A day or two after my return to Pretoria, to my surprise Lenehan sent in his name. He had come, he said, to complain bitterly about the indignity put upon three of his officers in that they had been sent to Pretoria in handcuffs. I looked at him and said, &#x27;You are speaking of three men convicted of murder; they are not officers.&#x27; He was taken aback and made no reply and left the office. I never saw him again. He [Lenehan] was taken to Cape Town, under escort I believe, and shipped to Australia on the first available steamer.&quot;

That night, Morant, Picton, Handcock and Witton had a last supper together; at Morant&#x27;s request, he and Handcock were allowed to spend their last night in the same cell. Morant spent most of the night writing and then penned a final sardonic verse, which he titled, &quot;Butchered to Make a Dutchmen&#x27;s Holiday&quot;.

Morant also wrote a confession which read

:To the Rev. Canon Fisher&lt;br&gt;Pretoria&lt;br&gt;The night before we&#x27;re shot&lt;br&gt;We shot the Boers who killed and mutilated&lt;br&gt;our friend (the best mate I had on Earth)&lt;br&gt;Harry Harbord Morant&lt;br&gt;Peter Joseph Handcock

At 05:00 hours on 27 February, Witton was taken away and was allowed to say a brief farewell to Morant and Handcock, but was only allowed to see them through the small gate in the cell door and clasped hands.

Shortly before 06:00 hours, Morant and Handcock were led out of the fort at Pretoria to be executed by a firing squad from the King&#x27;s Own Cameron Highlanders. Both men refused to be blindfolded; Morant gave his cigarette case to the squad leader. His last words were reported as: &quot;Shoot straight, you bastards! Don&#x27;t make a mess of it!&quot; A contemporary report from &quot;The Argus&quot; on 3 April 1902, however, has his last words as &quot;Take this thing (the blindfold) off,&quot; and on its removal, &quot;Be sure and make a good job of it!&quot; Witton wrote that he was by then at Pretoria railway station and heard the volley of shots that killed his comrades. However, Robert Poore, who attended the execution, wrote in his diary that he put Witton and Lieutenant Picton on the train that left at 05:30 hours. Thus, Witton would have been several miles on the way to Cape Town when the execution occurred.

==Legacy==
The newly federated Australian government demanded an explanation from Kitchener who, on 5 April 1902, sent a telegram to the Australian Governor-General, which was published in its entirety in the Australian press. It reads as follows:

:In reply to your telegram, Morant, Handcock and Witton were charged with twenty separate murders, including one of a German missionary who had witnessed other murders. Twelve of these murders were proved. From the evidence it appears that Morant was the originator of these crimes which Handcock carried out in cold-blooded manner. The murders were committed in the wildest parts of the Transvaal, known as Spelonken, about eighty miles north of Pretoria, on four separate dates namely 2 July, 11 August, 23 August, and 7 September. In one case, where eight Boer prisoners were murdered, it was alleged to have been done in a spirit of revenge for the ill treatment of one of their officers – Captain Hunt – who was killed in action. No such ill-treatment was proved. The prisoners were convicted after a most exhaustive trial, and were defended by counsel. There were, in my opinion, no extenuating circumstances. Lieutenant Witton was also convicted but I commuted the sentence to penal servitude for life, in consideration of his having been under the influence of Morant and Handcock. The proceedings have been sent home.

During 1981, South African historian Dr. C.A.R. Schulenburg wrote to the Public Record Office and was informed by letter that the trial transcripts, like almost all others dating from between 1850 and 1914, had &quot;been destroyed under statute&quot; by the Civil Service between 1923 and 1958.

George Witton was transported to naval detention quarters in England and then to HM Prison Lewes in Sussex. Some time later, he was transferred to HM Prison The Verne in Portland, Dorset, and was released after serving twenty-eight months. His release was announced before the British House of Commons on 10 August 1904. On his release he returned to Australia and for a while lived in Lancefield, Victoria, where he wrote his controversial &quot;memoir&quot; of the Court-martial of Breaker Morant. He published it during 1907 with the provocative title &quot;Scapegoats of the Empire&quot;.

Captain de Bertodano later denounced Witton&#x27;s account, saying, &quot;It is mostly a garbled and untrue version of the facts.&quot; The Captain added, however, that, &quot;When the book was published, it was largely bought up by the Govt. as a false presentation of what occurred.&quot;

Australian historian Craig Wilcox is equally critical. After expressing disgust that Australian law in 1907 could, &quot;allow a murderer to make money from his story&quot;, Wilcox continued, &quot;George Witton&#x27;s &quot;Scapegoats of the Empire&quot; promised to tell the truth about a war crime. Instead the book offered a half-truth, one that painted the perpetrators as the victims and the judges as the villains. The half-truth was what many Australians wanted to hear and Witton&#x27;s book became a rotten prop for a bogus legend that would help Australia win a cultural war of independence.&quot;

In 1929, George Witton revealed in a letter to James Francis Thomas that Peter Handcock had confessed to murdering Rev. Daniel Heese on Morant&#x27;s orders shortly after they were both acquitted in 1902. At the time, Maj. Thomas was still unable to forgive himself for having failed to save Morant and Handcock&#x27;s lives and had continued battling for decades to prove his clients innocence and to keep the case in the public eye. Upon receiving Witton&#x27;s letter and realizing the degree to which his deceased clients had manipulated him, Maj. Thomas was, by all accounts, completely beside himself.

George Witton had a heart attack while cranking his car engine, and died in hospital on 14 August 1942, at the age of 68. He lies buried with his first wife Mary Witton in Brisbane&#x27;s Lutwyche Cemetery.

Alfred Taylor returned to his farm near Plumtree, in Southern Rhodesia. He died of cholecystitis and pneumonia at Bulawayo Memorial Hospital on 24 October 1941. On 31 October 1941, a brief obituary in the &quot;Rhodesian Herald&quot; described Taylor as one of Rhodesia&#x27;s &quot;pioneers&quot;.

According to South African historian Arthur Davey, &quot;If Taylor enriched himself through the acquisition of Boer cattle, his lasting prosperity was not ensured by it. The National Archives, Harare, has correspondence that points to his having sought financial assistance from the Government later in his life. When he died in 1941 the estate that he left was not that of a wealthy farmer.&quot;

Intelligence Scout Henry Ledeboer was never prosecuted for the revenge killings in which he had assisted. He became in later life a well known game ranger at Kruger National Park.

According to Charles Leach, &quot;After the war, Major Wilfred N. Bolton, 2nd Wilts and Provost Marshal of Pietersburg, relinquished his military appointment to become a civilian magistrate. He became Resident Magistrate in Pietersburg and, as such, became involved with some of the descendants of the Bushveldt Carbineers victims. He was deeply committed to the cause of justice by way of compensation for the families of those victims and he soon became well known in the town and surrounding district. The proceeding and handling of the claims involved an exhausting amount of correspondence and bureaucratic dealing with numerous military as well as governmental departments and offices, most of which were located in London. Bolton became admired for his dedication, compassion, and perseverance in that lengthy process that dragged on until 1909 and beyond.&quot;

Despite Morant and Handcock&#x27;s acquittal for the murder of Reverend Heese, the missionary&#x27;s widow, Johanna Heese, received £5000 from the War Office.

According to Charles Leach, &quot;The British military authorities granted compensation to Mrs. Heese for the death of her husband despite the court finding Handcock not guilty. Surely this is also an &#x27;admission&#x27; that the killer was a British soldier? That Handcock was found not guilty by the court for the shooting of both Reverend Heese and his driver was perhaps due to a proper, professional investigation into the murder. The finding of not guilty will never in itself absolve him of suspicion.&quot;

Mrs. Pieternella Jacoba Vahrmeijer, whose school teacher husband had been murdered under Morant&#x27;s orders in the Eight Boers Case, received a £100 down payment followed by another £50 per year.

Mrs. Carel Smit, whose church deacon husband had also been murdered in the Eight Boers Case, received £100, plus an additional £100 for each of her children.

The two daughters of Roelf van Staden, whose father and two brothers had been murdered in the Three Boers Case, received £200 each.

Leach also writes, &quot;After the war, the total number of identified White victims of the Bushveldt Carbineers and the British Army&#x27;s Intelligence Department was pegged at 22. Local research has subsequently revealed at least 36 known victims, both Black and White.&quot;

Even so, the Australian government was so resentful over the executions of Morant and Handcock that they insisted that no Australian soldiers be court-martialled by the British military during World War I. This change in policy is partly credited for no Australian deserters being executed during the First World War.

The graves of Morant and Handcock were left unattended for many years, but after the release of Bruce Beresford&#x27;s movie it became a popular place of pilgrimage for Australian tourists. During June 1998, the Australian Government spent $1,500 refurbishing the gravesite with a new concrete slab. The marble cross which stood over the grave had been vandalised, as had many other gravestones nearby.

The South African Government also erected a series of monuments to mark the locations of some of the incidents, including that of the nighttime battle at Duivelskloof, and the site of the mass grave of the four Afrikaners and four Dutch schoolteachers who were shot on Lt. Morant&#x27;s orders during &quot;The Eight Boers Case&quot;.

According to historian Charles Leach, &quot;During the 2002 Anglo-Boer War Centenary Celebrations, an extremely well planned and presented reenactment of the Court-Martial was produced in Pietersburg. The organizing committee comprising a team of historians and enthusiasts was headed by Prof. Louis Changuinon. Many descendants of the actual victims were present at the &#x27;hearing&#x27;, which took place at the Pietersburg Club, a block away from the house where the actual trial was held. At that part of the hearing when witnesses were called to testify in the Heese case, an element of surprise occurred when Prof. Malie Smuts, granddaughter of Reverend Heese stepped forward and presented items that had been recovered from her grandfather&#x27;s cart by the British military and returned to the Heese family after the war. These items were a small shotgun, a Bible, and a fob watch.&quot;

==Literature on Morant and conflicting theories about the case==

Morant&#x27;s life, exploits, trial and execution have been examined in several books and numerous press and internet articles, but as noted above, each account varies very considerably from the others in both the facts presented and their interpretation. There are facts intermingled with fiction.

The most important primary source, the official record of the court-martial, vanished after the trial, and its location remains a mystery. A report on the case from Kitchener to the Australian Governor-General (published in the Australian press on 7 April 1902) quotes Kitchener as saying that &quot;the proceedings have been sent home&quot; [i.e. to England]. Whatever their actual fate, the transcripts have not been seen since the trial and evidently not even the Australian government was granted access to them.

In the &#x27;Afterword&#x27; to the 1982 reprint of Witton&#x27;s book, G.A. Embleton states that

:...the British authorities have been approached by many researchers eager to examine the transcripts thought to be held by the War Office. Invariably these requests have been met with denials that the documents exist or pronouncements to the effect that they cannot be released until the year 2002 ... It now appears that the papers never reached England ... (it was) recently announced that the court-martial papers had been discovered in South Africa...

A comprehensive record of the trial of Morant and Handcock, complete with a large number of depositions by members of the BVC and other witnesses of the deeds of Morant and Handcock, appears in Arthur Davey&#x27;s publication, &quot;Breaker Morant and the Bushveldt Carbineers&quot;.

During 2012, South African historian Charles Leach published the book &quot;The Legend of Breaker Morant is DEAD and BURIED: A South African version of the Bushveldt Carbineers in the Zoutpansberg, May 1901 – April 1902&quot;. Based upon extensive research, Leach had complete access to unpublished South African sources and the papers of the Viljoen and Heese families.

Joe West, a British Bushveldt Carbineers researcher, wrote in response: &quot;Charles Leach&#x27;s impressive research has revealed that the crimes of Morant and his associates were worse than originally thought. In today&#x27;s day and age Morant and Handcock plus several others would be arraigned before a War Crime Tribunal.&quot;

===Primary sources===

In the absence of the original trial records, three primary sources remain. The first is the report of the trial printed in &quot;The Times&quot; during April 1902; the second is George Witton&#x27;s account of the events of 1901–02, contained in his book &quot;Scapegoats of the Empire&quot;. The third is a letter about the case, written by Witton to Major Thomas during 1929, which was kept secret at Witton&#x27;s request until 1970. In it, Witton suggests that although Handcock confessed to the crimes, he did so under duress.

More recently in 2004, a diary written by Robert Poore, the provost marshal at the time, was unearthed with a record for 7 October 1901. It reads:

Different commentators have taken the diary entry either to mean that an order to take no prisoners did exist, exonerating Morant and Handcock, or that they had clearly acted wrongly by accepting a surrender from the Boers but then shooting them.

===Other accounts===

Wilcox, in &quot;Australia&#x27;s Boer war : the war in South Africa 1899–1902&quot;, states the next important book in creating the Morant myth was Cutlack&#x27;s &quot;Breaker Morant&quot; (1962), a short book as much a cartoon version of reality as &quot;The Bulletin&quot; once presented. Cutlack&#x27;s story, said Wilcox, was based on Witton&#x27;s &quot;Scapegoats&quot; and Frank Fox&#x27;s &quot;Breaker Morant&quot;.

The 1976 book &quot;The Australians at the Boer War&quot; by Australian writer R.L. Wallace gives a concise and reasonably detailed account of Morant&#x27;s military career, trial and execution although it contains almost no information about Morant&#x27;s earlier life and omits a number of significant details contained in Witton&#x27;s account of the events resulting in Morant&#x27;s trial. However, Wallace was writing an overall account of the Australians&#x27; role in South Africa, not the life of Morant, Handcock or Witton.

The most widely known book is the best-selling Australian novel &quot;The Breaker&quot; by Kit Denton, first published in 1973 and inspired by Denton&#x27;s meeting and conversation with a Boer War veteran who had known Morant. Wilcox suggested this book is a follow-on from Cutlack&#x27;s book and helped establish the myth. However, Denton claimed that Morant and Handcock were executed in Pietersburg and buried near that spot. This mistake appeared in his book as late as 1981, and is a possible explanation as to why there is confusion about the location of the execution, i.e., Pretoria or Pietersburg.

Kenneth Ross&#x27;s 1978 successful and widely acclaimed play &quot;Breaker Morant: A Play in Two Acts&quot;, was adapted by Ross and Bruce Beresford into Beresford&#x27;s 1980 movie &quot;Breaker Morant&quot;. The movie was nominated for the 1980 Academy Award for a screenplay adapted from another source.

===Legacy===

Although it is generally accepted that Morant and/or others in his regiment were responsible for the deaths of a number of Boer commandos, historical opinion is still divided over the main questions of the case – how many Boers were killed, by whom were they killed, and on whose orders? In his book, &quot;Born to Fight&quot;, Neil Speed has photos of a number of Canadian Scouts wearing black feathers (pp. 105 &amp; 119), a symbol that they would shoot any armed Boer they captured.

Morant&#x27;s devotees, however, argue that he and Handcock were unfairly singled out for punishment even though many other British soldiers were known to have committed summary executions of Boer prisoners. In their opinion, the two Australians were made scapegoats by the British, who were intent on concealing the existence of the &quot;take no prisoners&quot; policy against Boer insurgents – a policy which, they claim, had been promulgated by Kitchener himself.

However, Hamish Paterson, a South African military historian and a member of the Military History Society, has emphasised that the Bushveldt Carbineers were a British Imperial unit, not an Australian one: technically, the two &quot;Aussies&quot; were British officers.

A 2002 book by Nick Bleszynski, &quot;Shoot Straight, You Bastards&#x27;: The True Story Behind The Killing of &#x27;Breaker&#x27; Morant&quot;, promoted the &quot;scapegoat&quot; argument. It said that while Morant and the others probably committed some crimes and may well have deserved disciplinary action, there is now persuasive evidence from several sources to show that the Kitchener &#x27;no prisoners&#x27; order did indeed exist, that it was widely known among both the British and Australian troops and was performed by many disparate units. It also asserted that the court-martial&#x27;s procedures were flawed.

According to South African historian Arthur Davey, &quot;...Hunt was only 28 when he was killed and therefore younger than his subordinates, Morant and Handcock, and only a year older than the hapless Witton. His tenure as a junior officer in the regular army had been short and it can be supposed that his knowledge of military law was limited. At the courts-martial several witnesses, Sergeant S. Robertson and Lieutenants Morant, Handcock, and Picton mentioned that Hunt had given orders that no prisoners should be taken. Ex-Captain Robertson, giving evidence at the trial of Lenehan, stated that he, Taylor, and Hunt had known the truth about the death of Trooper van Buuren which had been concealed &#x27;in the interest of the corps.&#x27; As the Heese case shows, the veracity of Morant and Handcock is suspect, whilst Captain Robertson was a man who had turned King&#x27;s Evidence, so Hunt&#x27;s reputation remains, as it were, in limbo.&quot;

==Petition==

During 2002, a group of Australians travelled to South Africa and held a service at the Pretoria graveside to commemorate the execution on the morning of its hundredth anniversary. The service was also attended by the Australian High Commissioner to South Africa. The group left a new marker on the grave.

A petition to pardon Morant and Handcock was sent to Queen Elizabeth II during February 2010. The petition has been severely criticised in South Africa, specifically by descendants of the Viljoen brothers who were killed in the skirmish with Hunt and Eland and by the descendants of the family of Rev. Heese.

Hamish Paterson states: &quot;I don’t think they [the Australian supporters of a Morant pardon] have actually considered what Morant was convicted of. Let&#x27;s start off with the laws of war. If for example, we have a surrender. You want to surrender and I don’t accept your surrender, so I choose not to accept it, that I’m entitled to do. [...] However, the situation changes dramatically once I accept your surrender, then I must remove you from the battlefield to a POW camp and keep you safe. If, for example, Kitchener said, &quot;take no prisoners&quot;, that was very different from &quot;shoot prisoners!&quot; So Morant and Handcock made two very basic errors: Once you&#x27;ve accepted the surrender, you take them to the railway line and get them shipped off to Bermuda, or wherever. At that point, the sensible thing to do was to ship them off to a POW camp. The next error was to shoot these guys in front of a neutral witness, and then you kill the witness. These are a series of terrible errors of judgement. Because they killed a German missionary, the Kaiser (became) involved. [...] Technically, the two &quot;Aussies&quot; were British officers. The problem was you were dealing with an unstable set-up in the BVC. It had just been formed. I don&#x27;t see a regular Australian unit behaving that way. I rather suspect why no British guys were shot was that they were either regular army or militia, or yeomanry, all of which are very unlikely to actually shoot prisoners. I think no British were shot because they hadn&#x27;t made the mistake of shooting prisoners who&#x27;d already surrendered.&quot;

Jim Unkles, an Australian lawyer, submitted two petitions during October 2009, one to Queen Elizabeth II and the other to the House of Representatives Petitions Committee, to review the convictions and sentences of Morant, Handcock, and Witton. The petitions were referred to the British Crown by the Australian Attorney General. On Monday, 27 February 2012, in a speech delivered to the House of Representatives on the hundred-and-tenth anniversary of the sentencing of the three men, Alex Hawke, the Member for Mitchell (NSW), described the case for the pardons as &quot;strong and compelling&quot;.

During November 2010, the British Ministry of Defence stated that the appeal had been rejected: &quot;After detailed historical and legal consideration, the Secretary of State has concluded that no new primary evidence has come to light which supports the petition to overturn the original courts-martial verdicts and sentences.&quot; The decision was supported by Australian military historian Craig Wilcox and by South African local historian Charles Leach, but Jim Unkles continues to campaign for a judicial inquiry.

During October 2011, then Australian Attorney General Robert McClelland incorrectly claimed by ABC radio that the executed men did not have legal representation at the Courts Martial. In fact, Major J. F. Thomas represented the men.

Nicola Roxon replaced Robert McClelland as attorney general on 12 December 2011. On 9 May 2012, she indicated that the Australian government would not pursue the issue further with the British, as there was no doubt that the three men had committed the killings for which they were convicted, and the Australian government&#x27;s position is that pardons are appropriate only when an offender is both &quot;morally and technically innocent&quot; of the offence. Roxon also noted the seriousness of the offences involved, explaining that &quot;I consider that seeking a pardon for these men could be rightly perceived as &#x27;glossing over&#x27; very grave criminal acts.&quot; After Roxon&#x27;s announcement, McClelland said he would write to the British government expressing his concern about the lack of procedural fairness for the three accused.

==Discovery of relics==

During April 2016 it was announced that a person searching through rubbish at the council tip in Tenterfield, New South Wales, had recovered a rotting hessian sack containing an old mail bag; this was found to contain numerous items that likely belonged to Morant. The items found included a number of personal effects engraved with Morant&#x27;s name and/or his initials, including a penny on a leather thong, engraved with his name, which has a roughly circular nick on the edge. Other Morant effects contained in the bag included fragments of a trumpet, a bayonet scabbard, a bandolier, a cigarette case, brass drinking cups engraved with the initials HM, army field mess equipment, and a Boer War medal. The cache also included an Australian red ensign. The ensign had been signed by Thomas in ink on one of the white stars and has the following inscription:

&quot;This flag bore witness [to] utter scapegoats of the Empire Feb 27 1902 Pretoria.&quot;

&quot;Signed J F Thomas.&quot;

&quot;Handcock Feb 17 1868 Feb 27 1902 RIP.&quot;

&quot;Lt Henry H Morant Dec 9 1864 Feb 27 1902 Pretoria RIP.&quot;

The bag also contained newspaper clippings and books and papers pertaining to Sir Henry Parkes and the Australian Federation process. A significant quantity of badly damaged documents found in the bag were discarded by the anonymous finder before he realised the significance of the trove. The anonymous finder – known only as &quot;Mr Collector&quot; – subsequently donated the items to Tenterfield&#x27;s Henry Parkes School of Arts museum, where they are now on public display.

==See also==

* Military history of Australia during the Second Boer War

==Footnotes==
==References==
===Books===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===News, journals, gazettes and websites===
* 
* 
* 
* Paterson, A.B, &quot;The Late Lieutenant Morant: A Personal Sketch&quot;, &quot;The Sydney Mail&quot;, (Saturday, 12 April 1902), p. 898.
* Ross, Kenneth, &quot;The truth about Harry&quot;, &quot;The Age&quot;, 26 February 2002. (Written on the hundredth anniversary of Morant&#x27;s execution and the twenty-fourth anniversary of the first performance of his play, the same article appeared in the &quot;Sydney Morning Herald&quot; of 26 February 2002 in almost identical form )
*&#x27;Villains or Victims&#x27; in Australian War Memorial, &quot;Wartime&quot;, Issue No. 18, 2002, pp. 12–16.
*Wilcox, Craig. &#x27;Ned Kelly in Khaki&#x27;, in &quot;The Weekend Australian Magazine&quot;, 23–24 February 2002, pp. 20–22.
*Schulenburg, Dr CAR. &#x27;The Bushveldt Carbineers: a chapter from the Anglo-Boer War&#x27;, in &quot;Historia&quot;, Vol 26(1), May 1981 (in Afrikaans, translated and reworked at geocities.com)

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* Text of &quot;Scapegoats of the Empire&quot; at Project Gutenberg of Australia
* &quot;Move to Bring Morant Home&quot;, &quot;The Canberra Times&quot;, (Friday, 26 September 1980), p. 3.
* Breaker Morant executed</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q903766" start="0" end="13" title="Breaker Morant" label="Harry Harbord"/>
<link wikidata="Q903766" start="20" end="27" title="Breaker Morant" label="Breaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q903766" start="34" end="40" title="Breaker Morant" label="Morant"/>
<link wikidata="Q903766" start="47" end="66" title="Breaker Morant" label="Edwin Henry Murrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="111" end="118" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="119" end="127" title="Equestrianism" label="horseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001430" start="129" end="140" title="bush ballad" label="bush ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="145" end="161" title="officer (armed forces)" label="military officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="167" end="179" title="war crime" label="war criminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="230" end="246" title="prisoners-of-war" label="prisoners-of-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="322" end="337" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775100" start="360" end="383" title="History of Australia (1851–1900)" label="the Australian colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401203" start="465" end="475" title="Colony of Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348382" start="477" end="492" title="Colony of New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413679" start="497" end="512" title="Colony of South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55215647" start="644" end="675" title="South Australian Mounted Rifles" label="South Australian Mounted Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17378201" start="840" end="848" title="corporal" label="corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="884" end="892" title="sergeant" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422947" start="929" end="943" title="despatch rider" label="despatch rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="1102" end="1112" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017508" start="1143" end="1163" title="Bushveldt Carbineers" label="Bushveldt Carbineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="1185" end="1198" title="court-martial" label="court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712140" start="1438" end="1453" title="revenge killing" label="revenge killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188201" start="1468" end="1472" title="Boer" label="Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q134907" start="1513" end="1531" title="Northern Transvaal" label="Northern Transvaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q59919267" start="1571" end="1591" title="James Francis Thomas" label="James Francis Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454723" start="1629" end="1638" title="acquittal" label="acquitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q153817" start="1690" end="1705" title="superior orders" label="superior orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752350" start="1847" end="1864" title="summary execution" label="summary execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178311" start="1868" end="1881" title="Floris Visser (Boer War)" label="Floris Visser"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="1922" end="1931" title="Afrikaner" label="Afrikaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563421" start="2038" end="2059" title="Soutpansberg Commando" label="Soutpansberg Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="2089" end="2107" title="death penalty" label="sentenced to death"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376630" start="2131" end="2145" title="Peter Handcock" label="Peter Handcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217458" start="2204" end="2228" title="Daniel Heese" label="Carl August Daniel Heese"/>
<link wikidata="Q821648" start="2267" end="2292" title="Berlin Missionary Society" label="Berlin Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q216169" start="2596" end="2608" title="firing squad" label="firing squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413987" start="2618" end="2637" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Cameron Highlanders" label="Cameron Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q84164296" start="2692" end="2701" title="folk hero" label="folk hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959434" start="2895" end="2905" title="Breaker Morant (play)" label="stage play"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824505" start="2927" end="2946" title="Australian New Wave" label="Australian New Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195774" start="2947" end="2951" title="Breaker Morant (film)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q449220" start="2964" end="2979" title="Bruce Beresford" label="Bruce Beresford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="3185" end="3191" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q245122" start="3320" end="3329" title="scapegoat" label="scapegoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q978293" start="3353" end="3368" title="judicial murder" label="judicial murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="3445" end="3451" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723503" start="3841" end="3855" title="Alfred Taylor (British Army officer)" label="Captain Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q914015" start="3956" end="3966" title="Bridgwater" label="Bridgwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="3968" end="3976" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q628155" start="4183" end="4192" title="Workhouse" label="Workhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374463" start="4457" end="4491" title="Royal Masonic Institution for Boys" label="Royal Masonic Institution for Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="4532" end="4540" title="classics" label="classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087138" start="4542" end="4551" title="Dictation (exercise)" label="dictation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255221" start="4556" end="4565" title="elocution" label="elocution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394526" start="4902" end="4925" title="SS Waroonga (1882)" label="SS &amp;quot;Waroonga&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q190021" start="4944" end="4954" title="Townsville" label="Townsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971466" start="5078" end="5093" title="British subject" label="British subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775100" start="5174" end="5193" title="History of Australia (1851–1900)" label="Australian colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825062" start="5225" end="5251" title="Australian nationality law" label="Australian nationality law"/>
<link wikidata="Q838247" start="5317" end="5324" title="defense (law)" label="defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q59919267" start="5340" end="5360" title="James Francis Thomas" label="James Francis Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q390216" start="5468" end="5493" title="The Sydney Morning Herald" label="The Sydney Morning Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q47928" start="5726" end="5732" title="circus" label="circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207703" start="5733" end="5738" title="rodeo" label="rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020266" start="5786" end="5801" title="Charters Towers" label="Charters Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="5920" end="5926" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743503" start="5985" end="5993" title="Stockman (Australia)" label="stockman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010448" start="6026" end="6040" title="Burdekin River" label="Burdekin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540278" start="6086" end="6095" title="governess" label="governess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157679" start="6097" end="6119" title="Daisy Bates (author)" label="Daisy May O&amp;#x27;Dwyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="6345" end="6351" title="Pound sterling" label="pounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q80042" start="6677" end="6683" title="cheque" label="cheque"/>
<link wikidata="Q987260" start="6787" end="6798" title="Dishonoured cheque" label="dishonoured"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026409" start="6840" end="6846" title="Winton, Queensland" label="Winton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773904" start="6968" end="6982" title="anthropologist" label="anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="7151" end="7156" title="Pseudonym" label="alias"/>
<link wikidata="Q157165" start="7174" end="7182" title="creditor" label="creditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="7231" end="7236" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538534" start="7271" end="7290" title="George Digby Morant" label="George Digby Morant"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="7298" end="7308" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376570" start="7808" end="7824" title="Peter FitzSimons" label="Peter FitzSimons"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089213" start="7950" end="7969" title="Royal Naval College, Greenwich" label="Royal Naval College"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348382" start="8095" end="8110" title="Colony of New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413679" start="8115" end="8130" title="Colony of South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q848937" start="8162" end="8175" title="Horse training" label="horse-breaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308654" start="8177" end="8183" title="Drover (Australian)" label="drover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594327" start="8185" end="8195" title="Roustabout" label="rouseabout"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825159" start="8197" end="8208" title="Australian rodeo" label="rough rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905705" start="8210" end="8222" title="horse trader" label="horse trader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="8224" end="8241" title="journalist" label="bush newspaperman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707847" start="8243" end="8253" title="bookkeeper" label="bookkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391362" start="8258" end="8266" title="storeman" label="storeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="8299" end="8311" title="Equestrianism" label="horsemanship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300237" start="8328" end="8341" title="Steeplechase (horse racing)" label="steeplechaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q134211" start="8346" end="8350" title="polo" label="polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q880676" start="8643" end="8651" title="Blackall, Queensland" label="Blackall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432729" start="8751" end="8766" title="false pretences" label="false pretences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944072" start="8781" end="8791" title="Muttaburra" label="Muttaburra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373376" start="8872" end="8883" title="hard labour" label="hard labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q606162" start="8887" end="8898" title="Rockhampton" label="Rockhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="9216" end="9226" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001430" start="9454" end="9465" title="bush ballad" label="bush ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025604" start="9537" end="9549" title="The Bulletin (Australian periodical)" label="The Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577332" start="9567" end="9576" title="sobriquet" label="sobriquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q453577" start="9800" end="9812" title="Henry Lawson" label="Henry Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q436699" start="9814" end="9828" title="Banjo Paterson" label="Banjo Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329577" start="9834" end="9846" title="William Henry Ogilvie" label="Will Ogilvie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591703" start="10078" end="10088" title="Hawkesbury River" label="Hawkesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="10109" end="10115" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q850232" start="10181" end="10187" title="brumby" label="brumby"/>
<link wikidata="Q133333" start="10542" end="10551" title="Fox hunting" label="hunt club"/>
<link wikidata="Q31944" start="10655" end="10666" title="Mahdist War" label="Mahdist War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726699" start="10704" end="10721" title="Henry Parke Airey" label="Henry Parke Airey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002140" start="10862" end="10873" title="Tenterfield, New South Wales" label="Tenterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q385155" start="10981" end="10988" title="Penrith, New South Wales" label="Penrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887424" start="11012" end="11032" title="Public intoxication" label="drunk and disorderly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494248" start="11036" end="11046" title="Springwood, New South Wales" label="Springwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q667529" start="11061" end="11075" title="Blue Mountains (New South Wales)" label="Blue Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q708245" start="11079" end="11086" title="summons" label="summons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="11569" end="11578" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q56850459" start="11582" end="11590" title="Colony of Victoria" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="11628" end="11636" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q746623" start="11741" end="11748" title="Renmark, South Australia" label="Renmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q183078" start="11756" end="11768" title="Murray River" label="Murray River"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="12075" end="12090" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q55215647" start="12219" end="12250" title="South Australian Mounted Rifles" label="South Australian Mounted Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519246" start="12338" end="12352" title="The Advertiser (Adelaide)" label="The Advertiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270089" start="12512" end="12546" title="King&amp;#x27;s Regulations" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s rules and regulations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12555" end="12580" title="Articles of War#British Army" label="rules and articles of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840570" start="12660" end="12691" title="Governor of South Australia" label="South Australia&amp;#x27;s governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q335965" start="12693" end="12714" title="Hallam Tennyson, 2nd Baron Tennyson" label="Hallam, Lord Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="12725" end="12746" title="Alfred, Lord Tennyson" label="Alfred, Lord Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755189" start="12749" end="12760" title="Marble Hill, South Australia" label="Marble Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q17378201" start="12866" end="12874" title="corporal" label="corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q550374" start="12911" end="12920" title="South African Republic" label="Transvaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="12972" end="12981" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021731" start="13029" end="13036" title="Prieska" label="Prieska"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="13044" end="13055" title="Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q216129" start="13107" end="13122" title="Herbert Kitchener, 1st Earl Kitchener" label="Baron Kitchener"/>
<link wikidata="Q743069" start="13149" end="13155" title="De Aar" label="De Aar"/>
<link wikidata="Q125905" start="13198" end="13207" title="Kimberley, Northern Cape" label="Kimberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q37701" start="13238" end="13250" title="Bloemfontein" label="Bloemfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="13322" end="13330" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="13337" end="13350" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q335008" start="13351" end="13364" title="Frederick Roberts, 1st Earl Roberts" label="Baron Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544390" start="13366" end="13384" title="Lieutenant general (United Kingdom)" label="Lieutenant General"/>
<link wikidata="Q335059" start="13385" end="13396" title="John French, 1st Earl of Ypres" label="John French"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937193" start="13611" end="13624" title="Boer commando" label="Boer commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422947" start="14010" end="14024" title="despatch rider" label="despatch rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743678" start="14097" end="14110" title="Joseph Maria Gordon" label="Joseph Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896333" start="14153" end="14168" title="Bennet Burleigh" label="Bennet Burleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q164236" start="14174" end="14191" title="war correspondent" label="war correspondent"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="14212" end="14227" title="Daily Telegraph" label="Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q335008" start="14654" end="14666" title="Frederick Roberts, 1st Earl Roberts" label="Lord Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q889394" start="14714" end="14736" title="Portuguese East Africa" label="Portuguese East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="14779" end="14785" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q12665" start="15204" end="15223" title="Robert Baden-Powell, 1st Baron Baden-Powell" label="Robert Baden-Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18166379" start="15227" end="15253" title="South African Constabulary" label="South African Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q27948809" start="15423" end="15433" title="Percy Frederick Hunt" label="Percy Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549457" start="15482" end="15494" title="13th Hussars" label="13th Hussars"/>
<link wikidata="Q335059" start="15710" end="15721" title="John French, 1st Earl of Ypres" label="John French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="16298" end="16307" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378411" start="16351" end="16369" title="Belmond Mount Nelson Hotel" label="Mount Nelson Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692051" start="16840" end="16853" title="Agent-General" label="Agent-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q676357" start="16884" end="16891" title="Premier of South Australia" label="premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q15493771" start="16897" end="16910" title="John Cockburn (Australian politician)" label="John Cockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="16942" end="16954" title="officer (armed forces)" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059552" start="17099" end="17116" title="The Observer (Adelaide)" label="Adelaide Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958841" start="18490" end="18526" title="Death and state funeral of Queen Victoria" label="funeral procession of Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196345" start="19782" end="19794" title="bittereinder" label="bittereinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="19886" end="19904" title="Guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531654" start="20001" end="20008" title="general (British Army)" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q760037" start="20087" end="20104" title="counterinsurgency" label="counterinsurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q55137114" start="20251" end="20270" title="Second Boer War concentration camps" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q134907" start="20629" end="20647" title="northern Transvaal" label="northern Transvaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110404" start="20682" end="20694" title="Zoutpansberg" label="Zoutpansberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673189" start="20769" end="20778" title="irregular military" label="irregular"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150702" start="20787" end="20803" title="mounted infantry" label="mounted infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252814" start="20887" end="20902" title="provost marshal" label="provost marshal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21472" end="21489" title="Brigadier (United Kingdom)#Historical rank of brigadier-general" label="Brigadier General"/>
<link wikidata="Q336040" start="21490" end="21504" title="Herbert Plumer, 1st Viscount Plumer" label="Herbert Plumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131662" start="21568" end="21579" title="Pietersburg" label="Pietersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111613" start="21649" end="21658" title="Nylstroom" label="Nylstroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q326927" start="22488" end="22501" title="Potgietersrus" label="Potgietersrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587335" start="22896" end="22911" title="Royal Artillery" label="Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265327" start="23044" end="23062" title="Gordon Highlanders" label="Gordon Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374959" start="23097" end="23115" title="Wiltshire Regiment" label="Wiltshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723503" start="23326" end="23339" title="Alfred Taylor (British Army officer)" label="Alfred Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q173017" start="23589" end="23602" title="Limpopo River" label="Limpopo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q978191" start="23644" end="23658" title="Olifants River (Limpopo)" label="Olifants River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116423" start="24411" end="24423" title="Chuniespoort" label="Chuniespoort"/>
<link wikidata="Q852661" start="26450" end="26458" title="adjutant" label="adjutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q21484965" start="27088" end="27097" title="Hlanganani, Limpopo" label="Spelonken"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376630" start="27176" end="27190" title="Peter Handcock" label="Peter Handcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643251" start="27215" end="27241" title="Christiaan Frederik Beyers" label="Christiaan Frederik Beyers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27374" end="27383" title="John Thomas Kelly" label="Tom Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642875" start="27529" end="27540" title="Ben Viljoen" label="Ben Viljoen"/>
<link wikidata="Q252661" start="29165" end="29175" title="white flag" label="white flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="32274" end="32284" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927320" start="32999" end="33014" title="Hubert Hamilton" label="Hubert Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="33393" end="33406" title="court martial" label="court martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q982692" start="33818" end="33830" title="Letaba River" label="Letaba River"/>
<link wikidata="Q821648" start="33989" end="34014" title="Berlin Missionary Society" label="Berlin Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q83376" start="34777" end="34780" title="rum" label="rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633488" start="36152" end="36165" title="Lobedu people" label="Lobedu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009332" start="36337" end="36355" title="Groot Letaba River" label="Groot Letaba River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="44165" end="44172" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44541" end="44552" title="Frank Eland" label="Frank Eland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875082" start="45276" end="45283" title="hobnail" label="hobnail"/>
<link wikidata="Q125675" start="45770" end="45781" title="Henri-Alexandre Junod" label="Henri Junod"/>
<link wikidata="Q778417" start="45847" end="45857" title="disembowelment" label="disembowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="46045" end="46079" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q641319" start="46497" end="46512" title="No quarter" label="Give no quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q706042" start="47296" end="47309" title="Prussian Army" label="Prussian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="47328" end="47346" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="war against France"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937193" start="47378" end="47391" title="Boer Commando" label="Boer Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="47617" end="47628" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643251" start="47939" end="47965" title="Christian Frederick Beyers" label="Christian Frederick Beyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247470" start="47971" end="47989" title="Commanding Officer" label="Commanding Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563421" start="47997" end="48009" title="Soutpansberg Commando" label="Soutpansberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42723413" start="48014" end="48032" title="Waterberg Commando" label="Waterberg Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="48112" end="48124" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563164" start="48272" end="48287" title="Letaba Commando" label="Letaba Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633488" start="48416" end="48429" title="Lobedu people" label="Lobedu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="48574" end="48583" title="Afrikaner people" label="Afrikaner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48602" end="48615" title="Theunis Botha" label="Theunis Botha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401607" start="48681" end="48690" title="cowardice" label="cowardice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178311" start="49026" end="49039" title="Floris Visser (Boer War)" label="Floris Visser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643251" start="49863" end="49869" title="Christian Frederick Beyers" label="Beyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q42723413" start="49876" end="49884" title="Waterberg Commando" label="Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="50436" end="50449" title="court-martial" label="court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="50578" end="50591" title="court-martial" label="court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q871904" start="50985" end="50998" title="New Zealand people" label="New Zealander"/>
<link wikidata="Q804717" start="51004" end="51010" title="Balclutha, New Zealand" label="Clutha"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="51018" end="51030" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q216169" start="51073" end="51085" title="firing squad" label="firing squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q524931" start="51891" end="51904" title="coup de grâce" label="coup de grâce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51930" end="51942" title="Harry Picton" label="Harry Picton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285250" start="52342" end="52348" title="Kaffir (racial term)" label="Kaffir"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563421" start="53197" end="53218" title="Soutpansberg Commando" label="Soutpansberg Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318423" start="53847" end="53857" title="Australian people" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217458" start="55722" end="55746" title="Daniel Heese" label="Carl August Daniel Heese"/>
<link wikidata="Q821648" start="55754" end="55779" title="Berlin Missionary Society" label="Berlin Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q326927" start="55798" end="55811" title="Potgietersrus" label="Potgietersrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318423" start="55841" end="55851" title="Australian people" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262802" start="55887" end="55909" title="Frederick de Bertodano" label="Frederick de Bertodano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972827" start="55954" end="55977" title="Southern Ndebele people" label="Southern Ndebele people"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="56339" end="56344" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="56432" end="56441" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318423" start="56889" end="56899" title="Australian people" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131662" start="57628" end="57639" title="Pietersburg" label="Pietersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q216169" start="58986" end="58998" title="firing squad" label="firing squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q734271" start="59268" end="59278" title="mass grave" label="mass grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="59407" end="59413" title="Deacon" label="Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351981" start="59421" end="59435" title="Dutch Reformed Church in South Africa" label="Dutch Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563421" start="59872" end="59893" title="Soutpansberg Commando" label="Soutpansberg Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="61189" end="61198" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q821648" start="61836" end="61861" title="Berlin Missionary Society" label="Berlin Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q131662" start="61887" end="61898" title="Pietersburg" label="Pietersburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62111" end="62123" title="Bandolierkop" label="Bandolierkop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62747" end="62755" title="Malapong" label="Malapong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104692" start="64466" end="64478" title="Field Cornet" label="Field-cornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q92409" start="64930" end="64936" title="laager" label="laager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017508" start="65519" end="65539" title="Bushveldt Carbineers" label="Bushveldt Carbineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247470" start="65630" end="65648" title="Officer Commanding" label="Officer Commanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q131662" start="65652" end="65663" title="Pietersburg" label="Pietersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="65723" end="65743" title="Justice of the Peace" label="Justice of the Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="65749" end="65766" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="65902" end="65911" title="Afrikaner people" label="Afrikaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q14806526" start="65971" end="65979" title="Valdezia" label="Valdezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723503" start="66034" end="66047" title="Alfred Taylor (British Army officer)" label="Alfred Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376630" start="66318" end="66332" title="Peter Handcock" label="Peter Handcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712140" start="66562" end="66577" title="revenge killing" label="revenge killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="66606" end="66621" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoner of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q216169" start="66883" end="66895" title="firing squad" label="firing squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q524931" start="66997" end="67010" title="coup de grâce" label="coup de grâce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302331" start="67185" end="67197" title="Duivelskloof" label="Duivelskloof"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="67315" end="67320" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102017" start="67465" end="67478" title="George Witton" label="George Witton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217458" start="67736" end="67760" title="Daniel Heese" label="Carl August Daniel Heese"/>
<link wikidata="Q821648" start="67768" end="67793" title="Berlin Missionary Society" label="Berlin Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972827" start="68187" end="68210" title="Southern Ndebele people" label="Southern Ndebele people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071514" start="69128" end="69143" title="Field Commander" label="Field Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318423" start="69463" end="69474" title="Australian people" label="Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="69540" end="69550" title="Afrikaner people" label="Africaners"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="70554" end="70562" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374959" start="70705" end="70723" title="Wiltshire Regiment" label="Wiltshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974879" start="72058" end="72071" title="Civil Service (United Kingdom)" label="Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="72219" end="72228" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="72242" end="72251" title="The Blitz" label="The Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="72344" end="72354" title="grand jury" label="grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252814" start="72508" end="72523" title="Provost Marshal" label="Provost Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q106678742" start="75044" end="75060" title="Criminal order (international law)" label="illegal commands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="76240" end="76248" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027678" start="76670" end="76683" title="execution warrant" label="death warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="76864" end="76874" title="Devonshire" label="Devonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27948809" start="76898" end="76918" title="Percy Frederick Hunt" label="Percy Frederick Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="77171" end="77179" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027678" start="77390" end="77403" title="death warrant" label="death warrant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77844" end="77854" title="W.F. Kelly" label="W.F. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="78004" end="78019" title="Edward VII of the United Kingdom" label="King Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="78603" end="78608" title="Paganism" label="Pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="78957" end="78974" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927208" start="78998" end="79012" title="Roman Catholic Church in Australia" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247470" start="79318" end="79336" title="commanding officer" label="commanding officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="79370" end="79378" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="79880" end="79889" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="79930" end="79939" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413987" start="80939" end="80974" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Cameron Highlanders" label="King&amp;#x27;s Own Cameron Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937243" start="81202" end="81211" title="Cape Argus" label="The Argus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242184" start="81418" end="81442" title="Pretoria railway station" label="Pretoria railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348969" start="81508" end="81520" title="Robert Poore" label="Robert Poore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="81706" end="81715" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="81761" end="81798" title="Federation of Australia" label="newly federated Australian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="82442" end="82450" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505035" start="83196" end="83216" title="Public Record Office" label="Public Record Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974879" start="83382" end="83395" title="Civil Service (United Kingdom)" label="Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635219" start="83501" end="83516" title="HM Prison Lewes" label="HM Prison Lewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="83520" end="83526" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635277" start="83567" end="83586" title="HM Prison The Verne" label="HM Prison The Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q774215" start="83590" end="83598" title="Isle of Portland" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="83600" end="83606" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q936713" start="83806" end="83826" title="Lancefield, Victoria" label="Lancefield, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178311" start="83887" end="83918" title="Court-martial of Breaker Morant" label="Court-martial of Breaker Morant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102017" start="83981" end="84005" title="Scapegoats of the Empire" label="Scapegoats of the Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84327" end="84339" title="Craig Wilcox (historian)" label="Craig Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503371" start="84391" end="84405" title="Australian law" label="Australian law"/>
<link wikidata="Q59919267" start="84963" end="84983" title="James Francis Thomas" label="James Francis Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376630" start="84989" end="85003" title="Peter Handcock" label="Peter Handcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217458" start="85036" end="85048" title="Daniel Heese" label="Daniel Heese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="85545" end="85557" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="85697" end="85712" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706001" start="85713" end="85730" title="Lutwyche Cemetery" label="Lutwyche Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723503" start="85733" end="85746" title="Alfred Taylor (soldier)" label="Alfred Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974068" start="85773" end="85781" title="Plumtree, Zimbabwe" label="Plumtree"/>
<link wikidata="Q750583" start="85786" end="85803" title="Southern Rhodesia" label="Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q376666" start="85816" end="85829" title="cholecystitis" label="cholecystitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="85834" end="85843" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193250" start="85847" end="85855" title="Bulawayo" label="Bulawayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q309481" start="85922" end="85930" title="obituary" label="obituary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85944" end="85960" title="Rhodesian Herald" label="Rhodesian Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860554" start="86207" end="86224" title="National Archives of Zimbabwe" label="National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921" start="86226" end="86232" title="Harare" label="Harare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712140" start="86495" end="86510" title="revenge killing" label="revenge killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q24451" start="86590" end="86610" title="Kruger National Park" label="Kruger National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252814" start="86701" end="86716" title="Provost Marshal" label="Provost Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315443" start="86814" end="86833" title="Resident Magistrate" label="Resident Magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="87335" end="87341" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q708438" start="88313" end="88325" title="down payment" label="down payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017508" start="88745" end="88765" title="Bushveldt Carbineers" label="Bushveldt Carbineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="89126" end="89137" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q449220" start="89348" end="89363" title="Bruce Beresford" label="Bruce Beresford"/>
<link wikidata="Q734271" start="89844" end="89854" title="mass grave" label="mass grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="90861" end="90866" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q849813" start="90874" end="90883" title="fob watch" label="fob watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348969" start="93925" end="93937" title="Robert Poore" label="Robert Poore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15503607" start="95355" end="95365" title="Kit Denton" label="Kit Denton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390122" start="95874" end="95886" title="Kenneth G. Ross" label="Kenneth Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959434" start="95942" end="95976" title="Breaker Morant (play)" label="Breaker Morant: A Play in Two Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q449220" start="96008" end="96023" title="Bruce Beresford" label="Bruce Beresford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195774" start="96063" end="96077" title="Breaker Morant (film)" label="Breaker Morant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96117" end="96180" title="Academy Award for Writing Adapted Screenplay#1980s" label="1980 Academy Award for a screenplay adapted from another source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156796" start="98273" end="98287" title="junior officer" label="junior officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q641319" start="98544" end="98572" title="take no prisoners" label="no prisoners should be taken"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345608" start="99247" end="99264" title="High Commissioner" label="High Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="99378" end="99396" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717151" start="101748" end="101758" title="Alex Hawke" label="Alex Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973776" start="101775" end="101783" title="Division of Mitchell" label="Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818607" start="102413" end="102440" title="Attorney-General for Australia" label="Australian Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5981237" start="102441" end="102458" title="Robert McClelland (Australian politician)" label="Robert McClelland"/>
<link wikidata="Q518856" start="102621" end="102633" title="Nicola Roxon" label="Nicola Roxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002140" start="103596" end="103624" title="Tenterfield, New South Wales" label="Tenterfield, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607143" start="104686" end="104702" title="Sir Henry Parkes" label="Sir Henry Parkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857558" start="105106" end="105162" title="Military history of Australia during the Second Boer War" label="Military history of Australia during the Second Boer War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880526" wikidata="Q1782677" url="?curid=880526" title="Pegasus Bay">
<text>Pegasus Bay, earlier known as Cook&#x27;s Mistake, is a bay on the east coast of the South Island of New Zealand, to the north of Banks Peninsula.

==Toponymy==

Pegasus Bay takes its name from the brig &quot;Pegasus&quot;, a sealing ship that was sailing from Hobart to London via the &quot;sealing islands&quot; and was surveying this part of the South Island in 1809. Attempting to sail into Gore&#x27;s Bay shown on Captain Cook&#x27;s map between the supposed &quot;Island&quot; that Cook had named after Banks, the crew discovered a mistake in Cook&#x27;s chart and found the island was a peninsula connected to the rest of the South Island mainland by a low-lying isthmus. Fortunately they discovered this before trying to pass between the supposed island and the mainland before dark while approaching from the north and were still in about of water. Captain Chace (or Chase) and his first officer William Stewart, who had also surveyed Stewart Island on the same journey, were reported in the Oriental Navigator in 1816. Charts made of this part of New Zealand from the 1809 survey give the names Cook&#x27;s Mistake or Pegasus Bay to this large bay.

Māori do not divide this part of the coast in the same way, so there is no equivalent Māori name. However, the sandy beach on the shoreline between the Ashley River and Avon Heathcote Estuary is known as &quot;Kairaki&quot; (which is an ancient name of unknown meaning for the Pacific). While a fishing ground to the east of Pegasus Bay is known as &quot;Komaka a Te KaiKai a Waro&quot; meaning &quot;the foodstore belonging to KaiKai a Waro&quot;.

==Geography==
Pegasus Bay lies on the east coast of the South Island of New Zealand, between the Motunau River and Motunau Island in the north and Banks Peninsula in the south. The bay is nearly across and deep, with of water that gradually shoals to about or about from shore. The northern part of the coast are mostly cliffs, with stony or sandy beaches at low tide. The bay has a sandy beach that runs for about from about the Waipara River mouth to the Christchurch suburbs of Sumner and Scarborough on Banks Peninsula.

===Rivers===
Rivers flowing into Pegasus Bay, from north to south, are:
*Motunau River
*Waipara River
*Ashley River / Rakahuri
*Waimakariri River
*Avon River / Ōtākaro and Ōpāwaho / Heathcote River via the Avon Heathcote Estuary / Ihutai

==Fauna==

Other than dolphins including the endemic, endangered Hector&#x27;s dolphins that regularly live or visit into the waters, whales such as southern right and humpback are known to migrate into the gulf.

==Discovery==

The &quot;Pegasus&quot; was the name of the sailing ship which surveyed part of the South Island in 1809. The brig &quot;Pegasus&quot; was the former &quot;Pegaso&quot;, captured at the Peruvian port of Trujillo on 28 July 1807 by the British frigate , commanded by Captain Charles James Johnston, during a cruise against Spanish shipping and ports along the coasts of Spanish America. Johnston dispatched &quot;Pegaso&quot; to Port Jackson, where she arrived at the end of October. Submitted to the Court of Admiralty in Sydney, &quot;Pegaso&quot;, was condemned as a prize on 24 January 1808 and sold off, renamed &quot;Pegasus&quot;. A few months later she was acquired by Thomas Moore and in May of that year she was made ready to go on the sealing trade to the southern part of New Zealand. This expedition took place between August 1808 and March 1809, when &quot;Pegasus&quot; was commanded by Captain Eber Bunker. &quot;Pegasus&quot; went on a second expedition under the command of Samuel Chase from Port Jackson to London by way of the sealing grounds in southern New Zealand from May 1809 to August 1810: William W. Stewart was first officer and made charts of the New Zealand coast, including Stewart Island, which was subsequently named after him. William Stewart gave Pegasus Bay its name. The captain of the ship, Captain Samuel Chase (not to be confused with his contemporary, Captain Samuel Rodman Chace), lays claim to correcting James Cook&#x27;s charts by determining that &quot;Banks Island&quot; was in fact a peninsula. As late as 1843, the bay was referred to as Cook&#x27;s Mistake.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1782677" start="0" end="11" title="Pegasus Bay" label="Pegasus Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782677" start="30" end="49" title="Pegasus Bay" label="Cook&amp;#x27;s Mistake"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="85" end="97" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q806836" start="130" end="145" title="Banks Peninsula" label="Banks Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q202539" start="198" end="202" title="brig" label="brig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="1161" end="1166" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q791272" start="1330" end="1352" title="Avon Heathcote Estuary" label="Avon Heathcote Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918757" start="1708" end="1721" title="Motunau River" label="Motunau River"/>
<link wikidata="Q11990130" start="1726" end="1740" title="Motunau Island" label="Motunau Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q806836" start="1758" end="1773" title="Banks Peninsula" label="Banks Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355754" start="2041" end="2054" title="Waipara River (Canterbury)" label="Waipara River"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="2068" end="2080" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070280" start="2092" end="2098" title="Sumner, New Zealand" label="Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16899849" start="2103" end="2114" title="Scarborough, New Zealand" label="Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q806836" start="2118" end="2133" title="Banks Peninsula" label="Banks Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918757" start="2209" end="2222" title="Motunau River" label="Motunau River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355754" start="2224" end="2237" title="Waipara River (Canterbury)" label="Waipara River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805576" start="2239" end="2262" title="Ashley River / Rakahuri" label="Ashley River / Rakahuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535123" start="2264" end="2281" title="Waimakariri River" label="Waimakariri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q791289" start="2283" end="2303" title="Avon River / Ōtākaro" label="Avon River / Ōtākaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q927271" start="2308" end="2333" title="Ōpāwaho / Heathcote River" label="Ōpāwaho / Heathcote River"/>
<link wikidata="Q791272" start="2342" end="2373" title="Avon Heathcote Estuary / Ihutai" label="Avon Heathcote Estuary / Ihutai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="2397" end="2404" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q300961" start="2440" end="2461" title="Hector&amp;#x27;s dolphin" label="Hector&amp;#x27;s dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="2509" end="2514" title="whale" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q244410" start="2524" end="2538" title="southern right whale" label="southern right"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="2543" end="2551" title="Humpback whale" label="humpback"/>
<link wikidata="Q202539" start="2714" end="2718" title="brig" label="brig"/>
<link wikidata="Q214173" start="2807" end="2815" title="Trujillo, Peru" label="Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q54504" start="3032" end="3044" title="Port Jackson" label="Port Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331764" start="3513" end="3524" title="Eber Bunker" label="Eber Bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580635" start="3720" end="3738" title="William W. Stewart" label="William W. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q41684" start="3809" end="3823" title="Stewart Island" label="Stewart Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="4052" end="4062" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880528" wikidata="Q5494538" url="?curid=880528" title="Fred Barnes (performer)">
<text>Frederick Jester Barnes (31 May 1885 – 23 October 1938) was an English music hall singer known for his signature song, &quot;The Black Sheep of the Family&quot;, which he first performed in 1907. Although popular on stage, Barnes became infamous for his erratic private life and was often named in frequent controversies reported by the press. Openly gay, Barnes retired to Southend-on-Sea and performed in seaside pubs, notably The Cricketers Hotel, Westcliff-on-Sea. Suffering from terminal tuberculosis and alcoholism, Barnes died from coal gas poisoning at the age of 53.

==Biography==
===Life and career===
Barnes was born at 219 Great Lister Street, Saltley, Birmingham, England. The son of a butcher, Barnes became interested in performing as a result of going to see Vesta Tilley in 1895. Encouraged by the popular pantomime performer Dorothy Ward, he made his debut at the Gaiety Theatre, Birmingham in March 1906, and gave his first notable performance playing the Duke of Solihull in &quot;Cinderella&quot; at the Alexandra Theatre, Birmingham, the same year. It was while starring in the pantomime that Barnes acquired his first agent and attracted the attention of another Birmingham-born music hall artist, George Lashwood, who, in Fred&#x27;s own words, &#x27;took me in hand... [placed] at my disposal, free and unasked, the lessons of his long and brilliant career&#x27;.

It was following Cinderella&#x27;s fourteen-week run that Barnes first performed in London, persuaded by fellow cast members, The Eight Lancashire Lads, to travel with them. Upon his arrival, Barnes played the hated first slot on the bills. However, this was to change when he decided to try out a new song which he had written, &quot;The Black Sheep of the Family&quot;, at the Hackney Empire in 1907. It was a huge success and was to remain Barnes&#x27; most popular song. As Barnes said in his account of his life (&#x27;How success ruined me&#x27;), his name was &#x27;made in a single night&#x27;. With this impressive start to his career he spent the next few years establishing himself. By 1911, he was top of the bill on all of the major circuits and principal boy in a number of pantomimes.

In 1913, his father committed suicide. Two weeks later, Barnes performed at the Birmingham Hippodrome, &#x27;a place full of memories of my father. To this day I don&#x27;t know how I got through that week&#x27;. The &quot;Birmingham Gazette&quot; of 30 August commented, &#x27;Fred Barnes has this week proved the hollowness of the old saying that an artiste is never appreciated in his own town. He has gone a long way towards packing the house at every performance at the Hippodrome&#x27;. Following his father&#x27;s death, Fred&#x27;s career continued to improve, and he toured widely, including visits to Australia and South Africa. His other successful songs included &quot;Give Me the Moonlight&quot; (1917) and &quot;On Mother Kelly&#x27;s Doorstep&quot;.

===Private life===
Barnes was openly gay. In an interview with &quot;The Era&quot; in 1914, he stated that he had no vacant dates for the next three years and held contracts for the next ten. This was when his personal problems, namely spending and drinking too much, began. He attributed these to dealing with both the death of his father and his newfound success and popularity. The large sums of money he was earning and which he inherited led him to begin spending extravagantly – a habit he found hard to break when he was no longer earning any money. But it was drinking which was to ruin Barnes&#x27; career. He missed performances, went on stage incapable of singing or dancing and generally put less and less care into his performances. This led to his being moved to a less and less desirable position on the bill until he was finally back at first turn. Managers grew wary of him and soon his outstanding contracts were paid off and he was without work altogether. He experienced extremes of success and failure, and escaped to London from his father and his father&#x27;s lifestyle as a young gay man.

===Scandal and controversies===
In 1924, Barnes was sentenced to a month in jail for driving in Hyde Park while drunk and in a dangerous manner and without a licence. Following the arrest, he was deemed a &quot;menace to His Majesty&#x27;s fighting forces&quot; (because of the topless sailor who had been travelling with him at the time of the accident), and was banned from attending the Royal Tournament, an annual military tattoo. Despite this, he returned each year and successfully evaded discovery.

===Later life and death===
By the mid 1930s, Barnes was suffering from tuberculosis. His failing health led him and his lover and manager John Senior to move to Southend-on-Sea. By this time any work consisted of playing the piano in pubs while Senior collected tips. Barnes&#x27;s rent was paid for by Charles Ashmead Watson, while also funding lighting and clothing costs, as well as giving them a weekly allowance of 30 shillings. Barnes made a number of attempts to return to the stage, most of which were unsuccessful; a final job in the summer of 1938, playing his songs in the Cricketers Inn, Westcliff-on-Sea, restored some of his confidence in his own ability. By the winter of that year, he was told that he had three months to live causing the comedian to commit suicide soon after.

Barnes died at his lodgings in St Ann&#x27;s Road, Southend-on-Sea, on 23 October 1938. An inquest found that the cause of death was from the effects of coal gas poisoning, though the gas tap had been turned off, and suicide was ruled out.

When the jury at the inquest into Barnes&#x27;s death commented that Watson had been &quot;wonderful&quot;, he replied &quot;He was a great man&quot;. Naomi Jacob shared the view, and opined that Watson &quot;had one of the kindest hearts in the world and was a fine artist and no mean dancer&quot;. The &quot;Era&quot; commented on Barnes&#x27;s &quot;singularly pleasing popularity&quot;. His funeral on 2 November 1938, was attended by hundreds of people at St Saviour&#x27;s Church, Saltley with nearby streets crowded with mourners.

Barnes was free with facts in interviews and in his own account of his life; his numerous publicity stunts which included announcements of his &#x27;near-death&#x27; in a fire and a fake marriage. On occasion, he was known to walk around London at the height of his success with a marmoset perched on his shoulder (later, playing the pubs in Southend, he made do with a chicken).

On 18 October 2021 a blue plaque commemorating Fred Barnes was erected by the British Music Hall Society and unveiled by their then President Paul O&#x27;Grady, at Barnes&#x27; former home in Maida Vale.

==Bibliography==
* Paul Bailey, &quot;The wavy-haired, blue-eyed adonis : Fred Barnes (1885-1938)&quot;. In: &quot;Three queer lives : an alternative biography of Fred Barnes, Naomi Jacob and Arthur Marshall&quot; (London : Hamish Hamilton, 2001) p. 33-66
* Anthony Barker, &quot;Music Hall magazine&quot;, issue MH30

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5494538" start="0" end="23" title="Fred Barnes (performer)" label="Frederick Jester Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q940462" start="71" end="81" title="music hall" label="music hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="351" end="354" title="homosexual" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q203995" start="374" end="389" title="Southend-on-Sea" label="Southend-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584915" start="451" end="467" title="Westcliff-on-Sea" label="Westcliff-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="493" end="505" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="510" end="520" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q842311" start="539" end="547" title="coal gas" label="coal gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406147" start="657" end="664" title="Saltley" label="Saltley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="666" end="676" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063684" start="776" end="788" title="Vesta Tilley" label="Vesta Tilley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17415327" start="844" end="856" title="Dorothy Ward" label="Dorothy Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q11841" start="1002" end="1012" title="Cinderella" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005267" start="1026" end="1055" title="Alexandra Theatre (Birmingham)" label="Alexandra Theatre, Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344174" start="1142" end="1147" title="Casting Agent" label="agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541548" start="1222" end="1237" title="George Lashwood" label="George Lashwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731652" start="1517" end="1542" title="The Eight Lancashire Lads" label="The Eight Lancashire Lads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637363" start="1770" end="1784" title="Hackney Empire" label="Hackney Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916717" start="2272" end="2293" title="Birmingham Hippodrome" label="Birmingham Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916701" start="2415" end="2433" title="Birmingham Gazette" label="Birmingham Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q109236299" start="2873" end="2894" title="Give Me the Moonlight" label="Give Me the Moonlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536142" start="2918" end="2949" title="On Mother Kelly&amp;#x27;s Doorstep" label="On Mother Kelly&amp;#x27;s Doorstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="2995" end="2998" title="homosexual" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124996" start="3027" end="3034" title="The Era (newspaper)" label="The Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="3823" end="3831" title="Management" label="Managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q123738" start="4169" end="4178" title="Hyde Park, London" label="Hyde Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374927" start="4463" end="4479" title="Royal Tournament" label="Royal Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q13156702" start="4491" end="4506" title="military tattoo" label="military tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203995" start="4741" end="4756" title="Southend-on-Sea" label="Southend-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584915" start="5180" end="5196" title="Westcliff-on-Sea" label="Westcliff-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q203995" start="5426" end="5441" title="Southend-on-Sea" label="Southend-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964648" start="5767" end="5778" title="Naomi Jacob" label="Naomi Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q19291263" start="6077" end="6110" title="St Saviour&amp;#x27;s Church, Saltley" label="St Saviour&amp;#x27;s Church, Saltley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19829485" start="6436" end="6444" title="marmoset" label="marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="6557" end="6568" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q86750577" start="6614" end="6640" title="British Music Hall Society" label="British Music Hall Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416917" start="6678" end="6695" title="Paul O&amp;#x27;Grady" label="Paul O&amp;#x27;Grady"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880533" wikidata="Q5723950" url="?curid=880533" title="Henry John Andrews">
<text>Henry John Andrews (23 March 1871 – 22 October 1919) was an English recipient of the Victoria Cross, the highest award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces.

==Details==
Andrews was commissioned a temporary lieutenant in the Indian Medical Service as of 30 June 1917 and was promoted temporary captain as of 30 June 1918.

He was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire as (temporary Lieutenant), Indian Medical Service; Medical Officer in charge of the Thomas Emery Hospital at Moradabad, United Provinces in the London Gazette of 7 June 1918.

He was 48 years old, and a temporary captain in the Indian Medical Service, British Indian Army during the Waziristan Campaign when the following deed took place for which he was awarded the VC. The citation was published in a supplement to the &quot;London Gazette&quot; of 7 September 1920 (dated 9 September 1920):

He was buried in Bannu Cemetery, and is commemorated on the Delhi Memorial (India Gate).

==References==
==External links==

*Burial location of Henry Andrews &quot;Pakistan&quot;
*Salvation Army entry</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5723950" start="0" end="18" title="Henry John Andrews" label="Henry John Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="85" end="99" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="193" end="205" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480461" start="282" end="304" title="Indian Medical Service" label="Indian Medical Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="399" end="440" title="Member of the Order of the British Empire" label="Member of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="654" end="661" title="Captain (land)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="693" end="712" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976949" start="724" end="743" title="Waziristan campaign 1919–1920" label="Waziristan Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137581" start="868" end="882" title="London Gazette" label="London Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q806916" start="953" end="958" title="Bannu" label="Bannu"/>
<link wikidata="Q245347" start="996" end="1023" title="India Gate" label="Delhi Memorial (India Gate)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880534" wikidata="Q5008855" url="?curid=880534" title="CASCAR Super Series">
<text>The CASCAR Super Series was Canada&#x27;s premier stock car touring division. It was sanctioned by CASCAR. The series ended after the 2006 season after NASCAR purchased CASCAR, and NASCAR used it as the basis for the NASCAR Pinty&#x27;s Series.

General Tire served as the series&#x27; title sponsor from 1988 to 1990, followed by Budweiser in 1993. Castrol held the naming rights from 1994 to the final season in 2006.

A western counterpart called the CASCAR West Super Series began racing in 1992, replacing CASCAR&#x27;s Hobby Stock division. In addition to being its own championship, the West Super Series conducted combination races with the national series.

==Past champions==

* * – All events held at Delaware Speedway

==Tracks==
==References==
==External links==
* Canadian Racing Online web site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5008855" start="4" end="23" title="CASCAR Super Series" label="CASCAR Super Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930981" start="99" end="105" title="CASCAR" label="CASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="152" end="158" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791387" start="217" end="243" title="NASCAR Pinty&amp;#x27;s Series" label="NASCAR Pinty&amp;#x27;s Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q369128" start="246" end="258" title="General Tire" label="General Tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q610672" start="331" end="340" title="Budweiser (Anheuser-Busch)" label="Budweiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049970" start="350" end="357" title="Castrol" label="Castrol"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880535" wikidata="Q5608522" url="?curid=880535" title="Greyworld">
<text>Greyworld are a collective of London-based artists who create public-activated art, sculpture and interactive installations. Although often varied in their materials, their work is typically subtle and environmentally reflective, often allowing participants the opportunity to play through the work. The following descriptions are of a few selected artworks.

== Beginnings ==

In 1993, Andrew Shoben founded art group Greyworld in Paris. Their goal was to create works that articulated public spaces, allowing some form of self-expression in areas of the city that people can see every day but would normally exclude and ignore. Greyworld are now based in London, with permanent works in many major cities around the world.

== Works ==

=== Railings (1996) ===
Their first public work of art was a series of temporary installations, &quot;Railings&quot; (1996), first created in Paris and widely copied. In each case greyworld took a set of ordinary street railings and tuned them so that when you run a stick or an umbrella along them, rather than making the &#x27;clack-clack-clack&#x27; sound as expected, they played &quot;The Girl from Ipanema&quot;. Often created without permission, several instances of this installation have been removed.

=== Playground (1999) ===
&quot;Bridge 2&quot;, drew on ideas that Greyworld had explored in a previous work of art &quot;Playground&quot;, installed in the Yorkshire Sculpture Park in the UK. Visitors to the sculpture park stumbled across what looked like a deserted playground with faded markings for mysterious games and benches for spectators. All the elements of the installation, the floor of the playground and the accompanying benches, were sensitised with tiny sensors so that as people crossed the floor they triggered the sound of people playing a game whilst as others sitting on the bench found themselves immersed in the sound of spectators cheering and clapping. The installation is a permanent feature of the sculpture park.

=== Bridge 2 (2000) ===
Most of their early installations were sound based. In 2000, they took the Millennium Bridge which spans the Liffey River in Dublin, Ireland, and installed a bright blue carpet across its length. Embedded into the carpet were hundreds of tiny sensors that translated the motion of people crossing the bridge into a vibrant soundscape. One moment it sounded as if people were walking through crunchy snow, the next that they were sploshing through water, or walking across fallen leaves.

=== The Source (2004) ===
Although they have built up a rich history of acclaimed works since their formation in 1993, their most celebrated piece so far is probably &quot;The Source&quot; – a permanent installation for the new London Stock Exchange: A cube of 9×9×9 (729 in total) spherical balls are suspended on cables that run the full 32 metres height of the main atrium of the newly designed building. These spheres, controlled by a computer running Python scripts, can move themselves independently of each other, forming dynamic shapes, characters and fluid-like motions that reflects the nature of the stock market itself. The sculpture opens the market each morning at 8am, with the spheres breaking free from their default cube arrangement to form elegant patterns and shapes.

Throughout the day the sculpture responds to reputable news feed and displays snapshots of the current headlines, written in full height of the atrium. At the end of each day&#x27;s trading the spheres return to their cubed arrangement, resting on the sculpture&#x27;s base, and blue lights inside each sphere are illuminated to show the stock market&#x27;s closing price with an arrow to indicate how the market performed on that particular day. Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II unveiled the sculpture on 27 July 2004 and the opening was broadcast to a global audience. The installation is broadcast every morning on television to an estimated global audience of 80 million people. It was nominated for an Interactive BAFTA award in 2005.

=== Trace (2005) ===

&quot;Trace&quot; (2005) is a work created for the maze at Hampton Court Palace, UK. Drawing on its history and on the idea of a maze as a place of furtive conversation and flirtation, Greyworld have created a gentle soundwork that affects the visitors&#x27; experience of their journey from entrance to the centre and back again. As visitors pass through the many green corridors of the maze, they are tempted to follow tantalising sounds – a fragment of music, a snatch of laughter, the seductive rustle of fine silks or the whispers of an illicit conversation as it disappears around a corner and into a dead-end. Slowly the sounds weave together in the visitors mind to create a rich tapestry of the other people who have passed through the maze over the centuries and lost themselves in the seductive privacy of its secluded corners.

=== Bins and Benches (2005) ===
Later that year they also created &quot;Bins and Benches&quot; a permanent installation for a public square in Cambridge, UK. It features a group of animated street furniture that roam free, like buffalo, in the urban savannah of their square. When it rains the benches seek shelter under the nearby trees, inviting people to sit on them. As the temperature drops the bins start to shiver and when the sun shines the bins and benches break into song, singing in tight barbershop harmonies. Above all the bins and benches are still functional pieces of street furniture waiting for people to come and sit on them or deposit rubbish in their lids.

=== Worldbench (2005) ===

&quot;Worldbench&quot; (2005) is an installation that uses a park bench to link up locations across the world. It takes an ordinary wooden bench and places it up against a screen, attached to a wall in the school&#x27;s playground. Reflected on the screen is the mirror image of the bench, disappearing into the distance; but whilst one side of the bench is in South London for example, the other could be in the north of England, or the other side of the world. Four Worldbenches have been created, with many more to be installed around the globe.

=== Monument to the Unknown Artist (2007) ===
In 2007, Greyworld launched Monument to the Unknown Artist beside the Tate Modern on London&#x27;s Bankside. A permanent installation, it garnered the interest of the world&#x27;s media.
At first glance the installation would appear to be a simple bronze statue, dressed in a neck scarf and loose fitting suit. However, the monument seeks inspiration from passers-by, inviting them to strike poses which he copies, continually changing his form in a light-hearted and mischievous way. The unique sculpture offers an alternative and accessible creative experience for the public, allowing them to create a dialogue with the work of art.

=== Bloom (2007) ===

Their installation for a new Fosters and partners development in London&#x27;s Spitalfields launched in 2007. Occupying the full height of the building&#x27;s central 10-storey atrium it uses hundreds of flowers, hidden within a seemingly sober column suspended within the space, to allow the building to bloom into life. They respond to the motion of those passing by, opening and closing, thus allowing every viewer interaction and influence over their environment.

=== Invisible (2007) ===

In 2006 Channel 4 chose 7 sites across the United Kingdom to be part of The Big Art project. Burnley, East Lancashire was one of seven sites chosen to take part. 15 young people from throughout the region commissioned the artist group Greyworld to create a piece of public art in the town. The artwork, called &quot;Invisible,&quot; is a series of nineteen ultraviolet paintings placed around the town center displaying &quot;public heroes&quot; – outstanding local citizens who have left their mark in the town. The glowing paintings are best seen at night time. They appear as the nights grow longer, throughout the year.

=== Clockwork Forest (2011) ===
A series of clockwork keys appeared throughout the Ridding Wood trail, in the Grizedale Forest, UK in October 2011. Each key, when turned, generated a music box melody, that can be heard coming from the branches. A permanent work, it was commissioned by the National Forestry Commission.

=== Trafalgar Sun (2012) ===

For their most recent artwork, greyworld created a large spherical self illuminated &quot;Sun&quot; which was installed in Trafalgar Square, London for one day only. Weighing 2.5 tons, and using 210,000 watts of power, the Sun illuminated the Square for three hours after sunset.
==References==
==External links==
* Greyworld Official website
* Chris O&#x27;Shea interviews Greyworld
* Icon magazine feature on Greyworld
* We-make-money-not-art has lunch with Greyworld
* Bubbletank (2003) experiment
* Bruce Sterling blogs about Railings (1996) for Wired Magazine
* Trafalgar Sun report</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5608522" start="0" end="9" title="Greyworld" label="Greyworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="30" end="36" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="79" end="82" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="84" end="93" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758568" start="387" end="400" title="Andrew Shoben" label="Andrew Shoben"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="432" end="437" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q830576" start="1129" end="1150" title="The Girl from Ipanema" label="The Girl from Ipanema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136272" start="1408" end="1432" title="Yorkshire Sculpture Park" label="Yorkshire Sculpture Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858800" start="2092" end="2109" title="Millennium Bridge (Dublin)" label="Millennium Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="2733" end="2754" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="2961" end="2967" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="3753" end="3771" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q205666" start="4114" end="4134" title="Hampton Court Palace" label="Hampton Court Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="7359" end="7368" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="7394" end="7408" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717484" start="7423" end="7442" title="The Big Art project" label="The Big Art project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880538" wikidata="Q1754263" url="?curid=880538" title="Tremulant (EP)">
<text>Tremulant is the debut EP release by progressive rock band The Mars Volta, released on April 2, 2002, on Gold Standard Labs. Produced by Alex Newport, the EP marks the only appearance of founding bassist Eva Gardner until the release of The Mars Volta&#x27;s self-titled album in 2022. A remastered version of the EP was released on April 16, 2014.

==Recording==
Regarding the EP&#x27;s recording sessions, bassist Eva Gardner stated in 2009, &quot;We were in Long Beach somewhere, and it was a really exciting time because it was just this new music. It was a new project for these guys, so they were almost really excited about it. It was great. We did three songs, and it was so fun for me too because it was the first time I had actually been in a more professional... I had done recordings before, but it was just home studios with friends and stuff. This was a more established group. It was fun to be in a professional studio, and to play with really, really great musicians.&quot;

==Song information==
&quot;Concertina&quot;, often regarded as the centerpiece of the EP, is rumoured to be a brutal condemnation of Ben Rodriguez, a former bandmate of Cedric and Omar&#x27;s from At the Drive-In, whom Cedric and Omar regarded as a sociopath. According to interviews conducted with the band, they held Rodriguez responsible for tormenting Julio Venegas to the point where he committed suicide. The band later re-recorded the song alongside &quot;Eunuch Provocateur&quot;. (The re-recording of &quot;Concertina&quot; has yet to surface on an official release, however it can be listened to on YouTube).

The backwards vocals at the end of &quot;Eunuch Provocateur&quot; are the lyrics from the song &quot;Itsy Bitsy Spider&quot;. Other backwards vocals in the same song can be heard saying &quot;did mommy or daddy ever have to spank you?&quot;. These samples come from an old LP the band used that contained children&#x27;s songs. Other notable lyrics in &quot;Eunuch Provocateur&quot; include the lines, &quot;Dethroned by the comatorium... de-loused by the comatorium&quot;, which foreshadow the Mars Volta&#x27;s debut full-length album, &quot;De-Loused in the Comatorium&quot;. Additionally, the title of the EP itself is drawn from the concept story of &quot;De-Loused in the Comatorium&quot;, referring to the &quot;tremulants&quot;, creatures that dwell inside the mind of Cerpin Taxt, the main character.

==Track listing==
==Production==
*Recorded in Long Beach, California from October to December 2001.
*Produced by Alex Newport and The Mars Volta.
*Album production design and layout by Sonny Kay and Omar Rodríguez-López.

==Personnel==
*Omar Rodríguez-López – guitar, percussion, electronics
*Cedric Bixler-Zavala – vocals, percussion
*Ikey Owens – keyboards
*Jeremy Ward – sound manipulation
*Jon Theodore – drums
*Eva Gardner – bass

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="23" end="25" title="extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="37" end="53" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q484993" start="59" end="73" title="The Mars Volta" label="The Mars Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110013" start="105" end="123" title="Gold Standard Labs" label="Gold Standard Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132593" start="204" end="215" title="Eva Gardner" label="Eva Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q113496847" start="237" end="276" title="The Mars Volta (album)" label="The Mars Volta&amp;#x27;s self-titled album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132593" start="416" end="427" title="Eva Gardner" label="Eva Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="461" end="471" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q690904" start="1188" end="1203" title="At the Drive-In" label="At the Drive-In"/>
<link wikidata="Q366886" start="1240" end="1249" title="Psychopathy" label="sociopath"/>
<link wikidata="Q287262" start="1347" end="1360" title="Julio Venegas" label="Julio Venegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="1393" end="1400" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q759432" start="1712" end="1729" title="Itsy Bitsy Spider" label="Itsy Bitsy Spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q287262" start="2155" end="2182" title="De-Loused in the Comatorium" label="De-Loused in the Comatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="2249" end="2262" title="concept album" label="concept story"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="2468" end="2490" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q484993" start="2552" end="2566" title="The Mars Volta" label="The Mars Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562057" start="2607" end="2616" title="Sonny Kay" label="Sonny Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q335579" start="2621" end="2641" title="Omar Rodríguez-López" label="Omar Rodríguez-López"/>
<link wikidata="Q335579" start="2659" end="2679" title="Omar Rodríguez-López" label="Omar Rodríguez-López"/>
<link wikidata="Q707708" start="2715" end="2735" title="Cedric Bixler-Zavala" label="Cedric Bixler-Zavala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132412" start="2758" end="2768" title="Isaiah Ikey Owens" label="Ikey Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061870" start="2782" end="2793" title="Jeremy Ward (musician)" label="Jeremy Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132384" start="2816" end="2828" title="Jon Theodore" label="Jon Theodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132593" start="2838" end="2849" title="Eva Gardner" label="Eva Gardner"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880546" wikidata="Q7189962" url="?curid=880546" title="Pi Kappa Phi">
<text>Pi Kappa Phi (), commonly known as Pi Kapp(s), is an American Greek Letter secret and social fraternity. It was founded by Andrew Alexander Kroeg Jr., Lawrence Harry Mixson, and Simon Fogarty Jr. on December 10, 1904 at the College of Charleston in Charleston, South Carolina. The fraternity has 187 active chapters (168 chartered chapters and 19 associate chapters), and more than 113,000 initiated members.

Pi Kappa Phi&#x27;s mission statement is &quot;To create an uncommon and lifelong brotherhood that develops leaders and encourages service to others for the betterment of our communities.&quot; The fraternity&#x27;s vision statement is &quot;A future where every Pi Kappa Phi embraces his role as a leader, puts service before self and improves the world around him.&quot;

Pi Kappa Phi operates in four entities: Pi Kappa Phi Fraternity, Pi Kappa Phi Foundation, The Ability Experience, and Pi Kappa Phi Properties. Pi Kappa Phi operates its own philanthropy, The Ability Experience (formerly known as Push America), which works with individual chapters to serve people with disabilities. Among the most notable members are Senator Lindsey Graham, former Wisconsin Governor and founder of Earth Day Gaylord Nelson, baseball hall of famer Joe Sewell, social media entrepreneur and actor Jimmy Tatro, politician George Wallace Jr., and several former governors of the states of Mississippi, South Carolina, North Carolina, and Pennsylvania.

==History==

===Nu Phi===
Pi Kappa Phi was founded in 1904 by Andrew Alexander Kroeg Jr., a 19-year-old senior at the college; Simon Fogarty Jr., a 17-year-old junior; and Lawrence Harry Mixson, a 16-year-old sophomore. All three of the men were from Charleston.

In 1904, the College of Charleston was a small, municipal college. The all-male college was the first municipal college in the country, and the thirteenth oldest educational institution in the United States. The school had a campus literary society called the Chrestomathics, which held activities such as debates. The college&#x27;s monthly magazine was staffed by the officers of the Chrestomathics, forming the equivalent of a modern-day student government.

The three men set a goal to obtain officer positions within the Chrestomathic Literary Society. At that time, the organization was dominated by the three chapters of national fraternities on campus. All fraternity men were sworn to vote for their candidates, making it virtually impossible for any non-fraternity men to win election.

Kroeg, Mixson, Fogarty, and a group of their friends, all non-fraternity men, began forming an opposition party. Several meetings were held at Mixson&#x27;s home on Wentworth Street leading to the formation of Nu Phi, which stood for &quot;non-fraternity.&quot; The group of 15 men developed an opposing slate and began campaigning. Nu Phi adopted the outline of a hand as its secret symbol. A sketched hand on a classroom chalkboard signified an upcoming meeting. Inside the hand was written the meeting time and the host&#x27;s last name.

The Nu Phi group assigned a member to kidnap those who might vote for the fraternity ticket on election day. However, the Nu Phi ticket lost the elections. Later, it was revealed that several disloyal members cast their votes for the opposing fraternity slate. Kroeg, determined to see his friends have a chance at winning elections, decided that the only way to gain the influence of the fraternity men on campus was to begin his own fraternity.

===Founding===
On December 10, 1904, a meeting of the loyal Nu Phis was held at Fogarty&#x27;s home at 90 Broad Street to establish a new fraternity. There were seven men in attendance at the meeting: Kroeg, Fogarty, Mixson, Anthony Pelzer Wagener, Thomas F. Mosimann, Theodore (&quot;Teddy&quot;) Barnwell Kelley, and James Fogarty (Simon&#x27;s younger brother). All of the original members were students at the college and had grown up together in Charleston.

Wagener, who was a student of Greek and Latin, recommended the letters Pi Kappa Phi and their secret meaning as the official new name of the group. Simon proposed the design of the fraternity&#x27;s pin, a black enamel diamond with the Greek letters engraved in gold with a star and lamp as additional elements. Kroeg was selected as the new chapter&#x27;s first president, which was termed &quot;Archon&quot;, from the Greek term. He then began work on a constitution for chapter. The group quickly set out to recruit new members to its ranks.

On December 10, 1905, the first anniversary of the fraternity&#x27;s founding, Mixson&#x27;s mother cooked the men a special dinner in her home to celebrate a successful first year as a fraternity. The fraternity celebrate that date as &quot;Founders Day&quot; with a dinner or a similar ceremony. In 1906 Mixson and Wagener wrote the fraternity&#x27;s initiation ritual as the &quot;highest ideals of Christian manhood&quot;.

===Expansion===
That same year, the group was offered a charter from another U.S. fraternity. Instead, they chose to expand and create more Pi Kappa Phi chapters. A second chapter &quot;Beta chapter&quot;, was formed at Presbyterian College on March 9, 1907. Due to a state law banning fraternities at state supported schools, Presbyterian College and the College of Charleston were the only two South Carolina schools where fraternities were allowed. A third chapter was formed at the University of California, Berkeley, &quot;Gamma chapter&quot;, which was the first chapter of the Fraternity to obtain a house.

Kroeg developed &quot;Articles of Incorporation&quot; and the name Pi Kappa Phi became legally registered in the state of South Carolina on December 23, 1907.

The interest in Pi Kappa Phi within South Carolina was growing despite laws and policies banning fraternities. In 1909, &quot;Delta chapter&quot; at Furman University formed and operated in secret until state laws changed, allowing fraternal organizations. In 1910, a charter was granted to &quot;Sigma chapter&quot; at the University of South Carolina and the chapter was operated as the Sigma Club due to the laws banning fraternities.

In modern times, the fraternity is largely considered to be a &quot;southern fraternity,&quot; as many of its more notable alumni and chapters are located in the southern states, however the fraternity is expanding and has a growing presence in the northeast, at schools such as Sacred Heart University, the University of Connecticut, the University of New Hampshire, and the University of Maine.

===&quot;The Star and Lamp&quot;===
&quot;The Pi Kappa Phi Fraternity Journal&quot; was begun in 1909, with Henry Wagener as editor. In 1911, the name was changed to &quot;The Star and Lamp.&quot;

== Local chapter misconduct ==
In 2024, three members of the chapter at the University of Alabama were arrested after multiple reports of hazing came out against the fraternity. Among the allegations, students alleged they were &quot;forced to their hands and knees as part of the fraternity’s &#x27;Rules Night,&#x27;&quot; and &quot;While on their hands and knees, pledges were yelled at, stepped on, pushed, had items thrown at them, and had beer poured on them.&quot; Furthermore, additional video has shown they were forced to &quot;perform forced calisthenics, including wall sits and push-ups.&quot;

In 2024, the chapter at the University of Arizona was kicked off campus for several violations. A thorough investigation found the chapter guilty of hazing, alcohol violations (including furnishing alcohol to minors), conduct endangering others, and other state or federal law violations.

In 2022, the chapter at Clemson University was suspended for four years mainly due to hazing. It was reported that pledges acted as servants to members of the fraternity and were often berated and humiliated for various reasons.

On February 11, 2022, members of the &quot;Beta Chapter&quot; of the fraternity at Presbyterian College were involved in what the school&#x27;s president called &quot;racist, misogynistic, and hateful behaviors&quot; before a women&#x27;s lacrosse game vs. Howard University, a HBCU, at the college. After a three month independent investigation, several students were expelled and the fraternity was permanently removed from campus.

In 2021, the chapter at Virginia Tech was removed from campus and lost its national charter after it was determined they were guilty of hazing and causing upwards of $18,000 worth of damage to their on-campus fraternity house.

In 2020, the fraternity at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign was put on interim suspension after holding large parties linked to outbreaks of COVID-19 cases. The fraternity at the University of Pittsburgh was also suspended, along with several others, for violating the university’s health and safety guidelines related to COVID-19. Nine students from the fraternity at SUNY Plattsburgh were suspended for violating campus rules and local laws related to alcohol, nuisance, hazing, and endangerment, and the fraternity was issued a cease and desist order that ended its status as an officially recognized student organization.

In 2020, the University of Kansas chapter was shut down after university officials investigated repeated incidents of hazing and illicit drug use. The chapter was expelled from the university for 5 years, ending in the spring of 2026. Similarly, the Iota Psi chapter at Boise State University was suspended for five years following &quot;repeated violations,&quot; according to the school.

In 2019, the University of Texas at Austin chapter was shut down after university officials investigated submitted complaints of hazing. This was the second chapter to be shut down at UT, the fraternity having only been re-colonized there about 12 years prior; the first chapter was shut down in 2000 for similar reasons.

In 2019, several members of the fraternity at Texas State University brutally attacked a fellow student they mistakenly assumed was a member of their rival fraternity on campus Phi Kappa Psi, leaving him with a fractured skull and a traumatic brain injury. As a result, the fraternity was placed on suspension, some members faced criminal charges, and the attacked student filed a lawsuit against the fraternity.

In 2017, the chapter at Central Michigan University was suspended indefinitely by the university for failure to adhere to previous sanctions.

In July 2017, the &quot;Alpha chapter&quot; at the College of Charleston was suspended by the college following a probe investigating allegations of drug and alcohol use, hazing, and the alleged beating of a student. The fraternity is forbidden from recolonizing the campus until Fall 2019.

In November 2017, a Florida State University (FSU) student named Andrew Coffey was found unresponsive the morning after an unaffiliated off campus house party. Coffey, a Pi Kappa Phi fraternity pledge, was given medical treatment in an attempt to resuscitate, but died soon thereafter. After his death, FSU suspended all 58 fraternities and sororities on campus, and banned alcohol from student events.

In 2016, the fraternity at the University of South Florida (USF) was suspended after a 16 year old girl was raped while she was unconscious in the fraternity&#x27;s house. The girl was visiting the campus and decided to attend the fraternity&#x27;s house party. A fraternity member confessed to the rape and was arrested. A few months prior to the rape incident at USF, another rape allegation involving the fraternity at Purdue University was reported to the campus police department

In 2016, the fraternity at the Miami University was suspended for multiple hazing and alcohol violations.

In 2016, four fraternity members at Radford University were arrested for hazing.

In 2015, the chapter at Pennsylvania State University was shut down for hazing pledges, alcohol abuse, and disorderly conduct. It was re-colonized in the spring of 2018.

In Spring 2015, the fraternity at the Elon University was kicked off the campus until 2017 for hazing and hosting an unapproved event.

After the death of University of Missouri freshman Jack Lipp at a Pi Kappa Phi fraternity rush party in December 2014, his parents settled for $5 million with the property owner and future developers of the site. The lawsuit, initially filed for negligence in repairing a broken railing, alleged that the property owner was aware of the insecure railing before Lipp&#x27;s fatal fall. Despite complaints about the balcony&#x27;s safety, repairs were not scheduled as the property was slated for demolition. The incident occurred during an out-of-control rush party at Pi Kappa Phi fraternity, leading to Lipp&#x27;s death.

An alleged pledge notebook of Pi Kappa Phi&#x27;s North Carolina State University chapter was found in Raleigh. It contained numerous racist statements and comments about raping women and girls. The national organization placed the chapter on an interim suspension. NCSU suspended all social events at the chapter that involved alcohol.

A student pledging the California State University, Northridge chapter of Pi Kappa Phi died in the summer of 2014 during a mandatory 18-mile hike in what his family alleges was a hazing ritual. Nineteen-year-old Armando Villa died during the trip to the Angeles National Forest. Villa&#x27;s family reported that other boys on the hike said they were &quot;left barefoot with very little water to share between the boys, and no cellphones, and to find their way out of the forest.&quot; In September 2014, the University announced that the national and local chapters of the Pi Kappa Phi fraternity voted to withdraw permanently from the university. The fraternity is being sued by Villa&#x27;s family.

In December 2013, two Pi Kappa Phi members were arrested and charged with harassment at the University of Tennessee at Knoxville. The fraternity members were retaliating against a former pledge who reported to school officials physical and verbal abuse he experienced while he was seeking to join the fraternity.

In September 2013, the Gamma Gamma chapter at Troy University allegedly took a group of pledges out to the local woods, tied them to trees, and subsequently hazed them. They were discovered early that morning by police on the side of the road. As a result, the chapter was suspended and six students faced disciplinary action from the university. The chapter has since been reinstated.

In 2012, the fraternity at the University of North Florida was suspended after asking a pledge to vandalize the campus and offering him marijuana.

In 2010, the fraternity at the University of Georgia (UGA) was suspended after a father of a pledge wrote an anonymous letter to UGA&#x27;s Greek Life Office detailing the abusive hazing rituals his son endured in order to be fully welcomed into the fraternity.

In 2000, the California State University, Chico chapter was dissolved and later permanently banned after the alcohol-related hazing death of freshman student Adrian Heideman. In response to Heideman&#x27;s death the national chapter created an alcohol-awareness video for distribution to all members, &quot;The Choice Is Yours.&quot;

==Notable members==
==Chapters==
As of 2013 Pi Kappa Phi reports having over 113,000 members. Pi Kappa Phi has granted 231 charters, with an average chapter size of 55. There are 168 active chartered chapters plus 19 associate chapters (colonies).

==See also==
*List of social fraternities and sororities

==References==
* 
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7189962" start="0" end="12" title="Pi Kappa Phi" label="Pi Kappa Phi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189962" start="14" end="14" title="Pi Kappa Phi" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q7189962" start="35" end="45" title="Pi Kappa Phi" label="Pi Kapp(s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="93" end="103" title="Fraternities and sororities in North America" label="fraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4507421" start="224" end="245" title="College of Charleston" label="College of Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="249" end="275" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="321" end="328" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148486" start="347" end="365" title="associate chapters" label="associate chapters"/>
<link wikidata="Q22212" start="1143" end="1157" title="Lindsey Graham" label="Lindsey Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q886966" start="1210" end="1224" title="Gaylord Nelson" label="Gaylord Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q325312" start="1249" end="1259" title="Joe Sewell" label="Joe Sewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17417513" start="1297" end="1308" title="Jimmy Tatro" label="Jimmy Tatro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545829" start="1321" end="1339" title="George Wallace Jr." label="George Wallace Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4507421" start="1728" end="1749" title="College of Charleston" label="College of Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936308" start="1763" end="1780" title="municipal college" label="municipal college"/>
<link wikidata="Q193379" start="4363" end="4369" title="Archon" label="Archon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240768" start="5160" end="5180" title="Presbyterian College" label="Presbyterian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="5426" end="5460" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="5677" end="5691" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475020" start="5864" end="5881" title="Furman University" label="Furman University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024426" start="6039" end="6067" title="University of South Carolina" label="University of South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276963" start="6433" end="6456" title="Sacred Heart University" label="Sacred Heart University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49206" start="6462" end="6487" title="University of Connecticut" label="University of Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q49207" start="6493" end="6520" title="University of New Hampshire" label="University of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307345" start="6530" end="6549" title="University of Maine" label="University of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="6826" end="6847" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q503419" start="7386" end="7407" title="University of Arizona" label="University of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q631066" start="7672" end="7690" title="Clemson University" label="Clemson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240768" start="7961" end="7981" title="Presbyterian College" label="Presbyterian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068752" start="8135" end="8152" title="Howard University" label="Howard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="8156" end="8160" title="Historically black colleges and universities" label="HBCU"/>
<link wikidata="Q65379" start="8337" end="8350" title="Virginia Tech" label="Virginia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="8572" end="8614" title="University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign" label="University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q235034" start="8734" end="8758" title="University of Pittsburgh" label="University of Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="8924" end="8928" title="State University of New York" label="SUNY"/>
<link wikidata="Q998669" start="8929" end="8940" title="Plattsburgh (city), New York" label="Plattsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="9195" end="9215" title="University of Kansas" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q891082" start="9452" end="9474" title="Boise State University" label="Boise State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="9586" end="9615" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495387" start="9942" end="9964" title="Texas State University" label="Texas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378723" start="10073" end="10086" title="Phi Kappa Psi" label="Phi Kappa Psi"/>
<link wikidata="Q250205" start="10334" end="10361" title="Central Michigan University" label="Central Michigan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4507421" start="10504" end="10525" title="College of Charleston" label="College of Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q861548" start="10765" end="10789" title="Florida State University" label="Florida State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q500606" start="11180" end="11213" title="University of South Florida" label="University of South Florida (USF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q217741" start="11571" end="11588" title="Purdue University" label="Purdue University"/>
<link wikidata="Q590643" start="11666" end="11682" title="Miami University" label="Miami University"/>
<link wikidata="Q632465" start="11778" end="11796" title="Radford University" label="Radford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="11848" end="11877" title="Pennsylvania State University" label="Pennsylvania State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568893" start="12033" end="12048" title="Elon University" label="Elon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q579968" start="12150" end="12172" title="University of Missouri" label="University of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132346" start="12805" end="12836" title="North Carolina State University" label="North Carolina State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026939" start="13116" end="13155" title="California State University, Northridge" label="California State University, Northridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150105" start="13889" end="13925" title="University of Tennessee at Knoxville" label="University of Tennessee at Knoxville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817686" start="14157" end="14172" title="Troy University" label="Troy University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473796" start="14529" end="14556" title="University of North Florida" label="University of North Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q761534" start="14677" end="14698" title="University of Georgia" label="University of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026912" start="14922" end="14956" title="California State University, Chico" label="California State University, Chico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148486" start="15481" end="15489" title="Colony (fraternity or sorority)" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16237899" start="15507" end="15549" title="List of social fraternities and sororities" label="List of social fraternities and sororities"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880547" wikidata="Q4355754" url="?curid=880547" title="Waipara River (Canterbury)">
<text>The Waipara River is a river in Canterbury in the South Island of New Zealand. The river is about long, and its catchment area is .

The river passes through the small town of Waipara on its southeastward journey to the Pacific Ocean at the northern end of Pegasus Bay near Amberley.

==See also==
*List of rivers of New Zealand

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4355754" start="4" end="17" title="Waipara River (Canterbury)" label="Waipara River"/>
<link wikidata="Q657004" start="32" end="42" title="Canterbury, New Zealand" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="50" end="62" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q985544" start="176" end="183" title="Waipara" label="Waipara"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="220" end="233" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782677" start="257" end="268" title="Pegasus Bay" label="Pegasus Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q457210" start="274" end="282" title="Amberley, New Zealand" label="Amberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371038" start="299" end="328" title="List of rivers of New Zealand" label="List of rivers of New Zealand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880551" wikidata="Q16979314" url="?curid=880551" title="Saint John—Rothesay">
<text>Saint John—Rothesay (formerly Saint John) is a federal electoral district in southern New Brunswick, Canada. With its predecessor ridings, St. John—Albert and Saint John—Lancaster, the area has been represented in the House of Commons of Canada since 1917.

The district has always included the city of Saint John, and various suburbs and bedroom communities have been added or removed from it over the years. Presently the district also includes the town of Rothesay, the Indian reserve of The Brothers 18, and part of Simonds Parish.

The neighbouring ridings are Fundy Royal and New Brunswick Southwest.

==History==

Originally, Saint John had a special setup for representation in Parliament. The &quot;City of St. John&quot; returned one member, while the &quot;City and County of St. John&quot;, which included the County of Saint John returned one as well. Between 1872 and 1896, the &quot;City and County&quot; riding elected two Members of Parliament. In effect, the city itself had two or even three Members of Parliament. This practice continued until 1914.

After 1914, the counties of Saint John and Albert were joined. The two existing ridings were merged into a new riding, called &quot;St. John—Albert&quot;, that also incorporated parts of King&#x27;s and Albert riding. The new riding returned two Members of Parliament until 1935.

In 1966, St. John—Albert was abolished when Albert County was moved to the Fundy—Royal riding. A new riding, &quot;Saint John—Lancaster&quot;, was created.

Saint John—Lancaster was abolished in the 1976 redistribution, and a new riding with substantially the same boundaries was created and named &quot;Saint John&quot;. The City of Lancaster had been amalgamated into Saint John.

In recent years, the Progressive Conservative Party has had the most success in the city: its members were elected in all but four elections since 1953: 1974, 1980, 2004, and 2006. Well-known Members of Parliament from the area include Father of Confederation Samuel Leonard Tilley, former Veterans Affairs Minister Gerald Merrithew and popular former mayor Elsie Wayne.

As per the 2012 federal electoral redistribution, this riding was renamed Saint John—Rothesay and lost a small portion of territory to Fundy Royal.

Following the 2022 Canadian federal electoral redistribution, the riding will largely be replaced by Saint John—Kennebecasis. It gains Quispamsis from Fundy Royal and loses all of the City of Saint John west of the Saint John River to the new riding of Saint John—St. Croix. The name refers to the Kennebecasis Valley.

===Members of Parliament===
These ridings have elected the following members of Parliament:
==Election results==
===Saint John—Kennebecasis, 2023 representation order===
===Saint John—Rothesay, 2013 representation order===


===Saint John, 2003 Representation Order===


===Saint John, 1996 Representation Order===

===Saint John, previous elections===


===Saint John—Lancaster, 1966–1976===

===St. John—Albert 1914–1966===







Note: Conservative vote is compared to Government vote in 1917 election, and Liberal vote is compared to Opposition vote. Popular vote is compared to the party&#x27;s total share of the popular vote in the 1917 general election.
==See also==
* List of Canadian electoral districts
* Historical federal electoral districts of Canada

==References==

===Notes===
==External links==
*Riding history from the Library of Parliament:
**1914 - 1966
**1966 - 1976
**1976-1987
**1987-present</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16979314" start="0" end="19" title="Saint John—Rothesay" label="Saint John—Rothesay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979314" start="30" end="40" title="Saint John—Rothesay" label="Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973938" start="55" end="73" title="electoral district (Canada)" label="electoral district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="86" end="99" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979314" start="139" end="154" title="Saint John—Rothesay" label="St. John—Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979314" start="159" end="179" title="Saint John—Rothesay" label="Saint John—Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="218" end="244" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q203403" start="303" end="313" title="Saint John, New Brunswick" label="Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q240864" start="459" end="467" title="Rothesay, New Brunswick" label="Rothesay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520143" start="491" end="506" title="The Brothers 18" label="The Brothers 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520238" start="520" end="534" title="Simonds Parish, Saint John County, New Brunswick" label="Simonds Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q267073" start="566" end="577" title="Fundy Royal" label="Fundy Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345015" start="582" end="605" title="New Brunswick Southwest" label="New Brunswick Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786989" start="822" end="842" title="Saint John County, New Brunswick" label="County of Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196989" start="1258" end="1280" title="King&amp;#x27;s and Albert" label="King&amp;#x27;s and Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q267073" start="1427" end="1438" title="Fundy—Royal" label="Fundy—Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="1756" end="1786" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q954802" start="1888" end="1892" title="1974 Canadian federal election" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q952341" start="1894" end="1898" title="1980 Canadian federal election" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637432" start="1900" end="1904" title="2004 Canadian federal election" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723544" start="1910" end="1914" title="2006 Canadian federal election" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q780032" start="1995" end="2016" title="Samuel Leonard Tilley" label="Samuel Leonard Tilley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814016" start="2051" end="2067" title="Gerald Merrithew" label="Gerald Merrithew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051762" start="2093" end="2104" title="Elsie Wayne" label="Elsie Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030807" start="2118" end="2155" title="Canadian federal electoral redistribution, 2012" label="2012 federal electoral redistribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q267073" start="2242" end="2253" title="Fundy Royal" label="Fundy Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880083" start="2270" end="2316" title="2022 Canadian federal electoral redistribution" label="2022 Canadian federal electoral redistribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q964313" start="2391" end="2401" title="Quispamsis" label="Quispamsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q267073" start="2407" end="2418" title="Fundy Royal" label="Fundy Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q607546" start="2471" end="2487" title="Saint John River (Bay of Fundy)" label="Saint John River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345015" start="2509" end="2529" title="Saint John—St. Croix" label="Saint John—St. Croix"/>
<link wikidata="Q122363566" start="2554" end="2573" title="Kennebecasis Valley" label="Kennebecasis Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="2645" end="2666" title="Member of Parliament" label="members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632311" start="3253" end="3289" title="List of Canadian electoral districts" label="List of Canadian electoral districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774261" start="3292" end="3340" title="Historical federal electoral districts of Canada" label="Historical federal electoral districts of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125633" start="3414" end="3435" title="Library of Parliament" label="Library of Parliament"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880552" wikidata="Q889212" url="?curid=880552" title="Ernest McFarland">
<text>Ernest William McFarland (October 9, 1894 – June 8, 1984) was an American politician, jurist and, with Warren Atherton, one of the &quot;Fathers of the G.I. Bill&quot;. He served in all three branches of government, two at the state level, one at the federal level. He was a Democratic U.S. senator from Arizona from 1941 to 1953 (Majority Leader from 1951 to 1953) before becoming the tenth governor of Arizona from 1955 to 1959. Finally, McFarland sat as chief justice on the Arizona Supreme Court in 1968.

==Early life==
McFarland was born to William Thomas and Keziah (Smith) McFarland on October 9, 1894, in a log cabin on his family&#x27;s farm in Pottawatomie County, Oklahoma, near Earlsboro. When he was eight his family moved to Okemah for a year, before returning to Earlsboro. This had the effect of delaying McFarland&#x27;s education for a year, for Okemah at that time had no schools. As a result, he graduated from Earlsburg High School in 1914.

After high school, McFarland enrolled at East Central State Normal School in Ada, Oklahoma. He completed the required work for a temporary teaching certificate after one quarter. In late 1914 and early 1915, McFarland taught in a one-room school in Schoolton, Oklahoma, to raise funds for his education. He then returned to East Central and taught mathematics at Ada High School to pay for his education. Meanwhile, he was active in his school&#x27;s debating societies and began a friendship with Robert S. Kerr, who was a member of the same debate club. McFarland completed his studies at East Central in mid-1915, and left the school with a lifetime teaching certificate.

After East Central, McFarland enrolled at the University of Oklahoma. Working various part-time jobs, he initially studied mathematics with the intention of having a career in education. After a year he changed majors to pre-law. Studying at an accelerated rate, McFarland graduated with a bachelor&#x27;s degree on June 5, 1917.

Following his graduation, McFarland enlisted in the U.S. Navy soon after the US entered World War I. He entered the military on December 11, 1917, as a seaman second class and was assigned to the Great Lakes Naval Training Station. The climate on the shore of Lake Michigan did not agree with him, and he was admitted to a naval hospital on March 3, 1918, as suffering from pneumonia. McFarland spent the next several months in the hospital dealing with a variety of problems, including pericarditis, emphysema, and pleurisy. It was not until early 1919 that he had recovered enough for a navy medical board to recommend he receive an honorable discharge, which became effective on January 31, 1919.

==Early career==
After leaving the navy, McFarland returned to Oklahoma for a short time before he decided to move to Arizona. He arrived in Phoenix on May 10, 1919, and after several days found employment at a local bank. Seeing little opportunity for advancement at the bank, he applied to the Stanford University Law School. Before leaving to begin classes, he filed for a homestead near Casa Grande. McFarland would later refer to the land as his &quot;jackrabbit farm&quot;.

McFarland attended law school for four quarters before he took a break. His parents and younger brother had moved to Arizona. At the time, Stanford recommended all law students to spend a quarter interning at a legal office. Feeling homesick after a year in California, McFarland worked at the Phoenix office of Phillips, Cox, and Phillips. He was legal clerk for future Arizona Governor John Calhoun Phillips.

McFarland was also introduced to a variety of figures within the Arizona political establishment. At the completion of his internship, he returned to Stanford. McFarland completed work on his Juris Doctor in the summer quarter in 1922. In addition, he had completed the class work for a Masters of Arts degree in political science. McFarland was admitted to the Arizona Bar later that year.

Upon graduation from law school, McFarland moved to Casa Grande to &quot;prove up&quot; his homestead claim and open his first legal practice. The Arizona economy was doing poorly, and he found little legal work. He dealt with the lack of work by becoming involved in politics. McFarland worked for George W. P. Hunt&#x27;s campaign during the 1922 governor&#x27;s race. After Hunt won the election, McFarland received an appointment as assistant attorney general.

In mid-1924, he returned to Stanford to complete work on his master&#x27;s degree. Later that year he was elected county attorney for Pinal County. As state law required the county attorney to reside in the county seat, McFarland moved to Florence. He served three two-year terms in that position.

McFarland married Clair Collins on January 1, 1926. The couple had initially met at a Christmas party at Stanford in 1919. They had corresponded after their initial meeting, and by the time McFarland was elected, Collins was working at a teacher at Florence&#x27;s high school. The couple had a son, William Ernest, in 1927 and a daughter, Jean Clair, in February 1929. William became ill and died several days before his sister&#x27;s birth, and Jean died two days after her birth.

McFarland&#x27;s wife suffered from depression following the loss of their two children. She showed signs of improvement in 1930 as the couple expected a third child. The third child, Juliette, was stillborn, and Clare McFarland developed postpartum complications, which led to her death on December 12, 1930.

By February 1930, McFarland represented the state during Eva Dugan&#x27;s final appeal before her execution, a task that he found very unpleasant. Shortly afterwards, he decided that he was tired of being a prosecutor. Instead, McFarland ran for a seat on the Superior Court in Pinal County but lost the race to the incumbent, Judge E. L. Green, by 1464 to 1358.

Upon leaving office as county attorney, McFarland joined with his chief assistant, Tom Fulbright, to found the law office of McFarland and Fulbright. The practice gained public recognition when McFarland won an appeal that determined Winnie Ruth Judd to be insane, but its primary area of effort was water law.

Despite the success of his legal practice, McFarland still wished to become a judge. He ran a second time in 1934, defeated E. L. Green 2543 to 1542 in the primary, and was unopposed in the general election. In 1935, McFarland was sworn in, and he sat on the bench for the next six years.

As his workload in Pinal County was light, he accepted cases from other parts of the state, which allowed him to sit on the bench in every county in the state and to gain experience in issues in all parts of the state. As a judge, his rulings were well respected, and he was overturned on appeal only three times.

While on the bench, McFarland became romantically involved with a widow, Edna Eveland Smith, who had a young daughter, Jewell. She taught history and mathematics at Florence High School until the couple married in Tucson on June 1, 1939. McFarland also adopted his wife&#x27;s daughter.

==US Senator==
McFarland considered a run for a seat in the US House of Representatives following the resignation of Isabella Greenway and was repeatedly encouraged to run for Arizona Attorney General. Realizing that he lacked the resources for a statewide campaign, he did not run for those offices.

During the Senate election of 1940, McFarland counted on voters in Phoenix and Tucson to oppose any candidate from the other city. He toured the state and reacquainted himself to various political leaders he had met during his time on the bench, but he waited to announce his intentions to run. McFarland&#x27;s late entry did not hurt him, for he won the primary by nearly two-to-one and defeated the incumbent, Henry F. Ashurst. He went on to win the general election and took office in January 1941.

His initial committee assignments were to Indian Affairs, Interstate Commerce, Irrigation and Reclamation, Judiciary, and Pensions. Shortly after arriving in the Senate, Senator Gerald Nye convinced the Senate to create a committee looking into use of propaganda by the radio and motion picture industries. Senator Burton K. Wheeler recommended McFarland be placed on Nye&#x27;s committee under the assumption the freshman senator &quot;would keep his mouth shut&quot;.

Instead of remaining silent, McFarland became an outspoken critic of the committee and pointed out many accusations against films were being made by individuals who had not seen any of the films in question. McFarland gained national attention for his actions on the committee, with most of the nation viewing him favorably.

As a member of the Communications subcommittee, McFarland was involved in hearings dealing with the impact of developments in airmail, radio, telephones, and teletypes to the nation&#x27;s telegraph services. The US telegraph market was dominated by Postal Telegraph and Western Union. Postal had been borrowing money from the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to maintain its infrastructure even though it was becoming obvious that Postal would be unable to pay back the loans. Those dealings with the FCC led McFarland to develop an interest in communications.

McFarland&#x27;s experience in World War I led him to take an interest in the welfare of the troops during World War II. Arguing that many members of the military had left jobs, families, and schools to fight during the war, McFarland sponsored the G.I. Bill as a means to assisting soldiers and sailors as they transitioned back into civilian life.

McFarland was re-elected to the Senate in 1946 and received an honorary L.L.D. from the University of Arizona in 1950.

In 1950, the Democratic membership of the Senate formed a 12-person team to ensure that at least one member of their party was on the floor of the Senate whenever the Senate was in session. That was done to ensure that the Democratic membership could be called to the floor if ever a vote was to be taken. McFarland was selected leader of the team and found it easier to remain on the floor himself than to find others to take the duty.

During the 1950 election, the two leading candidates for Democratic majority leader lost their re-election bids. With other members of his party appreciative of his efforts, McFarland was encouraged to run for a leadership position in January 1951.

McFarland was selected to be Senate Majority Leader for the 82nd Congress. As majority leader, McFarland hosted a monthly lunch meeting to which he invited all committee chairmen and all freshmen senators. He used the informal setting as a forum to conduct a variety of Senate business.

For two years, McFarland had sat next to Harry Truman while they were both in the Senate. Both men then friends during this time, a situation that made it easy for the Senate Majority Leader to work with Truman after he became president. McFarland believed it was part of his duty as majority leader to inform the president of an accurate view of what his fellow senators felt: &quot;I never hesitated to present views contrary to those of the President in our conferences. As I&#x27;ve said before, I think that too frequently, the President is only told things people think he wants to hear. I would like to emphasize that it is not pleasant to present a view contrary to that of the President in such conferences.&quot; He felt that his duties as majority leader were separate from those of representing the interests of his constituents.

He spoke before Appropriations Committee to ask for funds to bring water from the Colorado River to central Arizona. He became an expert on water law because of his efforts on Irrigation and Reclamation Committee. He lost to Republican Barry Goldwater in the 1952 Senate elections. (This was the last time a Senate party leader lost a bid for reelection until 2004, when John Thune defeated Tom Daschle in South Dakota.)

==Governor==

McFarland was elected governor of Arizona in 1954 and re-elected in 1956. He worked with members of the Bureau of Reclamation to pick a location for the Glen Canyon Dam, and he emphasized education during his two terms in office.

==Television venture==
Shortly after he returned from the Senate, he bought a 40 percent stake in the Arizona Television Company, a group seeking to build the last VHF commercial television station in Phoenix. McFarland had long been intrigued by the still-new medium.

In 1955, shortly after he had become governor, McFarland and his group opened KTVK, Phoenix&#x27;s fourth television station. He chose the call letters &quot;because TV would be our middle name.&quot; He bought full control of the station in 1977. KTVK was the ABC affiliate for much of Arizona until 1995 and then became one of the nation&#x27;s most successful independent stations. It remained in the hands of McFarland&#x27;s family until 1999.

==Return to law==
McFarland tried unsuccessfully to unseat Goldwater in the Senate elections of 1958. After serving as governor, he returned to his law practice and was elected justice of the Arizona Supreme Court in 1964. He took part in &quot;Miranda v. Arizona&quot; and served as chief justice in 1968, thus completing a political &quot;grand slam&quot;.

==Later life==

In his mid-1970s, McFarland served as director of the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco and president of the Arizona Television Company. He died in Phoenix and is buried in that city&#x27;s Greenwood/Memory Lawn Mortuary &amp; Cemetery.

==Legacy==
There is now a monument at the Arizona State Capitol honoring him as the &quot;Father of the G.I. Bill.&quot; Also, the McFarland State Historic Park in Florence, Arizona, contains a preserved courthouse and other buildings from when Arizona was just a territory in 1878. McFarland purchased and donated them to the Arizona State Parks Board.

==References==
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* McFarland State Historic Park
* McFarland Collection of historic documents 
* Arizona State Capitol Monument 
* Congress Biography
* Biography from the Senate



|-




|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q889212" start="0" end="24" title="Ernest McFarland" label="Ernest William McFarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970033" start="103" end="118" title="Warren Atherton" label="Warren Atherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484269" start="152" end="161" title="G.I. Bill" label="G.I. Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="275" end="285" title="United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="286" end="298" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="304" end="311" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813203" start="331" end="346" title="United States Senate Majority Leader" label="Majority Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q777288" start="386" end="411" title="List of Governors of Arizona" label="tenth governor of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791452" start="478" end="499" title="Arizona Supreme Court" label="Arizona Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q695207" start="616" end="625" title="log cabin" label="log cabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q495880" start="655" end="684" title="Pottawatomie County, Oklahoma" label="Pottawatomie County, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550122" start="691" end="700" title="Earlsboro, Oklahoma" label="Earlsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032300" start="740" end="746" title="Okemah, Oklahoma" label="Okemah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328060" start="1005" end="1037" title="East Central State Normal School" label="East Central State Normal School"/>
<link wikidata="Q345921" start="1041" end="1054" title="Ada, Oklahoma" label="Ada, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849974" start="1103" end="1123" title="teaching certificate" label="teaching certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19310187" start="1134" end="1141" title="Academic quarter (year division)" label="quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519774" start="1213" end="1232" title="Schoolton, Oklahoma" label="Schoolton, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q179875" start="1415" end="1433" title="Debate" label="debating societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q381505" start="1462" end="1476" title="Robert S. Kerr" label="Robert S. Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="1686" end="1708" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239242" start="1861" end="1868" title="pre-law" label="pre-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1930" end="1952" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="2023" end="2032" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745451" start="2048" end="2070" title="American entry into World War I" label="US entered World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961535" start="2123" end="2142" title="Seaman apprentice" label="seaman second class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337219" start="2167" end="2201" title="Great Lakes Naval Training Station" label="Great Lakes Naval Training Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="2231" end="2244" title="Lake Michigan" label="Lake Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="2345" end="2354" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q501561" start="2458" end="2470" title="pericarditis" label="pericarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188605" start="2472" end="2481" title="emphysema" label="emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="Q55998" start="2487" end="2495" title="pleurisy" label="pleurisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q843610" start="2606" end="2625" title="honorable discharge" label="honorable discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="2790" end="2797" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="2813" end="2820" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012895" start="2968" end="2998" title="Stanford University Law School" label="Stanford University Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="3048" end="3057" title="Homestead Acts" label="homestead"/>
<link wikidata="Q79889" start="3063" end="3074" title="Casa Grande, Arizona" label="Casa Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="3129" end="3139" title="jackrabbit" label="jackrabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500754" start="3349" end="3358" title="interning" label="interning"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="3411" end="3421" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q880569" start="3541" end="3562" title="John Calhoun Phillips" label="John Calhoun Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="3757" end="3769" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="3852" end="3867" title="Masters of Arts" label="Masters of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="3878" end="3895" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q888957" start="4256" end="4273" title="George W. P. Hunt" label="George W. P. Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603658" start="4404" end="4420" title="State attorney general" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="4537" end="4552" title="county attorney" label="county attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q58712" start="4557" end="4569" title="Pinal County, Arizona" label="Pinal County"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="4630" end="4641" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q845754" start="4662" end="4670" title="Florence, Arizona" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q745832" start="5404" end="5413" title="stillborn" label="stillborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q749115" start="5445" end="5455" title="postpartum" label="postpartum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415037" start="5574" end="5583" title="Eva Dugan" label="Eva Dugan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791447" start="5777" end="5807" title="Arizona Superior Courts" label="Superior Court in Pinal County"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025660" start="6115" end="6131" title="Winnie Ruth Judd" label="Winnie Ruth Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q565520" start="6181" end="6190" title="water law" label="water law"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="6349" end="6356" title="Partisan primary" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076105" start="6383" end="6399" title="general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="7012" end="7018" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="7146" end="7173" title="US House of Representatives" label="US House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673594" start="7203" end="7220" title="Isabella Greenway" label="Isabella Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791244" start="7262" end="7286" title="Arizona Attorney General" label="Arizona Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q539092" start="7801" end="7817" title="Henry F. Ashurst" label="Henry F. Ashurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891269" start="7934" end="7948" title="United States Senate Committee on Indian Affairs" label="Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378864" start="7950" end="7969" title="United States Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation" label="Interstate Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501315" start="7971" end="7997" title="United States Senate Committee on Irrigation and Reclamation" label="Irrigation and Reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131462" start="7999" end="8008" title="United States House Committee on the Judiciary" label="Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747952" start="8014" end="8022" title="United States Senate Committee on Pensions" label="Pensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549449" start="8070" end="8080" title="Gerald Nye" label="Gerald Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q104868111" start="8114" end="8197" title="Senate Investigation into Motion Picture War Propaganda" label="committee looking into use of propaganda by the radio and motion picture industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q711631" start="8207" end="8224" title="Burton K. Wheeler" label="Burton K. Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399757" start="8939" end="8955" title="Postal Telegraph" label="Postal Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135797" start="9016" end="9050" title="Reconstruction Finance Corporation" label="Reconstruction Finance Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9285" end="9296" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9361" end="9373" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484269" start="9503" end="9512" title="G.I. Bill" label="G.I. Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518699" start="9677" end="9683" title="Legum Doctor" label="L.L.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q503419" start="9693" end="9714" title="University of Arizona" label="University of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644671" start="10473" end="10486" title="82nd United States Congress" label="82nd Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="10742" end="10754" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="11626" end="11640" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="11780" end="11795" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q462981" start="11915" end="11925" title="John Thune" label="John Thune"/>
<link wikidata="Q443640" start="11935" end="11946" title="Tom Daschle" label="Tom Daschle"/>
<link wikidata="Q777288" start="12002" end="12021" title="governor of Arizona" label="governor of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530724" start="12133" end="12148" title="Glen Canyon Dam" label="Glen Canyon Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="12375" end="12378" title="VHF" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616075" start="12390" end="12408" title="television station" label="television station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191538" start="12559" end="12563" title="KTVK" label="KTVK"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="12742" end="12745" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642249" start="13176" end="13194" title="Miranda v. Arizona" label="Miranda v. Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q448217" start="13361" end="13400" title="Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco" label="Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q24898227" start="13503" end="13548" title="Greenwood/Memory Lawn Mortuary &amp;amp; Cemetery" label="Greenwood/Memory Lawn Mortuary &amp;amp; Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q670442" start="13593" end="13614" title="Arizona State Capitol" label="Arizona State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801146" start="13682" end="13711" title="McFarland State Historic Park" label="McFarland State Historic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q845754" start="13715" end="13732" title="Florence, Arizona" label="Florence, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137809" start="13755" end="13765" title="courthouse" label="courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791409" start="13878" end="13903" title="Arizona State Parks (government)" label="Arizona State Parks Board"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880553" wikidata="Q5343757" url="?curid=880553" title="Edward Jennings (VC)">
<text>Edward Jennings VC (c. 1820 – 10 May 1889) was an Irish recipient of the Victoria Cross, the highest and most prestigious award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces.

==Details==
He was approximately 37 years old, and a Rough-Rider in the Bengal Artillery, Bengal Army during the Indian Mutiny when the following deeds took place at the Relief of Lucknow for which he was awarded the VC:
==Legacy==
For most of his life Edward Jennings was employed by the local council as a road sweeper and must have fallen on hard times as he sold his Victoria Cross to a private collector. His Victoria Cross is owned by the Royal Artillery and is not on public display.

Edward Jennings VC died on 10 May 1889 and was buried in an unmarked pauper&#x27;s grave, one of 190,000 bodies interred in Preston Cemetery, North Shields, North East England. In 1997 an appeal was launched to raise the necessary £2000 to place a headstone on Edward Jennings grave. A memorial service at graveside took place on 10 September 1997 to dedicate the new headstone.

==References==

Listed in order of publication year 
*&quot;The Register of the Victoria Cross&quot; (1981, 1988 and 1997)
*&quot;Ireland&#x27;s VCs&quot; (Dept of Economic Development, 1995)
*&quot;Monuments to Courage&quot; (David Harvey, 1999)
*&quot;Irish Winners of the Victoria Cross&quot; (Richard Doherty &amp; David Truesdale, 2000)

==External links==
*Location of grave and VC medal &quot;(Tyne &amp; Wear)&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5343757" start="0" end="15" title="Edward Jennings (VC)" label="Edward Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="16" end="18" title="Victoria Cross" label="VC"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="50" end="55" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="73" end="87" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="190" end="197" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="202" end="214" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083685" start="296" end="312" title="Bengal Artillery" label="Bengal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083685" start="314" end="325" title="Bengal Army" label="Bengal Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="337" end="350" title="Indian Mutiny" label="Indian Mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q815165" start="394" end="411" title="Relief of Lucknow" label="Relief of Lucknow"/>
<link wikidata="Q746096" start="858" end="871" title="North Shields" label="North Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760066" start="1156" end="1190" title="The Register of the Victoria Cross" label="The Register of the Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574533" start="1226" end="1244" title="Ireland&amp;#x27;s VCs" label="Ireland&amp;#x27;s VCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264386" start="1295" end="1315" title="Monuments to Courage" label="Monuments to Courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574533" start="1350" end="1385" title="Irish Winners of the Victoria Cross" label="Irish Winners of the Victoria Cross"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880562" wikidata="Q127469" url="?curid=880562" title="Lake Wakatipu">
<text>Lake Wakatipu () is an inland lake (finger lake) in the South Island of New Zealand. It is in the southwest corner of the Otago region, near its boundary with Southland. &quot;Lake Wakatipu&quot; comes from the original Māori name .

With a length of , it is New Zealand&#x27;s longest lake, and, at , its third largest. The lake is also very deep, its floor being below sea level (−110 metres), with a maximum depth of . It is at an altitude of , towards the southern end of the Southern Alps / Kā Tiritiri o te Moana. The general topography is a reversed &quot;N&quot; shape or &quot;dog leg&quot;. The Dart River / Te Awa Whakatipu flows into the northern end, the lake then runs south for 30 kilometres before turning abruptly to the east. Twenty kilometres (12.4 mi) further along, it turns sharply to the south, reaching its southern end further south, near Kingston. At the north end of the lake is the settlement of Glenorchy, in the north-east corner, and the smaller isolated locality of Kinloch in the north-west corner.

The lake is drained by the Kawarau River, which flows out from the lake&#x27;s only arm, the Frankton Arm, east of Queenstown. Until about 18,000 years ago the Mataura River drained Lake Wakatipu. The Kingston Flyer follows part of the former river bed now blocked by glacial moraine. Queenstown is on the northern shore of the lake close to the eastern end of its middle section. It has a seiche period of 26.7 minutes which, in Queenstown Bay, causes the water level to rise and fall some .

Lake Wakatipu is known for its scenery and is surrounded by mountains. Two mountain ranges, the Remarkables and the Tapuae-o-Uenuku / Hector Mountains, lie along its southeastern edge. It is a common venue for adventure tourism, with skifields, paragliding, bungy jumping and tramping tracks within easy reach. A vintage steamboat, the TSS &quot;Earnslaw&quot; regularly plies its waters. Several vineyards are nearby in Gibbston.
==Etymology==
The full original name of the lake is &quot;Whakatipu-wai-Māori&quot;. While the lake lacks an official name, it is generally referred to as &quot;Lake Wakatipu&quot;.

The name is believed to originate from the Waitaha people, who were later displaced by Kāti Māmoe. Elders from the modern iwi Ngāi Tahu say that while the name Whakatipu is archaic and its original meaning is a mystery, &quot;whaka&quot; means causative and &quot;tipu&quot; means growth. Wakatipu could mean &quot;growing bay&quot; if the original was Whakatipu and the h elided as a result of the Southern Māori dialect. The dialect is also known for dropping final vowels. &quot;Waka&quot; can also mean &#x27;hollow&#x27;. Wakatipua or Whakatipua (Canoe/Bay of spirits) have been recorded historically, as has Wakatapu (sacred vessel).

A legend says that the lake bed was formed when a giant ogre, Kopu-wai, was burned while lying asleep, leaving only his heart behind, which according to the same legend is the cause of the rhythmic rise and fall of the lake&#x27;s seiche. A variation on that is that Wakatipu is a contraction of Waka (trough) and tipua (enchanted giant), the giant was burnt when the surrounding bush was lit and his breathing causes the seiche. Another possibility, if the name was Whakatipu (make grow), is that a defeated group regrew their strength here.

Whakatipu is also the name of another six unrelated geographical features in the South Island, including &quot;Tarahaka Whakatipu&quot;, the Harris Saddle at the head of the Routeburn Track; &quot;Te Awa Whakatipu&quot;, the main Dart River / Te Awa Whakatipu flowing into the lake; &quot;Whakatipu Kā Tuka&quot;, the Hollyford River and Valley; and &quot;Whakatipu Kohurangi&quot;, Māori Bay in Pelorus Sound / Te Hoiere, Marlborough.

== Flooding ==
Lake Wakatipu has experienced periodic flooding affecting the lakeside communities of Kingston, Glenorchy and Queenstown. Notable flooding events include the 1878 Queenstown floods, which affected a large part of the outlying Queenstown and Otago areas, the 1995 Queenstown floods, and most notably the 1999 Queenstown floods, which significantly damaged the Queenstown CBD and road infrastructure resulting in approximately $50 million worth of damage.

==Wildlife==
Lake Wakatipu is a habitat for the longfin eel (a specimen caught in 1886 is the largest known of this species), and for introduced brown trout, salmon and rainbow trout. These and other fish support predators such as the pied shag. The black-billed gull is often found around the lake while the most common birds are the black-billed gull and the introduced mallard. A smaller bird often not noticed because of its size is the New Zealand scaup.

==In popular culture==

===Film===
Lake Wakatipu doubled as the Scottish Loch Ness in the 2007 film &quot;The Water Horse: Legend of the Deep&quot;.

The lake was a backdrop for several scenes in &quot;The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring&quot;, including Amon Hen.

===Television===
Lake Wakatipu is the eponymous lake in the murder mystery television series &quot;Top of the Lake&quot; (2013).

==Sports==
===Swimming===
The first person to swim the length of the lake was Ben Campbell-Macdonald in 2012. The 81 km solo wetsuit swim from Kingston on the lake&#x27;s southern point to Glenorchy took 18.5 hours.

== See also ==
* List of lakes in New Zealand

==References==
==External links==

* Lake Wakatipu information at the NZ Department of Conservation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q127469" start="0" end="13" title="Lake Wakatipu" label="Lake Wakatipu"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="30" end="34" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q26884214" start="36" end="47" title="finger lake" label="finger lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="56" end="68" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q692912" start="122" end="127" title="Otago" label="Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q864971" start="159" end="168" title="Southland, New Zealand" label="Southland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="220" end="225" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="306" end="319" title="List of lakes in New Zealand#Largest lakes" label="third largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q206650" start="480" end="518" title="Southern Alps / Kā Tiritiri o te Moana" label="Southern Alps / Kā Tiritiri o te Moana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225589" start="605" end="634" title="Dart River / Te Awa Whakatipu" label="Dart River / Te Awa Whakatipu"/>
<link wikidata="Q128090" start="864" end="872" title="Kingston, New Zealand" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784207" start="924" end="933" title="Glenorchy, New Zealand" label="Glenorchy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="998" end="1005" title="Kinloch, Otago" label="Kinloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q863681" start="1060" end="1073" title="Kawarau River" label="Kawarau River"/>
<link wikidata="Q613602" start="1148" end="1158" title="Queenstown, New Zealand" label="Queenstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q609560" start="1193" end="1206" title="Mataura River" label="Mataura River"/>
<link wikidata="Q266101" start="1234" end="1248" title="Kingston Flyer" label="Kingston Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221076" start="1423" end="1429" title="seiche" label="seiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454313" start="1619" end="1634" title="the Remarkables" label="the Remarkables"/>
<link wikidata="Q31694453" start="1643" end="1677" title="Tapuae-o-Uenuku / Hector Mountains" label="Tapuae-o-Uenuku / Hector Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q782762" start="1737" end="1754" title="Adventure travel" label="adventure tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="1761" end="1770" title="skiing" label="skifields"/>
<link wikidata="Q178380" start="1772" end="1783" title="paragliding" label="paragliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q193847" start="1785" end="1798" title="bungy jumping" label="bungy jumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548073" start="1803" end="1818" title="Tramping in New Zealand" label="tramping tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7671681" start="1863" end="1887" title="TSS Earnslaw" label="TSS &amp;quot;Earnslaw&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q22715" start="1924" end="1932" title="vineyard" label="vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4068924" start="1948" end="1956" title="Gibbston" label="Gibbston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540772" start="2184" end="2191" title="Waitaha (South Island iwi)" label="Waitaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163411" start="2228" end="2238" title="Kāti Māmoe" label="Kāti Māmoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q371230" start="2267" end="2276" title="Ngāi Tahu" label="Ngāi Tahu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2540" end="2562" title="Māori language#South Island dialects" label="Southern Māori dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q221076" start="3013" end="3019" title="seiche" label="seiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170592" start="3500" end="3515" title="Routeburn Track" label="Routeburn Track"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="3556" end="3585" title="river" label="Dart River / Te Awa Whakatipu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882378" start="3644" end="3659" title="Hollyford River" label="Hollyford River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068304" start="3722" end="3747" title="Pelorus Sound / Te Hoiere" label="Pelorus Sound / Te Hoiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784207" start="3874" end="3883" title="Glenorchy, New Zealand" label="Glenorchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q738570" start="4148" end="4151" title="Central business district" label="CBD"/>
<link wikidata="Q614800" start="4281" end="4292" title="New Zealand longfin eel" label="longfin eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857311" start="4378" end="4389" title="brown trout" label="brown trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="4391" end="4397" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="4402" end="4415" title="rainbow trout" label="rainbow trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q25625" start="4468" end="4477" title="Australian pied cormorant" label="pied shag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270731" start="4483" end="4500" title="black-billed gull" label="black-billed gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270731" start="4568" end="4585" title="black-billed gull" label="black-billed gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348" start="4605" end="4612" title="mallard" label="mallard"/>
<link wikidata="Q646096" start="4674" end="4691" title="New Zealand scaup" label="New Zealand scaup"/>
<link wikidata="Q49650" start="4767" end="4776" title="Loch Ness" label="Loch Ness"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4800" end="4835" title="The Water Horse: Legend of the Deep" label="The Water Horse: Legend of the Deep"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4896" end="4945" title="The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring" label="The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q105436668" start="4963" end="4971" title="Minor places in Middle-earth" label="Amon Hen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779266" start="5073" end="5088" title="Top of the Lake" label="Top of the Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851175" start="5338" end="5366" title="List of lakes in New Zealand" label="List of lakes in New Zealand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880566" wikidata="Q4957110" url="?curid=880566" title="Brandon University">
<text>Brandon University is a university located in the city of Brandon, Manitoba, Canada, with an enrolment of approximately 3,375 (2020) full-time and part-time undergraduate and graduate students. The current location was founded on July 13, 1899, as Brandon College as a Baptist institution. It was chartered as a university by then President John E. Robbins on June 5, 1967. The enabling legislation is the Brandon University Act. Brandon University is one of several predominantly undergraduate liberal arts and sciences institutions in Canada.

The university is a member of the Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada (AUCC) and the Association of Commonwealth Universities (ACU), the Canadian University Society for Intercollegiate Debate (CUSID) and a member of U Sports. Brandon University has a student-to-faculty ratio of 11 to 1 and sixty percent of all classes have fewer than 20 students. The university press, The Quill, is a member of CUP.

==History==

The university has its origins in the McKee’s Academy, founded in 1890 by the Canadian Baptists of Western Canada (member of the Canadian Baptists of Western Canada). 

In 1899, the school was renamed Brandon College. The first principal of the college was A. P. McDiarmid. McKee&#x27;s Academy, including its building on Rosser Avenue, was merged into the new institution. On July 13, 1900, the cornerstone was laid by Mrs. Davies for the first building of the present campus, at the corner of 18th Street and Lorne Avenue. This and the adjoining Clarke Hall later became Brandon University&#x27;s administration buildings.

Brandon College, built 1900-01 and the adjoining Clark Hall (1905–06) designed by architect William Alexander Elliott, a 3½-storey brick and stone complex are on the Registry of Historic Places of Canada. At this point Brandon College was a liberal arts college and offered some training in theology, secondary school classes, and a commercial department. A school of music was added in 1906.

The college remained affiliated with McMaster University between 1911 and 1938, and during this time the School of Music granted graduate diplomas in voice and piano.

Class enrolments were reduced during World War I as potential students signed up for military service. More than 200 Brandon College students served in the war; two of these won the Victoria Cross. A platoon from the college joined the Western Universities Battalion in France in 1916.

In 1922 college added a Science Building, and ceased offering commercial courses. Religious studies were integrated into the arts curriculum in 1928. After 1931, the college no longer taught Grade 9, 10, and 11 courses, but Grade 12 Department of Education courses were introduced and continued until 1955.

The Baptist Church ceased financing the institution in 1938 and the college became non-denominational. Funding to keep the college functioning was raised through public subscriptions, by an endowment from A. E. McKenzie, by tax levy from the City of Brandon, and through an annual grant from the government of Manitoba. The college became affiliated with the University of Manitoba; music courses as a credit to BA and BSc degrees were offered, and a Bachelor of Science program was implemented in 1939.

The COTC program was revived at the onset of World War II; once again enrolment dropped, as 234 Brandon College students joined Canada&#x27;s armed forces. New bursaries and scholarships were introduced. At this point, the college had 14 faculty members and about 100 students. During the late 1940s, the social sciences were introduced.

Brandon College began training high school teachers in 1952, and elementary teachers three years later. The first graduates of the new Bachelor of Training program received degrees in 1971.

As part of a national program to expand universities and colleges, in the 1950s Brandon College increased its enrolment and by 1962 the Arts and Library Building, later named the A. E. McKenzie Building, the J. R. C. Evans Lecture Theatre, the steam plant, Darrach Hall (men&#x27;s residence), and the dining hall were all completed.

In 1963 the college offered the first B.Mus. program in Manitoba, and the Music Building and Flora Cowan Hall (women&#x27;s residence) were built. The School of Music developed a conservatory department and offered private tutoring. The Brandon University Gymnasium was opened in 1965.

A Manitoba Historical Plaque was erected in Brandon, Manitoba by the province to commemorate Brandon College&#x27;s role in Manitoba&#x27;s heritage.

===Brandon University===
In 1967 the college attained university status through the Brandon University Act. Her Royal Highness Princess Alexandra and the Honourable Angus Ogilvy were present at the presentation of the charter on June 5, 1967, That year The Education Building was opened, and in 1969 the Western Manitoba Centennial Auditorium was opened. McMaster Hall, a ten-storey co-ed residence, was completed in 1971, along with the Jeff Umphrey Memorial Centre for Mental Retardation, which housed a bookstore, bank, and a day centre as well as the research centre on mental disability.

The J. R. Brodie Science Centre began holding classes in 1971, and was opened officially in May 1972, providing facilities for a number of departments: chemistry, physics, botany, zoology, geology, geography, mathematics and computer science, and psychology. In early 1980, the Master of Music Degree Program was set up and in September 1980, the Applied Program began. A Master of Music (Education) program was implemented in 1981. A new music building, officially named in 1984 by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II as the &quot;Queen Elizabeth II Music Building&quot;, was completed in 1985.

In September 1986, Brandon University began offering classes in the Department of Nursing and Health Studies program, providing 2-Year Post-Diploma Baccalaureate Degrees in Nursing and Mental Health. In 1990, the university also offered a major in Business Administration through the Faculty of Arts. A Masters of Education program was set up in 1990, and in 1991 the college offered a minor in Women&#x27;s Studies in the Faculty of Arts. In 1993, a minor in Aboriginal Art was approved, and in 1996, the 4-Year Bachelor of Science in Psychiatric Nursing was initiated.

Between 1994 and 1997 Clark Hall and the Brandon College Building underwent renovation and reconstruction, with the retention of the original façade; these buildings house faculty and administration as well as classes. In 1997, the college initiated the School of Health Studies and a 4-Year Bachelor of Business Administration. In 1998, a Masters program in Rural Development and a bachelor&#x27;s program in First Nations and Aboriginal Counselling were launched.

In 1999, the university celebrated its centennial. To mark the occasion, an excavation of the original Prairie College school site was carried out with the help of community members. The Applied Disaster and Emergency Studies program was initiated in the fall of 2001. The Health Studies Complex was opened in September 2003, to house the School of Health Studies and the First Nations and Aboriginal Counselling program. The complex includes a large round room equipped for holding traditional ceremonies performed by First Nations and Métis students.

By 2002, Brandon University had enrolment of 3,098 and a faculty of 220. The next year the Bachelor of Environmental Science program was implemented and a four-year Creative Arts program and the Bachelor of Fine Arts Program were begun. In September 2005 Brandon University&#x27;s Rural and Community Studies Program expanded from its existing three-year BA program to include four-year honours, four-year major, and four-year minor Bachelor of Arts degrees.

In September 2008, a 17-day strike of the university&#x27;s faculty took place. Contract negotiations broke down again in the fall of 2011, and a 45-day strike by university faculty members ensued.

In 2013, the university opened a Healthy Living Centre athletics facility, on the site of the former Kinsmen Memorial Stadium. The centre, which includes an indoor walking track, hosts the Bobcats and provides fitness facilities for students, faculty, staff, and the community.

==Faculties, schools, departments, and research centres==
*Faculty of Arts
**Aboriginal and Visual Arts, Anthropology, Business Administration, Drama, Economics, English, Gender and Women&#x27;s Studies, History, Classical and Modern Languages, Native Studies, Philosophy, Political Science, Religion, Rural Development, Sociology
*Faculty of Education
**Administration and Educational Services, Curriculum &amp; Instruction: Humanities, Curriculum &amp; Instruction: Math/Science, Department of Educational Psychology and Foundations, Physical Education, Music Education, Graduate Studies
*Faculty of Graduate Studies
** Graduate Diploma in Education, Master in Education, Music Graduate Program, Master of Psychiatric Nursing, Master in Rural Development, Graduate Diploma in Rural Development
*Faculty of Science
**Applied Disaster &amp; Emergency Studies, Biology (Botany &amp; Zoology discontinued in 2009), Chemistry, Environmental Science, Geography and Environment, Geology, Mathematics and Computer Science, Physics and Astronomy, Psychology
*Faculty of Health Studies
**Nursing, Psychiatric Nursing, Mental Health, Indigenous Health, and Human Services, First Nations and Aboriginal Counselling
*School of Music
**Honours (General Studies), Performance, Education, Jazz Studies, Graduate Studies in Performance, Music Education and Composition
* Research Centres
**Rural Development Institute (RDI)
** Environmental Science Laboratories
** Micro Analytical Facility
** Study of Cultural Adaptations in the Prairie Ecozone (SCAPE)
** Brandon University Centre for Aboriginal and Rural Education (BU CARES)

==Degrees and programs==
===Undergraduate===
* Bachelor of Arts (BA)
* Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA)
* Bachelor of Education (BEd)
* Bachelor of Fine Arts (BFA)
* Bachelor of First Nations and Aboriginal Counselling (BFNAC)
* Bachelor of Music (BMus)
* Bachelor of Nursing (BN)
* Bachelor of Science (BSc)
* Bachelor of Science in Environmental Science (BSES)
* Bachelor of Science in Psychiatric Nursing (BScPN)

===Graduate===
* Master of Education (MEd)
* Master of Music (MMus)
* Master of Rural Development (MRD)
* Master in Psychiatric Nursing
* Master of Science in Environmental and Life Sciences (MSc)

===Diplomas===
* Graduate Diploma in Rural Development (GRD)
* Post Diploma in Mental Health (BScMN)

===Programs===
* Brandon University Hutterite Education Program (BUHEP)
* Program for the Education of Native Teachers (PENT)
* Community Based Education (CBE)

===Defunct programs===
* Brandon University Northern Teacher Education Program (BUNTEP)

==Student activities==
===Athletics===
The university&#x27;s sports teams in U Sports are called the Brandon Bobcats. Brandon University competes in basketball (men/women) and volleyball (men/women). Brandon University used to field a men&#x27;s hockey team in the CIAU, however, that ceased in 2000.

In the 2006–07 academic year, the Bobcats advanced to the Canadian Basketball Finals. They placed second to Carleton University, in a hard-fought 52–49 game.

In 2016, the Bobcats hosted the CIS National Women&#x27;s Volleyball Championship.

===Music===
Music students can join the Brandon University Orchestra.

==Indigenous==

Brandon University provides services in more remote communities. Indigenous Elders are present on campus at Brandon University to provide social support.

==Governance==

===Administration===
*Chancellor – Mary Jane McCallum
*President and Vice Chancellor – David Docherty
*Provost and Vice President (Academic) – Kofi Campbell
*Vice President (Administration &amp; Finance) – Scott Lamont

===Deans===
*Arts – Balfour Spence (Acting)
*Education – Heather Duncan
*Health Studies – Linda Ross (Acting)
*Music – Greg Gatien
*Science – Bernadette Ardelli

===Student governance===
Brandon University students are represented by the Brandon University Students&#x27; Union (BUSU). BUSU represents undergraduate, graduate, and distance students. BUSU is a member of the Canadian Federation of Students, local 37.

The current BUSU executive is:
*President – Olufunke Adeleye
*Vice President Internal – Vacant
*Vice President External – Similouwa Omoteye

==University chancellors==
* Mary Jane McCallum (2021–Present)
* Michael Decter (2013–2021)
* Henry Champ (2009–2012)
* Edward Schreyer (2002–2008)
* Kevin Kavanagh (1996–2002)
* Ronald D. Bell (1991–1996)
* Stanley Knowles (1970–1990)
* Maitland Steinkopf (1967–1970)

==University presidents==
*David Docherty (2019–present)
*Steve Robinson (2017–2019)
*Gervan Fearon (2014–2017)
*Deborah Poff (2009–2014)
*Louis Visentin (2000–2009)
*Dennis Anderson (1990–2000)
*John Mallea (1985–1990)
*E. J. Tyler (1984–1985)
*Harold J. Perkins (1977–1984)
*Lloyd Dulmage (1970–1977)
*R. F. B. King (1969–1970, acting president)
*John E. Robbins (1967–1969, president Brandon University)
*John E. Robbins (1960–1967, president Brandon College)
*H. S. Perdue (1959–1960, acting president)
*Dr. J. R. C. Evans
==Notable alumni==

* Marjorie Beaucage, Métis filmmaker
* Henry Champ, Canadian broadcast journalist
* Tommy Douglas, father of medicare and The Greatest Canadian (as voted on by CBC viewers)
* Stanley Knowles, New Democratic Party Member of Parliament
* Branden Leslie, Conservative Member of Parliament
* Frank McKinnon, sports executive and Member of Order of Canada
* Andy Murray, NHL and Team Canada head coach
*Olivia Poole, inventor of the Jolly Jumper
* Brian Pallister, Conservative Party of Canada Member of Parliament, Manitoba MLA and Premier of Manitoba
* Mike Pellicciotti, American politician and Washington State Treasurer
* H. Clare Pentland, historian at the University of Manitoba 
* Neil Robertson, mathematician known for the Robertson–Seymour theorem
* John W. M. Thompson, Manitoba MLA and provincial cabinet minister

==Scholarships==
The university joined Project Hero, a scholarship program cofounded by General (Ret&#x27;d) Rick Hillier, for the families of fallen Canadian Forces members.

The Government of Canada sponsors an Aboriginal Bursaries Search Tool that lists over 680 scholarships, bursaries, and other incentives offered by governments, universities, and industry to support Aboriginal post-secondary participation. Brandon University scholarships for Aboriginal, First Nations and Métis students include: Maria Ross Scholarship; Isabelle Douglas Estate Scholarships; Manitoba Blue Cross George J. Strang Scholarship; Gerdau MRM Steel Inc. Annual Scholarship; Donna and Bill Parrish Scholarship for Aboriginal Students; Scotiabank Scholarships for Aboriginal students in financial need; Manitoba Industry, Economic Development and Mines Bursaries in Geology; First Nations Teacher Education Scholarships; Manitoba Citizens&#x27; Bursary Fund for Aboriginal Peoples; Louis Riel Institute Bursaries; Manitoba Hydro Employment Equity Bursary.

==See also==
* Higher education in Manitoba
* Education in Canada
* List of universities in the Canadian Prairies
* U Sports
* Canadian government scientific research organizations
* Canadian university scientific research organizations
* Canadian industrial research and development organizations

==References==

==Further reading==
* C. G. Stone and F. Joan Garnett. Brandon College: A History, 1899–1967. Brandon: Brandon University, 1969.
==External links==
* Brandon University Official Website
* Brandon University Students Union Official Website (BUSU)
* Brandon University Athletics
* Brandon University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4957110" start="0" end="18" title="Brandon University" label="Brandon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="24" end="34" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q61432" start="58" end="75" title="Brandon, Manitoba" label="Brandon, Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957110" start="248" end="263" title="Brandon University" label="Brandon College"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="269" end="276" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="297" end="304" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346473" start="580" end="630" title="Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada" label="Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q593768" start="646" end="686" title="Association of Commonwealth Universities" label="Association of Commonwealth Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030652" start="698" end="752" title="Canadian University Society for Intercollegiate Debate" label="Canadian University Society for Intercollegiate Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032195" start="777" end="785" title="U Sports" label="U Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030650" start="958" end="961" title="Canadian University Press" label="CUP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029764" start="1106" end="1141" title="Canadian Baptists of Western Canada" label="Canadian Baptists of Western Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q632891" start="2034" end="2053" title="McMaster University" label="McMaster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q61432" start="4461" end="4478" title="Brandon, Manitoba" label="Brandon, Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q170191" start="4676" end="4713" title="Princess Alexandra, The Honourable Lady Ogilvy" label="Her Royal Highness Princess Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q544609" start="4718" end="4745" title="Angus Ogilvy" label="the Honourable Angus Ogilvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380499" start="9660" end="9687" title="Rural Development Institute" label="Rural Development Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787220" start="10344" end="10363" title="Master of Education" label="Master of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401337" start="10372" end="10387" title="Master of Music" label="Master of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785467" start="10397" end="10424" title="Master of Rural Development" label="Master of Rural Development"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10701" end="10745" title="Program for the Education of Native Teachers" label="Program for the Education of Native Teachers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10755" end="10780" title="Community Based Education" label="Community Based Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032195" start="10954" end="10962" title="U Sports" label="U Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956777" start="10978" end="10993" title="Brandon Bobcats" label="Brandon Bobcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041737" start="11287" end="11306" title="Carleton University" label="Carleton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953413" start="12138" end="12177" title="Brandon University Students&amp;#x27; Union" label="Brandon University Students&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091484" start="12274" end="12305" title="Canadian Federation of Students" label="Canadian Federation of Students"/>
<link wikidata="Q44610760" start="12488" end="12506" title="Mary Jane McCallum" label="Mary Jane McCallum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12524" end="12538" title="Michael Decter" label="Michael Decter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719280" start="12553" end="12564" title="Henry Champ" label="Henry Champ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207881" start="12579" end="12594" title="Edward Schreyer" label="Edward Schreyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16092802" start="12609" end="12623" title="Kevin Kavanagh" label="Kevin Kavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364774" start="12638" end="12652" title="Ronald D. Bell" label="Ronald D. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496839" start="12667" end="12682" title="Stanley Knowles" label="Stanley Knowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737177" start="12697" end="12715" title="Maitland Steinkopf" label="Maitland Steinkopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q64760427" start="12842" end="12854" title="Deborah C. Poff" label="Deborah Poff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688334" start="12868" end="12882" title="Louis Visentin" label="Louis Visentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27437125" start="13078" end="13093" title="John Everett Robbins" label="John E. Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q27437125" start="13137" end="13152" title="John Everett Robbins" label="John E. Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q56222335" start="13278" end="13295" title="Marjorie Beaucage" label="Marjorie Beaucage"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="13297" end="13302" title="Métis" label="Métis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719280" start="13315" end="13326" title="Henry Champ" label="Henry Champ"/>
<link wikidata="Q359653" start="13360" end="13373" title="Tommy Douglas" label="Tommy Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806631" start="13385" end="13393" title="medicare (Canada)" label="medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999819" start="13398" end="13419" title="The Greatest Canadian" label="The Greatest Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496839" start="13451" end="13466" title="Stanley Knowles" label="Stanley Knowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="13468" end="13488" title="New Democratic Party of Canada" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="13489" end="13509" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q119757957" start="13512" end="13526" title="Branden Leslie" label="Branden Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="13528" end="13540" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="13541" end="13561" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q50824910" start="13564" end="13578" title="Frank McKinnon" label="Frank McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="13611" end="13626" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q526811" start="13629" end="13640" title="Andy Murray (ice hockey)" label="Andy Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="13642" end="13645" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q461503" start="13650" end="13661" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Team Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088088" start="13674" end="13686" title="Olivia Poole" label="Olivia Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924976" start="13719" end="13734" title="Brian Pallister" label="Brian Pallister"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="13736" end="13764" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="13765" end="13785" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401758" start="13804" end="13823" title="Premier of Manitoba" label="Premier of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q59660340" start="13826" end="13843" title="Mike Pellicciotti" label="Mike Pellicciotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394544" start="13869" end="13895" title="Washington State Treasurer" label="Washington State Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q91661032" start="13898" end="13915" title="H. Clare Pentland" label="H. Clare Pentland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191833" start="13934" end="13956" title="University of Manitoba" label="University of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531456" start="13960" end="13974" title="Neil Robertson (mathematician)" label="Neil Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527155" start="14004" end="14029" title="Robertson–Seymour theorem" label="Robertson–Seymour theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260655" start="14032" end="14051" title="John Thompson (Manitoba politician)" label="John W. M. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q360390" start="14208" end="14220" title="Rick Hillier" label="Rick Hillier"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="14249" end="14264" title="Canadian Forces" label="Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="14550" end="14560" title="Aboriginal peoples in Canada" label="Aboriginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="14562" end="14575" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="14580" end="14585" title="Métis" label="Métis"/>
<link wikidata="Q451476" start="14818" end="14828" title="Scotiabank" label="Scotiabank"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107777" start="15154" end="15182" title="Higher education in Manitoba" label="Higher education in Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251556" start="15185" end="15204" title="Education in Canada" label="Education in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232697" start="15207" end="15252" title="List of universities in the Canadian Prairies" label="List of universities in the Canadian Prairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032195" start="15255" end="15263" title="U Sports" label="U Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030812" start="15266" end="15319" title="Canadian government scientific research organizations" label="Canadian government scientific research organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030895" start="15322" end="15375" title="Canadian university scientific research organizations" label="Canadian university scientific research organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030823" start="15378" end="15436" title="Canadian industrial research and development organizations" label="Canadian industrial research and development organizations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880575" wikidata="Q4744431" url="?curid=880575" title="American Merchant Marine Veterans Memorial">
<text>The American Merchant Marine Veterans Memorial in John S. Gibson Park, San Pedro, California, was commissioned to honor American merchant marine veterans from all wars. It contains the bronze sculpture &quot;Jacob&#x27;s Ladder&quot; by Jasper D&#x27;Ambrosi as its centerpiece, and includes a black polished granite memorial wall engraved with the names of merchant seaman lost at sea during time of war. D&#x27;Ambrosi designed the memorial in 1986 and it was cast at Arizona Bronze in Tempe, Arizona in 1987. The public art work was dedicated in 1989.

A bronze plaque at the memorial states: &quot;The United States Merchant Marine has faithfully served our country in times of war and peace hauling cargo to every corner of the world. This Memorial is dedicated to those brave men and women of all races, creeds and colors who answered that call to serve.&quot;

The sculpture depicts a merchant seaman helping another during a rescue at sea as they climb &quot;a Jacob&#x27;s Ladder symbolizing the dedication and sacrifices of American merchant marines. It was designed by Jasper D&#x27;Ambrosi of Wilmington, California, and cast by his family foundry (Arizona Bronze). Soon after his original design was accepted and before he began the final model, D&#x27;Ambrosi died. In tribute to their father, his two sons, Marc D&#x27;Ambrosi and Michael D&#x27;Ambrosi, finished the sculpture&#x27;s model, casting, and installation in 1987.

== References ==
==External links==
* San Pedro Peninsula Chamber of Commerce. American Merchant Marine Veterans Memorial. Retrieved September 11, 2006.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4744431" start="4" end="46" title="American Merchant Marine Veterans Memorial" label="American Merchant Marine Veterans Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q290356" start="71" end="92" title="San Pedro, California" label="San Pedro, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="129" end="144" title="merchant marine" label="merchant marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163941" start="237" end="258" title="Jasper D&amp;#x27;Ambrosi" label="Jasper D&amp;#x27;Ambrosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q51685" start="488" end="502" title="Tempe, Arizona" label="Tempe, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q607715" start="969" end="988" title="Jacob&amp;#x27;s Ladder" label="Jacob&amp;#x27;s Ladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163941" start="1080" end="1101" title="Jasper D&amp;#x27;Ambrosi" label="Jasper D&amp;#x27;Ambrosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022724" start="1105" end="1127" title="Wilmington, California" label="Wilmington, California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880578" wikidata="Q6576513" url="?curid=880578" title="List of Latter Day Saints">
<text>This is a list of people who identify, (or have identified if dead), as Latter Day Saints, and who have attained levels of notability. This list includes adherents of all Latter Day Saint movement denominations, including the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), Community of Christ, and others.
LDS Church members are usually considered either: 
* &quot;Active&quot;, meaning they attend church on a regular basis and are committed to living their religion, 
* &quot;Less-active&quot; meaning they attend church on an occasional basis and may or may not be committed to living their religion or 
* &quot;Inactive&quot;, meaning they do not attend church regularly and/or they do not adhere to its principles. 
See List of former Latter Day Saints for those persons who ended their affiliation with the Latter Day Saint movement.
==Artists==

==Sports figures==
===American football and Canadian football===
===Association football (soccer)===
===Baseball===
===Basketball===
===Ice hockey===
===Rugby===
====Rugby league====
====Rugby union====

===Miscellaneous===
====Track and field====

* Valerie Adams, Olympic shot putter, two-time Olympic gold medalist, 2008 and 2012, silver medalist, 2016 and bronze medalist 2020, Team New Zealand
* Lindsey Anderson, Olympic middle distance and steeplechase runner, 2008, Team USA
* Niklas Arrhenius, Olympic discus thrower, 2008, Team Sweden
* Wade Bell, Olympic middle distance runner, 800 meters, 1968, Team USA
* April Steiner Bennett, Olympic pole vaulter, 2008, Team USA
* Peter Bol, Olympic middle-distance runner, (800 meters), 2016 and 2020, Team Australia
* Jillian Camarena-Williams, Olympic shot putter, 2008 and 2012, Team USA
* Roberto Carmona, Olympic decathlete, 1968, Team Mexico
* Ed Eyestone, Olympic long distance runner, marathon, 1988 and 1992, Team USA
* Richard George, Olympic javelin thrower, 1976, Team USA
* Creed Haymond, Olympic sprinter, but he was injured just before the competition 1920, Team USA
* Lydia Jele, Olympic sprinter, 400 meters, 2016, Team Botswana
* C. Kunalan, Olympic sprinter, Men&#x27;s 4 × 100 meters relay, for Team Malaysia in 1964, then the men&#x27;s 100 meters and men&#x27;s 200 meters, for Team Singapore in 1968
* Kenneth Lundmark, Olympic high jumper, 1968, Team Sweden
* Henry Marsh, Olympic 3,000 meter steeplechase runner, 1976, 1984, 1988, Team USA
* Joshua McAdams, Olympic 3,000 meter steeplechase runner, 2008, Team USA
* Jess Mortensen, National Track and Field Hall of Fame, decathlon athlete, declared ineligible at the 1932 Olympics, Team USA
* Doug Padilla, Olympic middle and long distance runner, 1984 and 1988, Team USA
* Doral Pilling, Olympic javelin thrower, 12th in the javelin, 1928, Team Canada
* Ed Red, Olympic javelin thrower, 12th in 1964, Team USA
* Alma Richards, Olympic athlete, gold medal in high jump, 1912, Team USA
* Clarence Robison, Olympic long distance runner, 5000 meters, 1948, Team USA
* Keith Russell, Olympic diver, 3-meter springboard and 10-meter platform, 1968, Team USA
* Dale Schofield, Olympic hurdler, 400 meters hurdles, 1936, Team USA
* Jay Silvester, Olympic discus thrower, silver medalist 1972, and finished 4th in 1964, 5th in 1968 and 8th in 1976, Team USA
* Jason Smyth, Paralympics sprinter, six-time gold medalist, 2008, 2012, 2016 and 2020, Team Ireland
* Usaia Sotutu, Olympic long distance and steeplechase runner, 5000 meters, 10,000 meters and 3,000-meter steeplechase, Team Fiji
* Patricia Taea, Olympic sprinter, 100 meters, 2012 and 2016, Team Cook Islands
* Saimoni Tamani, Olympic sprinter, qualified for 400 metres, but was injured before the competition, 1972, Team Fiji
* Jared Ward, Olympic long distance runner, marathon, 2016, Team USA
* Jack Yerman, Olympic sprinter, gold medalist and setting a world record for 4 x 400 meters relay, 6th Place 400 metres (400-Meter Dash), 1960, Team USA; also played fullback for University of California, Berkeley Golden Bears football team in the 1959, Rose Bowl

====Auto racing====
* David Abbott &quot;Ab&quot; Jenkins, professional race car driver, 1925-1951, (and mayor of Salt Lake City, 1940-1944,)

====Beach volleyball====
* Jake Gibb, Olympian 2008, 2012 and 2016, Team USA
* Casey Patterson, Olympian, 2016, Team USA

====Bobsleighing/bobsleding====
* David Bissett, Olympic Bobsledder, Bronze Medal Winner, 2010 and competed in 2006 and 2014, Team Canada
* Christopher Fogt, Olympic Bobsledder, Silver Medal Winner in 2014, and competed in 2010, 2014 (two-man too) and 2018, Team USA
* Shauna Rohbock, Olympic Bobsledder, Silver Medal Winner, 2006, and 6th Place in 2010, Team USA; see also professional Soccer

====Bodybuilding====
* Larry Scott, IFBB Professional BodyBuilder, 1960-1966, won the inaugural 1965 Mr. Olympia competition and defended the crown at the 1966 Mr. Olympia contest before retiring

====Boxing====
* Jay Lambert, Olympic Boxer, Heavyweight Division in 1948, Team USA
* Jack Dempsey, Professional Boxer, 1914-1927, World Heavyweight Boxing Champion, 1919-1926
* B. J. Flores, Professional Boxer, United States Amateur Heavyweight Champion, 2001-2002, Cruiserweight-Heavyweight, 2003-2018, Boxing Commentator, 2012–present, and Boxing Trainer, 2021–present
* Gene Fullmer, Professional Boxer, 1951-1963, World Middleweight Boxing Champion 1957-1962
* Joseph Parker, Professional Boxer, 2012–present, WBO Heavyweight Boxing Champion, 2016-2018
* Willard Bean, Professional Boxer, 1897-1902, claimed to be the World Middleweight Boxing Champion in 1905

====Fencing====
* María Gabriela Martínez Gascón, Olympic Épée Fencer, 2008 and 2012, Team Venezuela

====Golf====
* Billy Casper, World Golf Hall of Fame, Professional Golfer on PGA Tour 1956-1975, represented the United States on a then-record eight Ryder Cup teams, 1961 Winners, 1963 Winners, 1965 Winners, 1967 Winners, 1969 Winners, 1971 Winners, 1973 Winners, 1975 Winners, was non-playing Captain of the 1979 Winners, and Senior PGA Tour (now PGA Tour Champions), 1981-1989, Ranked as the 15th Greatest Golfer of all time by &quot;Golf Digest&quot; magazine in July 2000
* Keith Clearwater, Professional Golfer, 1982–present, on PGA Tour 1987-2021, PGA Tour Champions 2009-2021 
* Johnny Miller, World Golf Hall of Fame, Professional Golfer on PGA Tour 1969-1981, represented the United States on Ryder Cup teams, 1975 Winners and 1981 Winners, represented the Team USA on World Cup teams, 1973 Winners/Individual Winner, 1975 Winners/Individual Winner, and 1980, and Lead Golf Analyst (Broadcaster/Commentator) for NBC Sports, 1990-2019
* Tony Finau, Professional Golfer, on PGA Tour 2007–present
* Bruce Summerhays, Professional Golfer, on PGA Tour, 1966-199?, on Team USA for the PGA Cup 1977 (tie) and 1978, then Champions Tour, 1994-2010
* Daniel Summerhays, Professional Golfer, on PGA Tour, 2007-2020

====Gymnastics====
* George Greenfield, Olympic artistic gymnast, 1972, Team USA
* Dorothy Dale Elizabeth McClements-Kephart, Olympic artistic gymnast, 1964, Team USA
* MyKayla Skinner, Olympic artistic gymnast, an alternate for 2016 and won a Silver Medal in Women&#x27;s Vault, 2020 for Team USA
* Peter Vidmar, U.S. Olympic Hall of Fame and International Gymnastics Hall of Fame, Olympic gymnast and team captain, two-time Gold Medal Winner and a Silver Medal Winner in 1984, for Team USA

====Luge====
* Kate Hansen, Olympic Luger, 2014, Team USA
* Christian Niccum, Olympic Luger, 2006 Singles, 2010 Doubles, 2014 Doubles and 2014 Team Relay, Team USA

====Martial arts====
* Diego Brandão, Mixed Martial Artist, specializing in Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu, Featherweight Lightweight, UFC Fighter, RIZIN, and Fight Nights Global, 2005-present, and won &quot;The Ultimate Fighter 14&quot; on 21 Sep 2011, becoming the first ever Brazilian to win The Ultimate Fighter
* Rulon Gardner, Hall of Fame Olympic Greco-Roman Style Heavyweight Wrestler, Gold Medal Winner, beat Hidehiko Yoshida in a Judo vs. Wrestling Mixed Martial Arts (MMA) Bout, see also Wrestling, Film, Television and Stage Personalities and Writers
* Natasha Kai, former Olympic Gold Medal Winner in Soccer, 2008, Team USA, tries her hand at MMA, trained in Jujutsu, 2023–present, see also in Rugby and Soccer
* Ed Parker, Martial Artist, Actor, Senior Grandmaster, and Founder of American Kenpo Karate, (creating it from Karate, Kenpō and Judo), 1949–1990

====Race walking====
* John Nunn, Olympic Race Walker, 2004 and 2012, Team USA

====Rodeo====
* Earl W. Bascom, &quot;Father of modern Rodeo&quot;; Inventor and Innovator
* Lewis Feild, World champion 
* Reg Kesler, Canadian Champion, Rodeo Producer 
* Raymond Knight, Hall of Fame, Rodeo Producer, &quot;Father of Canadian Stampedes&quot; 
* Dale D. Smith, Consecutive Team Roping Championships 1956–1957, Inducted into the Pro Rodeo Hall of Fame in 1977, Inducted into the National Cowboy Hall of Fame in 1995

====Rowing (crew)====
* Robert Detweiler, Olympic Competition Coxed Eight Rower, Gold Medal Winner, Men&#x27;s Coxed Eight Rowing Teams, 1952, Team USA
* Lucia Palermo, Olympic Sculls Rower, 2004, 2012 and 2016, Team Argentina

====Skeleton racing====
* Eric Neilson, Olympic Skeleton Racer, 2014, Team Canada
* Noelle Pikus-Pace, Olympic Skeleton Racer, Silver Medal Winner, 2014, and 4th place in 2010, Team USA

====Skiing (snow)====
* Rowena Bright, Olympic Alpine Skier, 2002, Team Australia
* Erik Fisher, Downhill and Super-G Olympic and World Cup Alpine Skier, qualified for 2010 Winter Olympics, Team USA but was injured; has also raced in the 2009 World Championships and World Cups, 2009-2012
* Steven Nyman, Olympic Alpine Skier, 2006, 2010 and 2014, Team USA

====Snowboarding====
* Torah Bright, Olympic Halfpipe, Slopestyle and Boarder-Cross Snowboarder, Gold Medalist in Halfpipe, 2010 and Silver Medal in Halfpipe, 2014, Team Australia, and X Games two-time Gold Medalist, 2007 and 2009
* Jessika Jenson, Olympic Slopestyle Snowboarder, 2014 and 2018, Team USA

====Softball====
* Laura Berg, USA Softball Hall of Fame honoree, Olympic outfielder, three-time gold medal winner, 1996, 2000, 2004 and silver medal winner, 2008, Team USA, professionally Women&#x27;s Pro Softball League (WPSL), with WPSL Gold, 2001, assistant coach, California State University, Fresno Bulldogs and Oregon State University Beavers, 2000-2012, and head coach, Oregon State University Beavers, 2013–present
* Tairia Flowers, Olympic First basewoman and catcher, gold medal winner, 2004, silver medal winner, 2008, Team USA, professionally, Arizona Heat, 2005-2005, assistant coach, University of California Riverside (UCR) Highlanders and Long Beach State 49ers, 2006-2010, head coach, Cal State Northridge Matadors and Loyola Marymount University Lions, 2011–present

====Sports shooting====
* Arnold Vitarbo, Olympic sports shooter, fourth place in 50-metre pistol, 1968, Team USA

====Swimming and diving====
* Jack Horsley, Olympic Backstroke Swimmer, Bronze Medal Winner, 1968, Team USA
* Lelei (née Fonoimoana) Moore, Olympic butterfly stroke and medley relay swimmer, silver medalist in 4 x 100 meter medley relay, 1976, Team USA
* Paula Jean Myers-Pope, Olympic Diver, Silver Medal Winner 10 metre platform (10-Meter Tower), 1952, Team USA, Bronze Medal Winner 10 metre platform (10-Meter Tower), 1956, Team USA, and two-time Silver Medal Winner 10 metre platform (10-Meter Tower) and 3 Metre Springboard (3-Meter Springboard), 1960, Team USA
* Lacey Nymeyer, Olympic Freestyle Swimmer, 2008, Team USA
* Hayley Palmer, Olympic Freestyle Swimmer, 2008 and 2012, Team New Zealand
* Mary Jane Sears, Olympic Breaststroke and Butterfly Swimmer, Bronze Medal Winner, 1956, Team USA
* Byron Shefchik, Breaststroke Swimmer, 5-time All-American, 1992-1998, BYU Cougars, only male member of the BYU Swim and Diving Team to be in the BYU Hall of Fame 

====Volleyball====
* Richard &quot;Rich&quot; Lambourne, Olympic Libero, Gold Medal Winner 2008, Team USA, and professionally for Aon Hotvolleys Vienna (Vienna, Austria, Hot Volleyers), Piet Zoomers Apeldoorn (Apeldoorn, Netherlands, Peter Zoomers), G.S. Lamias Achilleus (Lamias, Greece, Achilles), Noliko Maaseik (Maaseik, Belgium, Not Much), Indykpol AZS Olsztyn (Olsztyn, Poland, Indykpol), Lokomotiv-Belogorie (Belogorie, Russia, Locomotives), Delecta Bydgoszcz (Bydgoszcz, Poland, Delights), Fart Kielce (Kielce, Poland, Lucky) and Al-Arabi Sports Club Fareeg Al-Ahlam (Arabi, Qatar, Dream Team), 2001-2013
* Ryan Millar, Olympic Middle Blocker, 2000, 2004 and Gold Medal Winner 2008, Team USA, and professionally for Volley Forlì (Forli, Italy, Volleyballers), Acqua Paradiso Gabeca Montichiari (Monza, Italy, Gabeca Montichiari Water Paradise Volleyballers), Trentino Volley (Trento, Italy, Volleyers), Sparkling Milano (Milan, Italy, Sparkling), İstanbul Büyükşehir Belediyespor (Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality Sports Club), Asseco Resovia Rzeszów Pasy (Resovia Stripes), VC Lokomotiv Novosibirsk (Novosibirsk Locomotives), 2000-2012, including Pro Gold Medal at FIVB Volleyball World League, 2008 and Pro Bronze Medal in 2007
* Taylor Sander, Olympic Outside Hitter, 2012-2021 Team USA and 2014-2021 professionally for BluVolley Verona, Beijing BAIC Motor Men, Al Arabi Doha, Volley Lube, Sada Cruzeiro and Skra Bełchatów Pszczoły (The Bees)

====Weightlifting====
* Melanie Roach, Olympic Weightlifter, 2008 (also an injured alternate for 2000), Team USA
* Sarah Robles, Olympic Weightlifter, two-time Bronze Medalist, 2016 and 2020, Team USA

====Wrestling====
* Chyna, World Wrestling Federation, 1995-2011,
* Rulon Gardner, Hall of Fame Olympic Greco-Roman Style Heavyweight Wrestler, Gold Medal Winner 2000 and Bronze Medal Winner 2004, Team USA, see also Martial Arts, Film, Television and Stage Personalities and Writers
* Don Leo Jonathan, &quot;The Mormon Giant&quot;, a second-generation Heavyweight Professional Wrestler, National Wrestling Alliance, 1949-1980, including two-time MAC World Heavyweight Championship in 1955
* Cael Sanderson, Hall of Fame Olympic Freestyle 84 Kg-Weight Class Wrestler, Gold Medal Winner, 2004, Team USA, and undefeated Collegiate/Folkstyle Wrestler, 159-0 Won-Loss Record, becoming a four-time NCAA Division I Champion, 1999–2002, Iowa State University Cyclones current head coach of the Penn State Nittany Lions and currently won 11 NCAA team titles with PSU.

==Business==

==Law==
===Judicial===
===Enforcement===
* Samuel P. Cowley (1899–1934), FBI agent killed in the line of duty by Baby Face Nelson
* Porter Rockwell, deputy US Marshal of Salt Lake City (1849–1878); bodyguard of LDS founder Joseph Smith

==Educators and scholars==

==Media and entertainment figures==
===Writers===

===Film, television and stage personalities===
=== Reality stars and YouTubers ===
===Singers and musicians===

===Dance===
* Brandon Armstrong, dancer appearing on &quot;So You Think You Can Dance&quot; and &quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot;
* Lindsay Arnold, dancer appearing on &quot;So You Think You Can Dance&quot; and &quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot;
* Witney Carson, winner of &quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot;″ 19th season
* Chelsie Hightower, ballroom dancer and choreographer
* Derek Hough, 5-time winner of &quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot;, brother of Julianne Hough 
* Sara Webb, professional ballet dancer (1997–2018), principal dancer with Houston Ballet.

==Medicine==
* Richard F. Daines, New York State Department of Health Commissioner, 2007- 2010
* Russell M. Nelson, (president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints) physician, heart surgeon, Director American Board Thoracic Surgeons, Chair Thoracic Surgery Salt Lake Hospital, University Hospital (world renowned) first open heart surgery heart lung support machine under Dr. Gibbon, Mayo Clinic, Philadelphia &quot;Top 20 Most Innovative Surgeons Alive Today&quot;
* Ellis Reynolds Shipp, 1847–1939.One of the first female doctors west of the Mississippi. Sent to Women&#x27;s Medical College of Pennsylvania in 1873 by Eliza R. Snow on an endowment from Dr. Willard Richards. Upon return to Salt Lake City, worked with Snow&#x27;s board to start obstetrics school 1876, trained 660 midwives. went to Michigan for pediatrics under pioneer Victor Vaugh who created American Pediatrics Board, returning created LDS Children&#x27;s hospital under relief society, bolstered by St. Marks Hospital Salt Lake.
* Willard Richards, 1804-1854 Obstetrician Thompson Infirmary Med School Boston 1835. Apostle 1840 2nd counselor 1847, migrated Salt Lake 1847–9, expedition secretary and medic/surgeon. Opened Deseret (Salt Lake) LDS clinic under Relief Society 1849 SLC. Started Deseret News column on health. Trained midwives, many starting as girls. Treated gold rush miners 1849–50.

==Scientists and inventors==

==Military==
===Commanders===
===U.S. Medal of Honor recipients===

==Politics==

===U.S. politicians===
====Currently in office====

=====U.S. Senate=====
=====U.S. House of Representatives=====
* Mike Simpson (R–Idaho)
* Chris Stewart (R–Utah)
* Burgess Owens (R–Utah)
* Andy Biggs (R–Arizona)

=====Governors=====
* Spencer Cox (R–Utah)

====Past office holders====
=====U.S. Senate=====
=====U.S. House of Representatives=====
=====U.S. governors=====

=====Cabinet officers, ambassadors and senior administration officials=====
=====Other American politicians=====


===Politicians outside the United States===

====Royalty====
* ʻElisiva Fusipala Vahaʻi, Tongan princess
* Prince Ata, Tongan prince

==Church leaders==
=== Presidents of the LDS Church (largest denomination) ===

=== Presidents of the Community of Christ ===

=== Presidents of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints ===
===Leaders of smaller factions===
==References==
==External links==
* Links to Lists of Famous Latter-day Saints
* The Mormon 100: A Ranking of the 100 Most Influential Latter-day Saints in History
* Mormons in Business</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="72" end="89" title="Latter Day Saints" label="Latter Day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="171" end="196" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="222" end="269" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q625363" start="284" end="303" title="Community of Christ" label="Community of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621130" start="736" end="768" title="List of former Latter Day Saints" label="List of former Latter Day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q6357" start="1115" end="1128" title="Valerie Adams" label="Valerie Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="1183" end="1187" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="1192" end="1196" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="1215" end="1219" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q181278" start="1240" end="1244" title="2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869068" start="1246" end="1262" title="Athletics New Zealand" label="Team New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6552863" start="1265" end="1281" title="Lindsey Anderson" label="Lindsey Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q223836" start="1311" end="1323" title="Steeplechase (athletics)" label="steeplechase"/>
<link wikidata="Q947750" start="1332" end="1336" title="Athletics at the 2008 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s 3000 metres steeplechase" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q140185" start="1338" end="1346" title="United States at the 2008 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358020" start="1349" end="1365" title="Niklas Arrhenius" label="Niklas Arrhenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q517035" start="1391" end="1395" title="Athletics at the 2008 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s discus throw" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q140560" start="1397" end="1408" title="Sweden at the 2008 Summer Olympics" label="Team Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959021" start="1411" end="1420" title="Wade Bell" label="Wade Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818455" start="1454" end="1464" title="800 metres at the Olympics" label="800 meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628428" start="1466" end="1470" title="Athletics at the 1968 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s decathlon" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312718" start="1472" end="1480" title="United States at the 1968 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q452843" start="1483" end="1504" title="April Steiner Bennett" label="April Steiner Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q847592" start="1528" end="1532" title="Athletics at the 2008 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s pole vault" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q140185" start="1534" end="1542" title="United States at the 2008 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q26787425" start="1545" end="1554" title="Peter Bol (runner)" label="Peter Bol"/>
<link wikidata="Q271008" start="1588" end="1600" title="800 metres" label="(800 meters)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18193712" start="1602" end="1606" title="Athletics at the 2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q39080746" start="1611" end="1615" title="Athletics at the 2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869069" start="1617" end="1631" title="Athletics Australia" label="Team Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q288857" start="1634" end="1659" title="Jillian Camarena-Williams" label="Jillian Camarena-Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="1682" end="1686" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="1691" end="1695" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055618" start="1697" end="1705" title="United States at the Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q122968441" start="1708" end="1723" title="Roberto Carmona Botella" label="Roberto Carmona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628428" start="1745" end="1749" title="Athletics at the 1968 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s decathlon" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q326770" start="1751" end="1762" title="Mexico at the 1968 Summer Olympics" label="Team Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334790" start="1765" end="1776" title="Ed Eyestone" label="Ed Eyestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628699" start="1818" end="1822" title="Athletics at the 1988 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s marathon" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407627" start="1827" end="1831" title="Athletics at the 1992 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s marathon" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055618" start="1833" end="1841" title="United States at the Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q27923046" start="1844" end="1858" title="Richard George (athlete)" label="Richard George"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628748" start="1885" end="1889" title="Athletics at the 1976 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s javelin throw" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433247" start="1891" end="1899" title="United States at the 1976 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183836" start="1902" end="1915" title="Creed Haymond" label="Creed Haymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q8128" start="1982" end="1986" title="1920 Summer Olympics" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884208" start="1988" end="1996" title="United States at the 1920 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621577" start="1999" end="2009" title="Lydia Jele" label="Lydia Jele"/>
<link wikidata="Q334734" start="2029" end="2039" title="400 metres" label="400 meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q26219839" start="2041" end="2045" title="Athletics at the 2016 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s 400 metres" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454140" start="2047" end="2060" title="Botswana Athletics Association" label="Team Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015065" start="2063" end="2073" title="C. Kunalan" label="C. Kunalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628505" start="2093" end="2124" title="Athletics at the 1964 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 4 × 100 metres relay" label="Men&amp;#x27;s 4 × 100 meters relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327883" start="2130" end="2143" title="Malaysia at the 1964 Summer Olympics" label="Team Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8420" start="2147" end="2151" title="1964 Summer Olympics" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093825" start="2162" end="2183" title="Athletics at the 1968 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 100 metres" label="men&amp;#x27;s 100 meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628416" start="2188" end="2209" title="Athletics at the 1968 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 200 metres" label="men&amp;#x27;s 200 meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436589" start="2215" end="2229" title="Singapore at the 1968 Summer Olympics" label="Team Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8429" start="2233" end="2237" title="1968 Summer Olympics" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967317" start="2240" end="2256" title="Kenneth Lundmark" label="Kenneth Lundmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628439" start="2279" end="2283" title="Athletics at the 1968 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s high jump" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664751" start="2285" end="2296" title="Sweden at the 1968 Summer Olympics" label="Team Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q506113" start="2299" end="2310" title="Henry Marsh (runner)" label="Henry Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q223836" start="2332" end="2344" title="Steeplechase (athletics)" label="steeplechase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628719" start="2353" end="2357" title="Athletics at the 1976 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 3000 metres steeplechase" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628614" start="2359" end="2363" title="Athletics at the 1984 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 3000 metres steeplechase" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679260" start="2365" end="2369" title="Athletics at the 1988 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 3000 metres steeplechase" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055618" start="2371" end="2379" title="United States at the Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289161" start="2382" end="2396" title="Joshua McAdams" label="Joshua McAdams"/>
<link wikidata="Q544177" start="2439" end="2443" title="Athletics at the 2008 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 3000 metres steeplechase" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055618" start="2445" end="2453" title="United States at the Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185978" start="2456" end="2470" title="Jess Mortensen" label="Jess Mortensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087567" start="2472" end="2509" title="National Track and Field Hall of Fame" label="National Track and Field Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628884" start="2557" end="2561" title="Athletics at the 1932 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s decathlon" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455082" start="2572" end="2580" title="United States at the 1932 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037949" start="2583" end="2595" title="Doug Padilla" label="Doug Padilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="2638" end="2642" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="2647" end="2651" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055618" start="2653" end="2661" title="United States at the Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297507" start="2664" end="2677" title="Doral Pilling" label="Doral Pilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628312" start="2725" end="2729" title="Athletics at the 1928 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s javelin throw" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q148043" start="2731" end="2742" title="Canada at the 1928 Summer Olympics" label="Team Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q47459006" start="2745" end="2751" title="Ed Red" label="Ed Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628508" start="2786" end="2790" title="Athletics at the 1964 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s javelin throw" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116585" start="2792" end="2800" title="United States at the 1964 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q706309" start="2803" end="2816" title="Alma Richards" label="Alma Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q8118" start="2860" end="2864" title="1912 Summer Olympics" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q531525" start="2866" end="2874" title="United States at the 1912 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126722" start="2877" end="2893" title="Clarence Robison" label="Clarence Robison"/>
<link wikidata="Q240500" start="2925" end="2936" title="5000 metres" label="5000 meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628389" start="2938" end="2942" title="Athletics at the 1948 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 5000 metres" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198277" start="2944" end="2952" title="United States at the 1948 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16122495" start="2955" end="2968" title="Keith Russell (diver)" label="Keith Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4000204" start="2985" end="3004" title="Diving at the 1968 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 3 metre springboard" label="3-meter springboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q609352" start="3009" end="3026" title="Diving at the 1968 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 10 metre platform" label="10-meter platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q221599" start="3028" end="3032" title="Diving at the 1968 Summer Olympics" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312718" start="3034" end="3042" title="United States at the 1968 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q41536341" start="3045" end="3059" title="Dale Schofield" label="Dale Schofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628454" start="3078" end="3096" title="Athletics at the 1936 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 400 metres hurdles" label="400 meters hurdles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="3098" end="3102" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q150462" start="3104" end="3112" title="United States at the 1936 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q914365" start="3115" end="3128" title="Jay Silvester" label="Jay Silvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q160007" start="3170" end="3174" title="Athletics at the 1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628493" start="3196" end="3200" title="Athletics at the 1964 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s discus throw" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628431" start="3209" end="3213" title="Athletics at the 1968 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s discus throw" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628730" start="3225" end="3229" title="Athletics at the 1976 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s discus throw" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q742661" start="3231" end="3239" title="United States at the Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385257" start="3242" end="3253" title="Jason Smyth" label="Jason Smyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q216864" start="3301" end="3305" title="2008 Summer Paralympics" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q182798" start="3307" end="3311" title="2012 Summer Paralympics" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142161" start="3313" end="3317" title="2016 Summer Paralympics" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q14856650" start="3322" end="3326" title="2020 Summer Paralympics" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q850391" start="3328" end="3340" title="Ireland at the 2008 Summer Paralympics" label="Team Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10388328" start="3343" end="3355" title="Usaia Sotutu" label="Usaia Sotutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094442" start="3404" end="3415" title="Athletics at the 1972 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 5000 metres" label="5000 meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628840" start="3417" end="3430" title="Athletics at the 1972 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 10,000 metres" label="10,000 meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628846" start="3435" end="3459" title="Athletics at the 1972 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 3000 metres steeplechase" label="3,000-meter steeplechase"/>
<link wikidata="Q143996" start="3461" end="3470" title="Fiji at the 1972 Summer Olympics" label="Team Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145865" start="3473" end="3486" title="Patricia Taea" label="Patricia Taea"/>
<link wikidata="Q164761" start="3506" end="3516" title="100 metres" label="100 meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q185262" start="3518" end="3522" title="Athletics at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q18193712" start="3527" end="3531" title="Athletics at the 2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="3533" end="3550" title="Cook Islands" label="Team Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400474" start="3553" end="3567" title="Saimoni Tamani" label="Saimoni Tamani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094451" start="3601" end="3611" title="Athletics at the 1972 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 400 metres" label="400 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q8438" start="3653" end="3657" title="1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q143996" start="3659" end="3668" title="Fiji at the 1972 Summer Olympics" label="Team Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q22002466" start="3671" end="3681" title="Jared Ward" label="Jared Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q40244" start="3713" end="3721" title="marathon" label="marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21858018" start="3723" end="3727" title="Athletics at the 2016 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s marathon" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q18035957" start="3729" end="3737" title="United States at the 2016 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q350583" start="3740" end="3751" title="Jack Yerman" label="Jack Yerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628540" start="3816" end="3836" title="Athletics at the 1960 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 4 × 400 metres relay" label="4 x 400 meters relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628518" start="3848" end="3875" title="Athletics at the 1960 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 400 metres" label="400 metres (400-Meter Dash)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8415" start="3877" end="3881" title="1960 Summer Olympics" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078654" start="3883" end="3891" title="United States at the 1960 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="3918" end="3965" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley Golden Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569697" start="3987" end="3991" title="1959 Rose Bowl" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q543429" start="3993" end="4002" title="Rose Bowl Game" label="Rose Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662996" start="4026" end="4061" title="Ab Jenkins" label="David Abbott &amp;quot;Ab&amp;quot; Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677498" start="4174" end="4183" title="Jake Gibb" label="Jake Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4471528" start="4194" end="4198" title="Beach volleyball at the 2008 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q918063" start="4200" end="4204" title="Beach volleyball at the 2012 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q24825467" start="4209" end="4213" title="Beach volleyball at the 2016 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q18035957" start="4215" end="4223" title="United States at the 2016 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q13521858" start="4226" end="4241" title="Casey Patterson (beach volleyball)" label="Casey Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q24825467" start="4253" end="4257" title="Beach volleyball at the 2016 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q18035957" start="4259" end="4267" title="United States at the 2016 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q508877" start="4303" end="4316" title="David Bissett (bobsleigh)" label="David Bissett"/>
<link wikidata="Q737863" start="4359" end="4363" title="Bobsleigh at the 2010 Winter Olympics – Four-man" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q147058" start="4380" end="4384" title="Canada at the 2006 Winter Olympics" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q24984" start="4389" end="4393" title="Bobsleigh at the 2014 Winter Olympics" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032282" start="4395" end="4406" title="Canadian Olympic Committee" label="Team Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491301" start="4409" end="4425" title="Christopher Fogt" label="Christopher Fogt"/>
<link wikidata="Q24984" start="4470" end="4474" title="Bobsleigh at the 2014 Winter Olympics" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q737863" start="4492" end="4496" title="Bobsleigh at the 2010 Winter Olympics – Four-man" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055978" start="4498" end="4516" title="Bobsleigh at the 2014 Winter Olympics – Two-man" label="2014 (two-man too)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168679" start="4521" end="4525" title="Bobsleigh at the 2018 Winter Olympics – Four-man" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q85812131" start="4527" end="4535" title="United States at the Winter Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q433552" start="4538" end="4552" title="Shauna Rohbock" label="Shauna Rohbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q613506" start="4595" end="4599" title="Bobsleigh at the 2006 Winter Olympics" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q325276" start="4618" end="4622" title="Bobsleigh at the 2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q139750" start="4624" end="4632" title="United States at the 2010 Winter Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4656" end="4662" title="List of Latter Day Saints#Association Football (Soccer)" label="Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q721877" start="4687" end="4698" title="Larry Scott (bodybuilder)" label="Larry Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q511252" start="4700" end="4704" title="International Federation of BodyBuilding and Fitness" label="IFBB"/>
<link wikidata="Q633391" start="4750" end="4764" title="1965 Mr. Olympia" label="inaugural 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q271725" start="4765" end="4776" title="Mr. Olympia" label="Mr. Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15286313" start="4819" end="4835" title="1966 Mr. Olympia" label="1966 Mr. Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166823" start="4878" end="4889" title="Jay Lambert" label="Jay Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q575685" start="4930" end="4934" title="Boxing at the 1948 Summer Olympics" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198277" start="4936" end="4944" title="United States at the 1948 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q313686" start="4947" end="4959" title="Jack Dempsey" label="Jack Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491137" start="5039" end="5051" title="B. J. Flores" label="B. J. Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892578" start="5073" end="5115" title="United States national amateur boxing championships" label="United States Amateur Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q942573" start="5235" end="5247" title="Gene Fullmer" label="Gene Fullmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16227145" start="5327" end="5340" title="Joseph Parker" label="Joseph Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q830940" start="5376" end="5379" title="World Boxing Organization" label="WBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q75186328" start="5421" end="5433" title="Willard Bean" label="Willard Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q584786" start="5546" end="5576" title="María Martínez (fencer)" label="María Gabriela Martínez Gascón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051974" start="5599" end="5603" title="Fencing at the 2008 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s épée" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156695" start="5608" end="5612" title="Fencing at the 2012 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s épée" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q754703" start="5614" end="5628" title="Venezuela at the Olympics" label="Team Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q863051" start="5645" end="5657" title="Billy Casper" label="Billy Casper"/>
<link wikidata="Q258851" start="5659" end="5682" title="World Golf Hall of Fame" label="World Golf Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="5707" end="5715" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561413" start="5743" end="5756" title="List of American Ryder Cup golfers" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q854376" start="5780" end="5789" title="Ryder Cup" label="Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570452" start="5797" end="5801" title="1961 Ryder Cup" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571206" start="5811" end="5815" title="1963 Ryder Cup" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572000" start="5825" end="5829" title="1965 Ryder Cup" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710308" start="5839" end="5843" title="1967 Ryder Cup" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453893" start="5853" end="5857" title="1969 Ryder Cup" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453896" start="5867" end="5871" title="1971 Ryder Cup" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453897" start="5881" end="5885" title="1973 Ryder Cup" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453898" start="5895" end="5899" title="1975 Ryder Cup" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5925" end="5932" title="Ryder Cup#Captains" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453899" start="5940" end="5944" title="1979 Ryder Cup" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061312" start="5958" end="5998" title="PGA Tour Champions" label="Senior PGA Tour (now PGA Tour Champions)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110173" start="6067" end="6078" title="Golf Digest" label="Golf Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193051" start="6109" end="6125" title="Keith Clearwater" label="Keith Clearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="6165" end="6173" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061312" start="6185" end="6203" title="PGA Tour Champions" label="PGA Tour Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q436423" start="6217" end="6230" title="Johnny Miller" label="Johnny Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q258851" start="6232" end="6255" title="World Golf Hall of Fame" label="World Golf Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="6280" end="6288" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561413" start="6316" end="6329" title="List of American Ryder Cup golfers" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q854376" start="6333" end="6342" title="Ryder Cup" label="Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453898" start="6350" end="6354" title="1975 Ryder Cup" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453900" start="6367" end="6371" title="1981 Ryder Cup" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q60313881" start="6397" end="6405" title="United States national team" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q524624" start="6409" end="6418" title="World Cup (men&amp;#x27;s golf)" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q85724325" start="6426" end="6430" title="1973 World Cup" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q85724565" start="6458" end="6462" title="1975 World Cup (men&amp;#x27;s golf)" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q85725098" start="6494" end="6498" title="1980 World Cup (men&amp;#x27;s golf)" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046048" start="6552" end="6562" title="NBC Sports" label="NBC Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q17505091" start="6576" end="6586" title="Tony Finau" label="Tony Finau"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="6612" end="6620" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978335" start="6636" end="6652" title="Bruce Summerhays" label="Bruce Summerhays"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="6678" end="6686" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6702" end="6710" title="United States national team#Other international competitions" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115804" start="6719" end="6726" title="PGA Cup" label="PGA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6727" end="6731" title="PGA Cup#Appearances" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6742" end="6746" title="PGA Cup#Appearances" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061312" start="6753" end="6767" title="PGA Tour Champions" label="Champions Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218869" start="6781" end="6798" title="Daniel Summerhays" label="Daniel Summerhays"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="6824" end="6832" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q66337302" start="6866" end="6883" title="George Greenfield (gymnast)" label="George Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703073" start="6911" end="6915" title="Gymnastics at the 1972 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s artistic individual all-around" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q2127861" start="6917" end="6925" title="United States at the 1972 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298539" start="6928" end="6969" title="Dorothy McClements" label="Dorothy Dale Elizabeth McClements-Kephart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5624306" start="6997" end="7001" title="Gymnastics at the 1964 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s artistic team all-around" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116585" start="7003" end="7011" title="United States at the 1964 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6947520" start="7014" end="7029" title="MyKayla Skinner" label="MyKayla Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q39089625" start="7074" end="7078" title="Final Five (gymnastics)" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q65242421" start="7105" end="7123" title="Gymnastics at the 2020 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s vault" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q39080753" start="7125" end="7129" title="Gymnastics at the 2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q742661" start="7134" end="7142" title="United States at the Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q933770" start="7145" end="7157" title="Peter Vidmar" label="Peter Vidmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890852" start="7159" end="7184" title="United States Olympic &amp;amp; Paralympic Hall of Fame" label="U.S. Olympic Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666611" start="7189" end="7226" title="International Gymnastics Hall of Fame" label="International Gymnastics Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q593579" start="7318" end="7322" title="Gymnastics at the 1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055618" start="7328" end="7336" title="United States at the Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375520" start="7353" end="7364" title="Kate Hansen" label="Kate Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q273285" start="7374" end="7378" title="Luge" label="Luge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056285" start="7381" end="7385" title="Luge at the 2014 Winter Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q85812131" start="7387" end="7395" title="United States at the Winter Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q383087" start="7398" end="7414" title="Christian Niccum" label="Christian Niccum"/>
<link wikidata="Q273285" start="7424" end="7428" title="Luge" label="Luge"/>
<link wikidata="Q826580" start="7431" end="7443" title="Luge at the 2006 Winter Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2006 Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q582450" start="7445" end="7457" title="Luge at the 2010 Winter Olympics – Doubles" label="2010 Doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056282" start="7459" end="7471" title="Luge at the 2014 Winter Olympics – Doubles" label="2014 Doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056284" start="7476" end="7491" title="Luge at the 2014 Winter Olympics – Team relay" label="2014 Team Relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q85812131" start="7493" end="7501" title="United States at the Winter Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274592" start="7526" end="7539" title="Diego Brandão" label="Diego Brandão"/>
<link wikidata="Q186471" start="7627" end="7630" title="Ultimate Fighting Championship" label="UFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q21089381" start="7640" end="7645" title="Rizin Fighting Federation" label="RIZIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q21857783" start="7651" end="7670" title="AMC Fight Nights" label="Fight Nights Global"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7700" end="7723" title="The Ultimate Fighter: Team Bisping vs. Team Miller" label="The Ultimate Fighter 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q724193" start="7810" end="7823" title="Rulon Gardner" label="Rulon Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979466" start="7825" end="7837" title="National Wrestling Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295056" start="7910" end="7926" title="Hidehiko Yoshida" label="Hidehiko Yoshida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7991" end="8000" title="List of Latter Day Saints#Wrestling" label="Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8002" end="8042" title="List of Latter Day Saints#Film, Television and Stage Personalities" label="Film, Television and Stage Personalities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8047" end="8054" title="List of Latter Day Saints#Writers" label="Writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q443799" start="8057" end="8068" title="Natasha Kai" label="Natasha Kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="8114" end="8118" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q140185" start="8120" end="8128" title="United States at the 2008 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q114466" start="8148" end="8151" title="Mixed martial arts" label="MMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q163770" start="8164" end="8171" title="Jujutsu" label="Jujutsu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8199" end="8204" title="List of Latter Day Saints#Rugby Union" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8209" end="8215" title="List of Latter Day Saints#Association Football (Soccer)" label="Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q653633" start="8218" end="8227" title="Ed Parker" label="Ed Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q978854" start="8252" end="8270" title="Grandmaster (martial arts)" label="Senior Grandmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q525270" start="8287" end="8308" title="American Kenpo" label="American Kenpo Karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="8328" end="8334" title="Karate" label="Karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q501672" start="8336" end="8341" title="Kenpō" label="Kenpō"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="8346" end="8350" title="Judo" label="Judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250720" start="8387" end="8396" title="John Nunn (racewalker)" label="John Nunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="8419" end="8423" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="8428" end="8432" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055618" start="8434" end="8442" title="United States at the Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326138" start="8460" end="8474" title="Earl W. Bascom" label="Earl W. Bascom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241650" start="8537" end="8548" title="Lewis Feild" label="Lewis Feild"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307807" start="8568" end="8578" title="Reg Kesler" label="Reg Kesler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298934" start="8617" end="8631" title="Raymond Knight (rodeo organizer)" label="Raymond Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q28542618" start="8707" end="8720" title="Dale Smith (cowboy)" label="Dale D. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343513" start="8901" end="8917" title="Robert Detweiler" label="Robert Detweiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q9375319" start="8977" end="9012" title="Rowing at the 1952 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s eight" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Coxed Eight Rowing Teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8407" start="9014" end="9018" title="1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863859" start="9020" end="9028" title="United States at the 1952 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696661" start="9031" end="9044" title="Lucia Palermo" label="Lucia Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="9068" end="9072" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="9074" end="9078" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="9083" end="9087" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="9089" end="9103" title="Argentina" label="Team Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q658740" start="9131" end="9143" title="Eric Neilson (skeleton racer)" label="Eric Neilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q186190" start="9153" end="9161" title="Skeleton (sport)" label="Skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056279" start="9169" end="9173" title="Skeleton at the 2014 Winter Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416060" start="9175" end="9186" title="Canada at the 2014 Winter Olympics" label="Team Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q447178" start="9189" end="9206" title="Noelle Pikus-Pace" label="Noelle Pikus-Pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q186190" start="9216" end="9224" title="Skeleton (sport)" label="Skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056278" start="9253" end="9257" title="Skeleton at the 2014 Winter Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q939181" start="9276" end="9280" title="Skeleton at the 2010 Winter Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417323" start="9282" end="9290" title="United States at the 2014 Winter Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q51280948" start="9316" end="9329" title="Rowena Bright" label="Rowena Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q9668" start="9353" end="9357" title="2002 Winter Olympics" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q600403" start="9359" end="9373" title="Australia at the Olympics" label="Team Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q635156" start="9376" end="9387" title="Erik Fisher" label="Erik Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="9389" end="9397" title="Alpine skiing" label="Downhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129021" start="9402" end="9409" title="Super-G" label="Super-G"/>
<link wikidata="Q207657" start="9460" end="9480" title="Alpine skiing at the 2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q30897012" start="9482" end="9490" title="United States Ski Team" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q754506" start="9530" end="9554" title="FIS Alpine World Ski Championships 2009" label="2009 World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q982" start="9559" end="9569" title="FIS Alpine Ski World Cup" label="World Cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q722673" start="9583" end="9595" title="Steven Nyman" label="Steven Nyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q251520" start="9619" end="9623" title="Alpine skiing at the 2006 Winter Olympics" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q207657" start="9625" end="9629" title="Alpine skiing at the 2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q390965" start="9634" end="9638" title="Alpine skiing at the 2014 Winter Olympics" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q30897012" start="9640" end="9648" title="United States Ski Team" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q264875" start="9673" end="9685" title="Torah Bright" label="Torah Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="9774" end="9778" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q9678" start="9809" end="9813" title="2014 Winter Olympics" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q600403" start="9815" end="9829" title="Australia at the Olympics" label="Team Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q527512" start="9835" end="9842" title="X Games" label="X Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026368" start="9867" end="9871" title="Winter X Games XI" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800298" start="9876" end="9880" title="Winter X Games XIII" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q15926176" start="9883" end="9897" title="Jessika Jenson" label="Jessika Jenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055074" start="9931" end="9935" title="Snowboarding at the 2014 Winter Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s slopestyle" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q47461842" start="9940" end="9944" title="Snowboarding at the 2018 Winter Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s slopestyle" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q30897012" start="9946" end="9954" title="United States Ski Team" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q10062" start="9975" end="9985" title="Laura Berg" label="Laura Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="10072" end="10076" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="10078" end="10082" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="10084" end="10088" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="10114" end="10118" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514945" start="10120" end="10128" title="United States women&amp;#x27;s national softball team" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q376049" start="10145" end="10184" title="National Pro Fastpitch" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Pro Softball League (WPSL)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10191" end="10200" title="2001 Women&amp;#x27;s Pro Softball League season#WPSL Gold" label="WPSL Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q24944425" start="10202" end="10206" title="2001 Women&amp;#x27;s Pro Softball League season" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q85762140" start="10225" end="10269" title="Fresno State Bulldogs softball" label="California State University, Fresno Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089578" start="10274" end="10305" title="Oregon State Beavers softball" label="Oregon State University Beavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089578" start="10334" end="10365" title="Oregon State Beavers softball" label="Oregon State University Beavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130754" start="10382" end="10396" title="Tairia Flowers" label="Tairia Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="10454" end="10458" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="10481" end="10485" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514945" start="10487" end="10495" title="United States women&amp;#x27;s national softball team" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154292" start="10513" end="10525" title="Arizona Heat" label="Arizona Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864182" start="10555" end="10607" title="UC Riverside Highlanders" label="University of California Riverside (UCR) Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q9023633" start="10612" end="10634" title="Long Beach State athletics" label="Long Beach State 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018231" start="10659" end="10688" title="Cal State Northridge Matadors" label="Cal State Northridge Matadors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786078" start="10693" end="10726" title="Loyola Marymount University" label="Loyola Marymount University Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096746" start="10768" end="10782" title="Arnold Vitarbo" label="Arnold Vitarbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25021431" start="10841" end="10845" title="Shooting at the 1968 Summer Olympics – Mixed 50 metre pistol" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312718" start="10847" end="10855" title="United States at the 1968 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113201" start="10887" end="10899" title="Jack Horsley" label="Jack Horsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q831984" start="10950" end="10954" title="Swimming at the 1968 Summer Olympics" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312718" start="10956" end="10964" title="United States at the 1968 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229270" start="10967" end="10995" title="Lelei Fonoimoana" label="Lelei (née Fonoimoana) Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656585" start="11067" end="11093" title="Swimming at the 1976 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s 4 × 100 metre medley relay" label="4 x 100 meter medley relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8444" start="11095" end="11099" title="1976 Summer Olympics" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433247" start="11101" end="11109" title="United States at the 1976 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q533418" start="11112" end="11133" title="Paula Jean Myers-Pope" label="Paula Jean Myers-Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284226" start="11170" end="11204" title="Diving at the 1952 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s 10 metre platform" label="10 metre platform (10-Meter Tower)"/>
<link wikidata="Q922762" start="11206" end="11210" title="Diving at the 1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863859" start="11212" end="11220" title="United States at the 1952 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972676" start="11242" end="11276" title="Diving at the 1956 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s 10 metre platform" label="10 metre platform (10-Meter Tower)"/>
<link wikidata="Q549474" start="11278" end="11282" title="Diving at the 1956 Summer Olympics" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326879" start="11284" end="11292" title="United States at the 1956 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4000206" start="11327" end="11361" title="Diving at the 1960 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s 10 metre platform" label="10 metre platform (10-Meter Tower)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4000208" start="11366" end="11407" title="Diving at the 1960 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s 3 metre springboard" label="3 Metre Springboard (3-Meter Springboard)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8415" start="11409" end="11413" title="1960 Summer Olympics" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078654" start="11415" end="11423" title="United States at the 1960 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q271205" start="11426" end="11439" title="Lacey Nymeyer" label="Lacey Nymeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="11468" end="11472" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547330" start="11474" end="11482" title="USA Swimming" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686862" start="11485" end="11498" title="Hayley Palmer" label="Hayley Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="11527" end="11531" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="11536" end="11540" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q754771" start="11542" end="11558" title="New Zealand at the Olympics" label="Team New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780694" start="11561" end="11576" title="Mary Sears (swimmer)" label="Mary Jane Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656388" start="11643" end="11647" title="Swimming at the 1956 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s 100 metre butterfly" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326879" start="11649" end="11657" title="United States at the 1956 Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004469" start="11660" end="11674" title="Byron Shefchik" label="Byron Shefchik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416599" start="11730" end="11741" title="BYU Cougars" label="BYU Cougars"/>
<link wikidata="Q695115" start="11845" end="11879" title="Richard Lambourne" label="Richard &amp;quot;Rich&amp;quot; Lambourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="11915" end="11919" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465109" start="11921" end="11929" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q300922" start="11954" end="12008" title="Hotvolleys Vienna" label="Aon Hotvolleys Vienna (Vienna, Austria, Hot Volleyers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q742012" start="12010" end="12072" title="Sportvereniging Dynamo" label="Piet Zoomers Apeldoorn (Apeldoorn, Netherlands, Peter Zoomers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093139" start="12074" end="12122" title="G.S. Lamias Achilleus" label="G.S. Lamias Achilleus (Lamias, Greece, Achilles)"/>
<link wikidata="Q767541" start="12124" end="12167" title="VC Maaseik" label="Noliko Maaseik (Maaseik, Belgium, Not Much)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028313" start="12169" end="12217" title="AZS Olsztyn (volleyball)" label="Indykpol AZS Olsztyn (Olsztyn, Poland, Indykpol)"/>
<link wikidata="Q163526" start="12219" end="12271" title="VC Belogorie" label="Lokomotiv-Belogorie (Belogorie, Russia, Locomotives)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962273" start="12273" end="12320" title="BKS Visła Bydgoszcz" label="Delecta Bydgoszcz (Bydgoszcz, Poland, Delights)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067028" start="12322" end="12357" title="KPS Kielce" label="Fart Kielce (Kielce, Poland, Lucky)"/>
<link wikidata="Q283760" start="12362" end="12425" title="Al-Arabi SC (Qatar)" label="Al-Arabi Sports Club Fareeg Al-Ahlam (Arabi, Qatar, Dream Team)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569874" start="12439" end="12450" title="Ryan Millar" label="Ryan Millar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="12476" end="12480" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="12482" end="12486" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="12509" end="12513" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465109" start="12515" end="12523" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12548" end="12590" title="Volley Forlì" label="Volley Forlì (Forli, Italy, Volleyballers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488136" start="12592" end="12689" title="Gabeca Pallavolo" label="Acqua Paradiso Gabeca Montichiari (Monza, Italy, Gabeca Montichiari Water Paradise Volleyballers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632686" start="12691" end="12733" title="Trentino Volley" label="Trentino Volley (Trento, Italy, Volleyers)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12735" end="12777" title="Sparkling Milano" label="Sparkling Milano (Milan, Italy, Sparkling)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058313" start="12779" end="12860" title="İstanbul Büyükşehir Belediyespor (men&amp;#x27;s volleyball)" label="İstanbul Büyükşehir Belediyespor (Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality Sports Club)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359492" start="12862" end="12907" title="Resovia (volleyball)" label="Asseco Resovia Rzeszów Pasy (Resovia Stripes)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636149" start="12909" end="12959" title="VC Lokomotiv Novosibirsk" label="VC Lokomotiv Novosibirsk (Novosibirsk Locomotives)"/>
<link wikidata="Q300168" start="13000" end="13028" title="FIVB Volleyball World League" label="FIVB Volleyball World League"/>
<link wikidata="Q659514" start="13030" end="13034" title="2008 FIVB Volleyball World League" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465501" start="13059" end="13063" title="2007 FIVB Volleyball World League" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q16612430" start="13066" end="13079" title="Taylor Sander" label="Taylor Sander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465109" start="13115" end="13123" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907119" start="13157" end="13173" title="BluVolley Verona" label="BluVolley Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q16531721" start="13175" end="13197" title="Beijing BAIC Motor men&amp;#x27;s volleyball team" label="Beijing BAIC Motor Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q4544423" start="13199" end="13212" title="Al Arabi Qatar (volleyball)" label="Al Arabi Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872851" start="13214" end="13225" title="Volley Lube" label="Volley Lube"/>
<link wikidata="Q693362" start="13227" end="13240" title="Associação Social e Esportiva Sada" label="Sada Cruzeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475263" start="13245" end="13279" title="Skra Bełchatów" label="Skra Bełchatów Pszczoły (The Bees)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811341" start="13305" end="13318" title="Melanie Roach" label="Melanie Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q212887" start="13342" end="13346" title="Weightlifting at the 2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="13378" end="13382" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055618" start="13385" end="13393" title="United States at the Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422740" start="13396" end="13408" title="Sarah Robles" label="Sarah Robles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18564445" start="13458" end="13462" title="Weightlifting at the 2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q39080756" start="13467" end="13471" title="Weightlifting at the 2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055618" start="13473" end="13481" title="United States at the Summer Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q466683" start="13503" end="13508" title="Chyna" label="Chyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="13510" end="13536" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q724193" start="13551" end="13564" title="Rulon Gardner" label="Rulon Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979466" start="13566" end="13578" title="National Wrestling Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037955" start="13645" end="13649" title="Wrestling at the 2000 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s Greco-Roman 130 kg" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3837496" start="13674" end="13678" title="Wrestling at the 2004 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s Greco-Roman 120 kg" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q742661" start="13680" end="13688" title="United States at the Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13699" end="13711" title="List of Latter Day Saints#Martial Arts" label="Martial Arts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13713" end="13753" title="List of Latter Day Saints#Film, Television and Stage Personalities" label="Film, Television and Stage Personalities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13758" end="13765" title="List of Latter Day Saints#Writers" label="Writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292996" start="13768" end="13784" title="Don Leo Jonathan" label="Don Leo Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068680" start="13871" end="13898" title="National Wrestling Alliance" label="National Wrestling Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q104852836" start="13930" end="13964" title="MAC World Heavyweight Championship" label="MAC World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025377" start="13975" end="13989" title="Cael Sanderson" label="Cael Sanderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979466" start="13991" end="14003" title="National Wrestling Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3837513" start="14070" end="14074" title="Wrestling at the 2004 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s freestyle 84 kg" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q742661" start="14076" end="14084" title="United States at the Olympics" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146995" start="14101" end="14130" title="Collegiate wrestling" label="Collegiate/Folkstyle Wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008553" start="14213" end="14243" title="Iowa State Cyclones" label="Iowa State University Cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412329" start="14401" end="14417" title="Samuel P. Cowley" label="Samuel P. Cowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231650" start="14490" end="14505" title="Porter Rockwell" label="Porter Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q102985643" start="14800" end="14817" title="Brandon Armstrong (dancer)" label="Brandon Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154310" start="14919" end="14933" title="Lindsay Arnold" label="Lindsay Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206289" start="15035" end="15048" title="Witney Carson" label="Witney Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090167" start="15110" end="15127" title="Chelsie Hightower" label="Chelsie Hightower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189327" start="15165" end="15176" title="Derek Hough" label="Derek Hough"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560877" start="15260" end="15269" title="Sara Webb" label="Sara Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787020" start="15333" end="15347" title="Houston Ballet" label="Houston Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325573" start="15365" end="15382" title="Richard F. Daines" label="Richard F. Daines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027523" start="15447" end="15464" title="Russell M. Nelson" label="Russell M. Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365975" start="15832" end="15852" title="Ellis Reynolds Shipp" label="Ellis Reynolds Shipp"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030657" start="15929" end="15973" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Medical College of Pennsylvania" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Medical College of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051180" start="15985" end="15998" title="Eliza R. Snow" label="Eliza R. Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003479" start="16024" end="16040" title="Willard Richards" label="Willard Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003479" start="16370" end="16386" title="Willard Richards" label="Willard Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q549521" start="16967" end="16979" title="Mike Simpson" label="Mike Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4068880" start="16992" end="17005" title="Chris Stewart (politician)" label="Chris Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998602" start="17017" end="17030" title="Burgess Owens" label="Burgess Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199304" start="17042" end="17052" title="Andy Biggs" label="Andy Biggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208237" start="17088" end="17099" title="Spencer Cox (politician)" label="Spencer Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540460" start="17404" end="17428" title="ʻElisiva Fusipala Vahaʻi" label="ʻElisiva Fusipala Vahaʻi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947549" start="17448" end="17458" title="Prince Ata" label="Prince Ata"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880581" wikidata="Q1307735" url="?curid=880581" title="Prentiss M. Brown">
<text>Prentiss Marsh Brown (June 18, 1889December 19, 1973) was an American lawyer and politician who served three full and one partial term as a Democratic U.S. Representative and Senator from the state of Michigan from 1936 to 1943.

== Biography ==

Brown was born in St. Ignace, Michigan and attended the public schools there. He attended the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and graduated from Albion College in Albion, Michigan in 1911. He studied law and was admitted to the bar in 1914 and commenced practice in St. Ignace.

=== Personal life ===
Brown married Marion Walker in 1916. The couple had a total of seven children.They are Mariana Rudolph, Ruth Evashevski, James J. Brown, Barbara Laing, Patricia Watson, Prentiss M. Brown, Jr., and Paul Walker Brown.

=== Early career ===
Brown was prosecuting attorney of Mackinac County from 1914 to 1926 and the city attorney of St. Ignace from 1916 to 1928.

He was an unsuccessful candidate for election in 1924 to the United States House of Representatives and in 1928 for election as justice of the Michigan Supreme Court. He was a member of the State Board of Law Examiners from 1930 to 1942.

===Congress===
Brown was elected as a Democrat from Michigan&#x27;s 11th congressional district to the United States House of Representatives for the 73rd Congress and was reelected to the 74th Congress, serving from March 4, 1933, until his resignation, effective November 18, 1936.

He was elected as a Democrat on November 3, 1936, to the United States Senate for the term beginning January 3, 1937, but was subsequently appointed to the United States Senate to fill the vacancy caused by the death of James Couzens for the term ending January 3, 1937. In total, he served from November 19, 1936, to January 3, 1943.

He was chairman of the U.S. Senate Committee on Claims in the Seventy-seventh Congress. He was also a member of the Banking and Currency Committee, and in this capacity was instrumental in helping Franklin D. Roosevelt achieve his desired wage and farm price controls. He was an unsuccessful candidate for re-election in 1942.

===After Congress ===
In December 1942, Roosevelt selected Brown to take over as administrator of the Office of Price Administration, replacing Leon Henderson, whose tenure as administrator was listed as one of the major reasons for Democratic losses in the 1942 elections. In 1943 he resumed the practice of law in both Washington, D.C., and Detroit, Michigan. He also served as chairman of the Detroit Edison Company.

In 1951, Brown was named chairman of the new Mackinac Bridge Authority and served until his death. During his chairmanship, this authority oversaw the construction of Michigan&#x27;s Mackinac Bridge. He once stated during a radio interview that he came up with the idea for the Mackinac Bridge after an unusually bitter winter one day disrupted his commute to work by ferry and forced him to cross the strait on the brittle icy lake surface.

=== Death and burial ===
Brown died in St. Ignace at the age of 84 and is interred there at Lakeside Cemetery.

=== Family ===
Two of Brown&#x27;s children were also active in Democratic party politics. His son, Prentiss M. Brown, Jr., ran unsuccessfully for Congress several times, in 1952, 1956, 1958, and 1960, and was the city attorney for St. Ignace for 50 years. Paul Walker Brown was a member of the Board of Regents of the University of Michigan from 1971 until 1994, and ran unsuccessfully for lieutenant governor in 1974.

===Honors===
* He has been called the &quot;father of the Mackinac Bridge.&quot; His import was so great that his visage was placed on a special memorial bridge token created by the Mackinac Bridge Authority.
* In 2004, Albion College renamed its Honors Institute the &quot;Prentiss M. Brown Honors Institute&quot; in memory of the 1911 alumnus.
* Between 1976 and 2001, the stretch of Interstate 75 between the Mackinac Bridge and Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan, was known as the Prentiss M. Brown Memorial Highway. Since 2001, the Prentiss M. Brown Memorial Highway is designated as the name of I-75 in Mackinac County on the north side of the Mackinac Bridge.
* His accomplishments are commemorated as a &quot;Michigan Legal Milestone&quot; erected by the State Bar of Michigan.
* He is prominently featured in the PBS documentary &quot;Building the Mighty Mac&quot; by LA filmmaker Mark Howell.

== References ==
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
*Albion College press announcement</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1307735" start="0" end="20" title="Prentiss M. Brown" label="Prentiss Marsh Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="140" end="150" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="151" end="170" title="U.S. Representative" label="U.S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="175" end="182" title="U.S. Senator" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="192" end="197" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="201" end="209" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946253" start="265" end="285" title="St. Ignace, Michigan" label="St. Ignace, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="341" end="383" title="University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign" label="University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831920" start="403" end="417" title="Albion College" label="Albion College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327553" start="421" end="437" title="Albion, Michigan" label="Albion, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015569" start="486" end="489" title="bar (law)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q491121" start="831" end="846" title="Mackinac County, Michigan" label="Mackinac County"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="982" end="1020" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415342" start="1064" end="1086" title="Michigan Supreme Court" label="Michigan Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="1198" end="1206" title="U.S. Democratic Party" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837401" start="1212" end="1255" title="Michigan&amp;#x27;s 11th congressional district" label="Michigan&amp;#x27;s 11th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="1263" end="1301" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643305" start="1310" end="1323" title="73rd United States Congress" label="73rd Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643381" start="1349" end="1362" title="74th United States Congress" label="74th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="1465" end="1473" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="1502" end="1522" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680610" start="1665" end="1678" title="James Couzens" label="James Couzens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891262" start="1804" end="1835" title="U.S. Senate Committee on Claims" label="U.S. Senate Committee on Claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643615" start="1843" end="1867" title="Seventy-seventh United States Congress" label="Seventy-seventh Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891260" start="1897" end="1927" title="United States Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs" label="Banking and Currency Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="1978" end="1999" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079289" start="2211" end="2241" title="Office of Price Administration" label="Office of Price Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q15454316" start="2253" end="2267" title="Leon Henderson" label="Leon Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2430" end="2446" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="2452" end="2469" title="Detroit" label="Detroit, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265919" start="2505" end="2527" title="Detroit Edison" label="Detroit Edison Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724489" start="2575" end="2600" title="Mackinac Bridge Authority" label="Mackinac Bridge Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q12568" start="2713" end="2728" title="Mackinac Bridge" label="Mackinac Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931365" start="3380" end="3426" title="Board of Regents of the University of Michigan" label="Board of Regents of the University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586403" start="3476" end="3495" title="Lieutenant Governor of Michigan" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q751944" start="3660" end="3672" title="token coin" label="bridge token"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831920" start="3726" end="3740" title="Albion College" label="Albion College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351623" start="3892" end="3905" title="Interstate 75 in Michigan" label="Interstate 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q12568" start="3918" end="3933" title="Mackinac Bridge" label="Mackinac Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q986634" start="3938" end="3964" title="Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan" label="Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q491121" start="4107" end="4122" title="Mackinac County, Michigan" label="Mackinac County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603081" start="4261" end="4282" title="State Bar of Michigan" label="State Bar of Michigan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880591" wikidata="Q2917126" url="?curid=880591" title="Technetium (99mTc) sestamibi">
<text>Technetium (99mTc) sestamibi (INN) (commonly sestamibi; USP: technetium Tc 99m sestamibi; trade name Cardiolite) is a pharmaceutical agent used in nuclear medicine imaging. The drug is a coordination complex consisting of the radioisotope technetium-99m bound to six (sesta=6) methoxyisobutylisonitrile (MIBI) ligands. The anion is not defined. The generic drug became available late September 2008. A scan of a patient using MIBI is commonly known as a &quot;MIBI scan&quot;.

Sestamibi is taken up by tissues with large numbers of mitochondria and negative plasma membrane potentials. Sestamibi is mainly used to image the myocardium (heart muscle). It is also used in the work-up of primary hyperparathyroidism to identify parathyroid adenomas, for radioguided surgery of the parathyroid and in the work-up of possible breast cancer.

==Cardiac imaging (MIBI scan)==
A &quot;MIBI scan&quot; or &quot;sestamibi scan&quot; is now a common method of cardiac imaging. Technetium (99mTc) sestamibi is a lipophilic cation which, when injected intravenously into a patient, distributes in the myocardium proportionally to the myocardial blood flow. Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging of the heart is performed using a gamma camera to detect the gamma rays emitted by the technetium-99m as it decays. 

Two sets of images are acquired. For one set, 99mTc MIBI is injected while the patient is at rest and then the myocardium is imaged. In the second set, the patient is stressed either by exercising on a treadmill or pharmacologically. The drug is injected at peak stress and then imaging is performed. The resulting two sets of images are compared with each other to distinguish ischemic from infarcted areas of the myocardium. This imaging technique has a sensitivity of around 90%. Resting images are useful only for detecting tissue damage, while stress images will also provide evidence of coronary artery (ischemia) disease. 

===With dipyridamole (Persantine MIBI scan)===
When combined with the drug dipyridamole, a brand name of which is Persantine, a MIBI scan is often referred to as a &quot;Persantine MIBI scan&quot;.

==Parathyroid imaging==

In primary hyperparathyroidism, one or more of the four parathyroid glands either develops a benign tumor called an adenoma or undergoes hyperplasia as a result of homeostatic dysregulation. The parathyroid gland takes up 99mTc MIBI following an intravenous injection, and the patient&#x27;s neck is imaged with a gamma camera to show the location of all glands. A second image is obtained after a washout time (approximately 2 hours), and mitochondria in the oxyphil cells of the abnormal glands retaining the 99mTc are seen with the gamma camera. This imaging method will detect 75 to 90 percent of abnormal parathyroid glands in primary hyperparathyroidism. An endocrine surgeon can then perform a focused parathyroidectomy (less invasive than traditional surgery) to remove the abnormal gland.

===Radioguided surgery of the parathyroids===
Following administration, 99mTc MIBI collects in overactive parathyroid glands. During surgery, the surgeon can use a probe sensitive to gamma rays to locate the overactive parathyroid before removing it.

=== Thyroid imaging ===
Several case reports have demonstrated that 99mTc MIBI scan may be useful to differentiate the sub-type of amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis. Lack of MIBI uptake in the thyroid is compatible with a form of thyroiditis (type-2 AIT) which may respond to treatment with steroids.

==Breast imaging==

The drug is also used in the evaluation of breast nodules. Malignant breast tissues concentrate 99mTc MIBI to a much greater extent and more frequently than benign disease. As such, limited characterization of breast anomalies is possible. Scintimammography has a high sensitivity and specificity for breast cancer, both more than 85%.

More recently, breast radiologists administer lower doses of 99mTc sestamibi (approximately ) for Molecular Breast Imaging (MBI) scans which results in a high sensitivity (91%) and high specificity (93%) for breast cancer detection. It however carries a greater risk of &quot;causing&quot; cancer, making it not appropriate for general breast cancer screening in patients.

The last reference listed refers to a dose, which is given with the Dilon single-head system, which requires a higher dose since only one camera is utilized (meaning the camera needs to be able to see through more tissue). A dose, which is used in the other two commercially available MBI systems is essentially equivalent to a mammogram () or a tomosynthesis exam ().

In order to keep the radiation doses to patients as low as reasonably achievable, MBI is usually limited to women with dense breast tissue, where the medical benefit of the scan outweighs the potential risk of radiation exposure. For the same reason, the administered activity is kept low. This can potentially result in noisy images, which in turn causes inconclusive mammograms. Researchers continue to devote their time to improving the technology, changing scan parameters, and reducing dose to patients.

== References ==
== External links ==
*Cardiolite official page
*Molecular Breast Imaging 
*The Sestamibi Scan for Hyperparathyroidism on: Parathyroid.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2917126" start="0" end="28" title="Technetium (99mTc) sestamibi" label="Technetium (99mTc) sestamibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q824258" start="30" end="33" title="International Nonproprietary Name" label="INN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917126" start="45" end="54" title="Technetium (99mTc) sestamibi" label="sestamibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271952" start="56" end="59" title="United States Pharmacopeia" label="USP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917126" start="101" end="111" title="Technetium (99mTc) sestamibi" label="Cardiolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q214963" start="147" end="163" title="nuclear medicine" label="nuclear medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="187" end="207" title="coordination complex" label="coordination complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="226" end="238" title="radioisotope" label="radioisotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373354" start="239" end="253" title="technetium-99m" label="technetium-99m"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917126" start="304" end="308" title="Technetium (99mTc) sestamibi" label="MIBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q193161" start="310" end="316" title="ligand" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q506319" start="349" end="361" title="generic drug" label="generic drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="533" end="545" title="mitochondria" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q84133" start="625" end="635" title="myocardium" label="myocardium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344835" start="694" end="713" title="hyperparathyroidism" label="hyperparathyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q650401" start="726" end="737" title="parathyroid" label="parathyroid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="752" end="771" title="radioguided surgery" label="radioguided surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="822" end="835" title="breast cancer" label="breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q898401" start="1001" end="1011" title="lipophilic" label="lipophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q84133" start="1089" end="1099" title="myocardium" label="myocardium"/>
<link wikidata="Q849737" start="1189" end="1194" title="SPECT" label="SPECT"/>
<link wikidata="Q612082" start="1238" end="1250" title="gamma camera" label="gamma camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="1265" end="1274" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="1312" end="1318" title="radioactive decay" label="decays"/>
<link wikidata="Q188151" start="1700" end="1708" title="ischemic" label="ischemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207550" start="1714" end="1723" title="infarcted" label="infarcted"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808900" start="1778" end="1789" title="sensitivity and specificity" label="sensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q419374" start="2028" end="2040" title="dipyridamole" label="dipyridamole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919083" start="2180" end="2207" title="primary hyperparathyroidism" label="primary hyperparathyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q272741" start="2293" end="2300" title="adenoma" label="adenoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q835051" start="2314" end="2325" title="hyperplasia" label="hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326185" start="2637" end="2650" title="Oxyphil cell (parathyroid)" label="oxyphil cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136153" start="2886" end="2903" title="parathyroidectomy" label="parathyroidectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="3109" end="3116" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520314" start="3140" end="3145" title="gamma probe" label="probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q114344886" start="3359" end="3392" title="Amiodarone induced thyrotoxicosis" label="amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11835644" start="3458" end="3469" title="thyroiditis" label="thyroiditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q177911" start="3519" end="3527" title="Steroid" label="steroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808900" start="3819" end="3846" title="sensitivity and specificity" label="sensitivity and specificity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011492" start="4223" end="4246" title="breast cancer screening" label="breast cancer screening"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820316" start="4607" end="4620" title="tomosynthesis" label="tomosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q109535915" start="4750" end="4769" title="dense breast tissue" label="dense breast tissue"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880606" wikidata="Q1687856" url="?curid=880606" title="Jerry Portnoy">
<text>Jerry Portnoy (born November 25, 1943, in Evanston, Illinois, United States) is an American harmonica blues musician, who has toured with Muddy Waters and Eric Clapton.

==Biography==
Portnoy grew up in Chicago. He first heard the blues played outside his father&#x27;s carpet store in the Maxwell Street market in the late 1940s and early 1950s. Maxwell Street was a mecca for blues musicians, who would play on the street for tips. Little Walter, Jimmy Rogers, Johnny &quot;Man&quot; Young, Big Walter Horton and many others all played on Maxwell Street.
Portnoy began to perform professionally in 1970, touring the Midwest with the band of Johnny &quot;Man&quot; Young (guitar/mandolin). Two years later, he left Johnny Young, but continued to perform around the Midwest in the bands of guitarist Johnny Littlejohn and, later, drummer Sam Lay. For a time, he was also a member of the house band at the Checkerboard Lounge. He joined the Muddy Waters Blues Band in May 1974 and appeared on the albums &quot;I&#x27;m Ready&quot;, &quot;Muddy &#x27;Mississippi&#x27; Waters Live&quot;, and &quot;King Bee&quot;. He remained until June 1980 when he and other members of Waters&#x27; band (pianist Pinetop Perkins, drummer Willie &quot;Big Eyes&quot; Smith and bassist Calvin &quot;Fuzz&quot; Jones) formed The Legendary Blues Band, where he remained until 1986.

&quot;Life of Ease&quot; was released in 1981 and &quot;Red Hot and Blue&quot; two years later. After a brief hiatus from touring and the music business, he returned to music in 1987 when Ronnie Earl asked him to help start a band which became the Broadcasters. He formed his own band, called the Streamliners, in 1989. They released the CD &quot;Poison Kisses&quot; in 1991 (later re-issued as &quot;Home Run Hitter&quot; with three extra tracks). That same year Eric Clapton invited Portnoy to join an all-star blues band for the six blues shows at London&#x27;s Royal Albert Hall as part of Clapton&#x27;s 24-night stand. In 1993, he joined Clapton&#x27;s band and remained with it through 1996. During this time, the band recorded Clapton&#x27;s blues album &quot;From the Cradle&quot;.

Portnoy has performed in twenty-eight foreign countries on six continents, including performances at the White House, Carnegie Hall, Radio City Music Hall, the Smithsonian, the Newport Jazz Festival and other major jazz and blues festivals worldwide. He was a Grammy Award nominee in 1996 for his work with the Muddy Waters Tribute Band on their recording &quot;You&#x27;re Gonna Miss Me When I&#x27;m Dead and Gone&quot;, and released an instructional package, &quot;Jerry Portnoy&#x27;s Blues Harmonica Masterclass&quot;, in 1997. In 2001, he released his second solo album, &quot;Down in the Mood Room&quot;.

Known for his dark, amplified tone, he has long been a favorite of both critics and peers. &quot;The New York Times&quot; (1987) said, &quot;Mr. Portnoy crests like an alto saxophone.&quot; &quot;Down Beat Magazine&quot; (2002) said, &quot;Portnoy has few equals as a harmonica player, blues or otherwise.&quot; Rick Estrin, a leading professional player as well, was quoted in &quot;Blues Revue&quot; (2002) as saying, &quot;He can get so much sound out of that harp — such a beautiful, just enormous, fat, rich tone.&quot; In 2004, Portnoy appeared on the album, &quot;Me and Mr. Johnson&quot;, with Eric Clapton.

He currently has available an online harmonica playing tutorial.

==See also==
* Chicago Blues Festival

==References==
==External links==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1687856" start="0" end="13" title="Jerry Portnoy" label="Jerry Portnoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q462799" start="42" end="60" title="Evanston, Illinois" label="Evanston, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="102" end="107" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q220707" start="138" end="150" title="Muddy Waters" label="Muddy Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="155" end="167" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914334" start="290" end="304" title="Maxwell Street" label="Maxwell Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q380261" start="434" end="447" title="Little Walter" label="Little Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347919" start="449" end="461" title="Jimmy Rogers" label="Jimmy Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266173" start="463" end="491" title="Johnny &amp;quot;Man&amp;quot; Young" label="Johnny &amp;quot;Man&amp;quot; Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q859504" start="493" end="510" title="Big Walter Horton" label="Big Walter Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266173" start="643" end="671" title="Johnny &amp;quot;Man&amp;quot; Young" label="Johnny &amp;quot;Man&amp;quot; Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244983" start="800" end="817" title="Johnny Littlejohn" label="Johnny Littlejohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216509" start="838" end="845" title="Sam Lay" label="Sam Lay"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593821" start="905" end="924" title="Checkerboard Lounge" label="Checkerboard Lounge"/>
<link wikidata="Q220707" start="940" end="952" title="Muddy Waters" label="Muddy Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q458229" start="1196" end="1211" title="Pinetop Perkins" label="Pinetop Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q645393" start="1221" end="1254" title="Willie &amp;quot;Big Eyes&amp;quot; Smith" label="Willie &amp;quot;Big Eyes&amp;quot; Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018798" start="1267" end="1296" title="Calvin &amp;quot;Fuzz&amp;quot; Jones" label="Calvin &amp;quot;Fuzz&amp;quot; Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812445" start="1305" end="1329" title="The Legendary Blues Band" label="The Legendary Blues Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q326471" start="1550" end="1561" title="Ronnie Earl" label="Ronnie Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="1826" end="1838" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="1927" end="1944" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q971557" start="2130" end="2145" title="From the Cradle" label="From the Cradle"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="2259" end="2270" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="2272" end="2285" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q753437" start="2287" end="2308" title="Radio City Music Hall" label="Radio City Music Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="2310" end="2325" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="the Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q577042" start="2331" end="2352" title="Newport Jazz Festival" label="Newport Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="2414" end="2426" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="2864" end="2882" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934986" start="3079" end="3090" title="Rick Estrin &amp;amp; The Nightcats" label="Rick Estrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q686789" start="3338" end="3356" title="Me and Mr. Johnson" label="Me and Mr. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071835" start="3465" end="3487" title="Chicago Blues Festival" label="Chicago Blues Festival"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880611" wikidata="Q5457167" url="?curid=880611" title="Flame of Hope">
<text>Flame of Hope may refer to:
* Flame of Hope (Special Olympics), symbol of the Special Olympics
* Flame of Hope (diabetes), tribute to Dr. Frederick Banting
* &quot;Eternal Flame of Hope&quot;, tribute to disabled people on Pecaut Square in Toronto.
* &quot;The Flame of Hope&quot;, failed flame, formerly at Centenary Square in Birmingham, England
* &quot;Flame of Hope&quot;, song from the album &quot;The Pacific Age&quot; by Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5457169" start="30" end="62" title="Flame of Hope (Special Olympics)" label="Flame of Hope (Special Olympics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510691" start="97" end="121" title="Flame of Hope (diabetes)" label="Flame of Hope (diabetes)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158636" start="223" end="236" title="Pecaut Square" label="Pecaut Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059092" start="308" end="324" title="Centenary Square" label="Centenary Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712546" start="403" end="418" title="The Pacific Age" label="The Pacific Age"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880612" wikidata="Q421853" url="?curid=880612" title="Kinsman">
<text>A kinsman is a male relative (see kinship).

The term kinsman (or plural kinsmen) may also refer to:

==Places in the United States==
*Kinsman, Illinois
*Kinsman, Ohio
*Kinsman Township, Trumbull County, Ohio
*Kinsman Mountain, in the White Mountains of New Hampshire
*Kinsman Notch, a mountain pass in New Hampshire

==People==
*Brent Kinsman (born 1997), American child actor
*Frederick Joseph Kinsman (1868–1944), American clergyman
*Gary Kinsman (born 1955), Canadian sociologist
*Jeremy Kinsman (born 1942), Canadian diplomat
*Kay Kinsman (1909–1998), Canadian artist and writer
*Shane Kinsman (born 1997), American child actor
*Thomas James Kinsman (1945–2017), U.S. Army soldier awarded the Medal of Honor
*Paul Kinsman (1931–2014), Canadian physician and politician

==Organizations==
*Kin Canada, a Canadian non-profit service organization also known as Kinsmen and Kinette Clubs
*Kinsmen Field House, a multi-purpose sport and recreation facility

==Vessels==

*USS &quot;Colonel Kinsman&quot; (1862), a gunboat captured by the Union Army during the American Civil War

==Fiction==
*&quot;The Kinsman&quot;, a 1919 British silent comedy film 
*&quot;Chet Kinsman&quot;, protagonist in a series of books by Ben Bova, including the novels &quot;&quot;Kinsman&quot; and &quot;The Kinsman Saga&quot;&quot;

==Music==
*&quot;Kinsmen&quot; (album), a 2008 jazz album with saxophonist Rudresh Mahanthappa

==See also==
*Kingsman (disambiguation)
*King&#x27;s Men (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q421853" start="2" end="9" title="Kinsman" label="kinsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q171318" start="34" end="41" title="kinship" label="kinship"/>
<link wikidata="Q421853" start="54" end="61" title="Kinsman" label="kinsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q421853" start="73" end="80" title="Kinsman" label="kinsmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669222" start="135" end="152" title="Kinsman, Illinois" label="Kinsman, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414293" start="154" end="167" title="Kinsman, Ohio" label="Kinsman, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414303" start="169" end="208" title="Kinsman Township, Trumbull County, Ohio" label="Kinsman Township, Trumbull County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414295" start="210" end="226" title="Kinsman Mountain" label="Kinsman Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414297" start="269" end="282" title="Kinsman Notch" label="Kinsman Notch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14638639" start="330" end="343" title="Brent Kinsman" label="Brent Kinsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498170" start="379" end="403" title="Frederick Joseph Kinsman" label="Frederick Joseph Kinsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15491227" start="437" end="449" title="Gary Kinsman" label="Gary Kinsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q595301" start="485" end="499" title="Jeremy Kinsman" label="Jeremy Kinsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q51719366" start="532" end="543" title="Kay Kinsman" label="Kay Kinsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14638639" start="585" end="598" title="Shane Kinsman" label="Shane Kinsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791208" start="634" end="654" title="Thomas James Kinsman" label="Thomas James Kinsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111814" start="714" end="726" title="Paul Kinsman" label="Paul Kinsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410308" start="794" end="804" title="Kin Canada" label="Kin Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414302" start="890" end="909" title="Kinsmen Field House" label="Kinsmen Field House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870808" start="972" end="1010" title="USS Colonel Kinsman (1862)" label="USS &amp;quot;Colonel Kinsman&amp;quot; (1862)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744713" start="1099" end="1110" title="The Kinsman" label="The Kinsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q436664" start="1216" end="1224" title="Ben Bova" label="Ben Bova"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1324" end="1351" title="Kinsmen (album)" label="&amp;quot;Kinsmen&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174541" start="1388" end="1407" title="Rudresh Mahanthappa" label="Rudresh Mahanthappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413350" start="1423" end="1448" title="Kingsman (disambiguation)" label="Kingsman (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411017" start="1450" end="1482" title="King&amp;#x27;s Men (disambiguation)" label="King&amp;#x27;s Men (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880618" wikidata="Q6747721" url="?curid=880618" title="Mandaic">
<text>Mandaic may refer to:

* Mandaic language
* Mandaic alphabet
** Mandaic (Unicode block)

==See also==
* Mandean (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6747721" start="0" end="7" title="Mandaic" label="Mandaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33500" start="25" end="41" title="Mandaic language" label="Mandaic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812130" start="44" end="60" title="Mandaic alphabet" label="Mandaic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622432" start="64" end="87" title="Mandaic (Unicode block)" label="Mandaic (Unicode block)"/>
<link wikidata="Q118369073" start="104" end="128" title="Mandean (disambiguation)" label="Mandean (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880623" wikidata="Q3036757" url="?curid=880623" title="Donna Barr">
<text>Donna Barr (born August 13, 1952) is an American comic book author and cartoonist. She is best known for &quot;The Desert Peach&quot; and &quot;Stinz&quot;.

== Life and education ==
Donna Barr was born in Everett, Washington, and is the second child of six. She had earned a bachelor&#x27;s degree in German from Ohio State University in 1978. Barr had enlisted in the United States Army and served from 1970 to 1973. She was a school trained teletype operator who was an E5, or Sergeant. Because of this position she was not sent into war. Donna Barr had met her husband Dan during her time in the army. She now lives in Clallam Bay, Washington with her husband.

== Works ==
She works in pencil, ink, watercolor, and silkscreen.

She is known for her series &quot;Stinz&quot; and &quot;The Desert Peach&quot;. &quot;Stinz&quot;, originally published in 1986 as a short story in a hand-bound book, tells the story of a society of centaur-like people in a setting reminiscent of pre-industrial Germany. The story was then serialized in the Eclipse Comics series &quot;The Dreamery&quot;, edited by Lex Nakashima, and was picked up by &quot;Albedo&quot; creator Steve Gallacci under his Thoughts &amp; Images label, moving on to MU Press and its imprint Aeon Press. It was then self-published under A Fine Line Press.

Her other long-running series, &quot;The Desert Peach&quot; is about Pfirsich Rommel, the fictional homosexual younger brother of Erwin &quot;The Desert Fox&quot; Rommel. Beginning in 1987, it was set in North Africa during World War 2. The comic has been describes as a fantasy war comic that was set within the German regime. Pfirsch (peach) Rommel is a colonel in the German Afrika Korps in World War II. The rest of this unit of misfits includes a mute radio officer, a shell-shocked mental case with a pet landmine, a French-speaking black Moroccan, an American prisoner of war, and a Cossack mercenary. In this context, a gay colonel engaged to marry a hotshot Luftwaffe ace does not seem out of place. It comes to fruition to long time readers that the story is actually a long running flashback. According to Barr, some of the themes within The Desert Peach are; &quot;Love, Honor, Death and Tea, Surfing, fascism, obnoxious pilots and boyfriends, birth, love, hate, revenge, rape, child-murder, slavery, tribal customs, insanity, drug-use, prejudice, racism, death-camps, warfare, love-at-first-sight, homophobia, bad relationships, feminism, horse-training, camel-theft, fashion, marriage, euthanasia, grandchildren — etc., etc., etc&quot;. Donna Barr explains her process of creating The Desert Peach as, &quot;I usually do a rough on scrap paper (junk mail has lots of blank backs!), happily cutting and pasting, then I copy the whole thing (so the back is clear), rearrange the copy backwards on the back of the final paper, slap in some lettering guides, flip it over on a light table, and use it as a rough guide while I ink. No penciling, and no erasing&quot;. The first three issues were published by Thoughts &amp; Images. Additional issues were published by Fantagraphics Books, Aeon Press, and then self-published. The entirety of The Desert Peach series can be found on Webtoons. A Desert Peach musical was produced in 1992 and a novel was published in 2005.

Both &quot;Stinz&quot; and &quot;The Desert Peach&quot; are now largely serialized online and her novels are self-published. Other works include &quot;Hader and the Colonel&quot; (1987), &quot;The Barr Girls&quot; (1990), and &quot;Bosom Enemies&quot; (1987). Barr has also published a number of novels, including &quot;Permanent Party&quot;, &quot;An Insupportable Light&quot;, Ringcat and &quot;Bread and Swans&quot;. The last two of these feature &quot;Stinz&quot; and &quot;The Desert Peach&quot;, respectively. Barr has illustrated several &quot;GURPS&quot; roleplaying books, including &quot;GURPS Ice Age&quot; and &quot;GURPS Callahan&#x27;s Crosstime Saloon,&quot;. and &quot;Traveller&quot; role-playing books, including &quot;Alien Module 8: Darrians&quot;, the &quot;MegaTraveller Player&#x27;s Manual&quot; and several issues of both the &quot;Journal of the Travellers Aid Society&quot; and &quot;Challenge&quot; magazine. Her latest series, &quot;Afterdead&quot;, is a crossover of all of her characters. It is said to be politically charged and wild.

Her work has been translated into German, Japanese, Italian, and Croatian. Barr has created a series of handmade ornate, stitchery-covered bound sketchbooks, called the &quot;Black Manuscripts&quot;.

== Awards and accomplishments ==
Barr and her work have been recognized with numerous awards and honors. These include The Xeric Grant in 2000, The Bruce Brown Foundation Grant in 2004, San Diego Comic-Con&#x27;s Inkpot Award in 1996, Seattle&#x27;s Cartoonists Northwest&#x27;s Toonies in 1998, London Comics Creators Guild&#x27;s Best Ongoing Humor Series in 1992, and the Washington Press Association&#x27;s Communicator of Excellence for Fiction in 1997 and 1998. Barr appeared at the Cartoonists Northwest Association 2016 event and received a Golden Toonie Award.

== Involvement ==
Donna Barr has been involved in the Northwest community as a member of the Graphic Artists Guild, the National Writers Union, UAW/AFL/CIO, and has acted as a consultant for the Media curriculum in the Arts Department at Olympic College in Bremerton, Washington. She lectures on her work at conventions and symposiums all over the United States, Canada, and Europe. She had attended Opttaconn in 2019.

==References==
== External links ==
* AfterDead
* Interview at Rational Magic
* Interview at WashingtonRuralHeritage.org
* Toonopedia The Desert Peach
* Webtoons The Desert Peach</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3036757" start="0" end="10" title="Donna Barr" label="Donna Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="49" end="59" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114448" start="71" end="81" title="cartoonist" label="cartoonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729803" start="111" end="127" title="The Desert Peach" label="The Desert Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617485" start="144" end="149" title="Stinz" label="Stinz"/>
<link wikidata="Q392599" start="206" end="213" title="Everett, Washington" label="Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617485" start="767" end="772" title="Stinz" label="Stinz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729803" start="789" end="805" title="The Desert Peach" label="The Desert Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617485" start="819" end="824" title="Stinz" label="Stinz"/>
<link wikidata="Q83203" start="932" end="939" title="centaur" label="centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="995" end="1002" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281957" start="1041" end="1055" title="Eclipse Comics" label="Eclipse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281957" start="1069" end="1081" title="The Dreamery" label="The Dreamery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709475" start="1135" end="1153" title="Albedo Anthropomorphics" label="&amp;quot;Albedo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709475" start="1162" end="1176" title="Steve Gallacci" label="Steve Gallacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q6719117" start="1229" end="1237" title="MU Press" label="MU Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709474" start="1254" end="1264" title="Aeon Press" label="Aeon Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729803" start="1356" end="1372" title="The Desert Peach" label="The Desert Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="1449" end="1488" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin &amp;quot;The Desert Fox&amp;quot; Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1543" end="1554" title="World War II" label="World War 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729803" start="2614" end="2630" title="The Desert Peach" label="The Desert Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395850" start="3096" end="3115" title="Fantagraphics Books" label="Fantagraphics Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709474" start="3117" end="3127" title="Aeon Press" label="Aeon Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617485" start="3311" end="3316" title="Stinz" label="Stinz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729803" start="3333" end="3349" title="The Desert Peach" label="The Desert Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047814" start="3851" end="3856" title="GURPS" label="GURPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580150" start="3898" end="3911" title="GURPS Ice Age" label="GURPS Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580117" start="3928" end="3966" title="GURPS Callahan&amp;#x27;s Crosstime Saloon" label="GURPS Callahan&amp;#x27;s Crosstime Saloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164069" start="3979" end="4000" title="Traveller (role-playing game)" label="&amp;quot;Traveller&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4037" end="4061" title="Traveller Alien Module 8: Darrians" label="Alien Module 8: Darrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296206" start="4157" end="4194" title="Journal of the Travellers Aid Society" label="Journal of the Travellers Aid Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068887" start="4205" end="4226" title="Challenge (game magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Challenge&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043783" start="4692" end="4703" title="Xeric Foundation" label="Xeric Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q279385" start="4755" end="4774" title="San Diego Comic-Con" label="San Diego Comic-Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687578" start="4782" end="4794" title="Inkpot Award" label="Inkpot Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880237" start="4872" end="4893" title="Comics Creators Guild" label="Comics Creators Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597123" start="5233" end="5254" title="Graphic Artists Guild" label="Graphic Artists Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979469" start="5260" end="5282" title="National Writers Union" label="National Writers Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880626" wikidata="Q333894" url="?curid=880626" title="Tokyo Electric Power Company">
<text>is a Japanese electric utility holding company servicing Japan&#x27;s Kantō region, Yamanashi Prefecture, and the eastern portion of Shizuoka Prefecture. This area includes Tokyo. Its headquarters are located in Uchisaiwaicho, Chiyoda, Tokyo, and international branch offices exist in Washington, D.C., and London. It is a founding member of strategic consortiums related to energy innovation and research; such as JINED, INCJ and MAI.

In 2007, TEPCO was forced to shut the Kashiwazaki-Kariwa Nuclear Power Plant after the Niigata-Chuetsu-Oki earthquake. That year, it posted its first loss in 28 years. Corporate losses continued until the plant reopened in 2009. Following the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami, one of its power plants was the site of one of the world&#x27;s most serious ongoing nuclear disasters, the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster. TEPCO could face ¥ (US$) in special losses in the current business year to March 2012, and the Japanese government plans to put TEPCO under effective state control to guarantee compensation payments to the people affected by the accident. The Fukushima disaster displaced 50,000 households in the evacuation zone because of leaks of radioactive materials into the air, soil and sea.

In July 2012, TEPCO received ¥1 trillion (US$) from the Japanese government in order to prevent collapse of the company to ensure electricity is still being supplied to Tokyo and its surrounding municipalities, and decommission the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant.&lt;ref name=&quot;Guardian 09/05/2012&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; TEPCO&#x27;s management subsequently made a proposal to its shareholders for the company to be part-nationalized. The Nuclear Damage Compensation and Decommissioning Facilitation Corporation later became the majority stockholder to oversee the damages and decommissioning of the power plant. The total cost of the disaster was estimated at $100 billion in May 2012.

==History==

Japan&#x27;s electricity sector, nationalized in 1939 in preparation of total war (the Pacific War), were privatized in 1951 on behest of the U.S./Allied occupation forces, creating nine privately owned government-granted monopolies, one in a certain region; this included TEPCO. Tokyo Electric Power Co., Inc. was established by reorganizing Kanto Haiden and Nippon Shuden, which were established through wartime integration.

In the 1950s, the company&#x27;s primary goal was to facilitate a rapid recovery from the infrastructure devastation of World War II. After the recovery period, the company had to expand its supply capacity to catch up with the country&#x27;s rapid economic growth by developing fossil fuel power plants and a more efficient transmission network.

In the 1960s and 1970s, the company faced the challenges of increased environmental pollution and oil shocks. TEPCO began addressing environmental concerns through expansion of its LNG fueled power plant network as well as greater reliance on nuclear power generation. The first nuclear unit at the Fukushima Dai-ichi (Fukushima I) nuclear power plant began operational generation on March 26, 1971.

During the 1980s and 1990s, the widespread use of air-conditioners and IT/OA appliances resulted a gap between day and night electricity demand. In order to reduce surplus generation capacity and increase capacity utilization, TEPCO developed pumped storage hydroelectric power plants and promoted thermal storage units.

Recently, TEPCO is expected to play a key role in achieving Japan&#x27;s targets for reduced carbon dioxide emissions under the Kyoto Protocol. It also faces difficulties related to the trend towards deregulation in Japan&#x27;s electric industry as well as low power demand growth. In light of these circumstances, TEPCO launched an extensive sales promotion campaign called &#x27;Switch!&#x27;, promoting all-electric housing in order to both achieve the more efficient use of its generation capacity as well as erode the market share of gas companies.

==Major subsidiaries==
As Tokyo Electric Power Company Holdings, Inc. is a holding company, there are several major wholly owned subsidiaries.
* TEPCO Power Grid Responsible for managing power grid around Kantō region and transmits and distributes electricity between electricity wholesaler and retailer.
* TEPCO Energy Partner Electricity retailer operating under &quot;TEPCO&quot; brand throughout Japan, except Okinawa.
* TEPCO Fuel &amp; Power Operates fossil fuel power stations mainly for TEPCO Energy Partner.
* Tokyo Electric Generation Company Generates wholesale electricity for electricity market.
* Tokyo Electric Power Services Co. Ltd (TEPSCO) Provides consulting services for electric power industry.

==Corporate overview==
* Capital stock: ¥676,424,197,050
* Total outstanding shares: 1,352,876,531
* Number of shareholders: 821,841
* Electricity sales (FY 2004): 92,592 million kWh (lighting), 194,148 million kWh (power), 286,741 million kWh (total)
* Peak demand: 64.3 million kW (July 24, 2001)
* Number of customers (ending March 31, 2005): 25,120,000 / 83.89 million kW (lighting), 2,630,000 thousand / 39.75 million kWh (power), 27,740,000 / 123.64 million kW (total)
* Revenue from electricity sales: ¥4,637.2 billion yen (FY 2004)

==Ownership==
In March 2010, the last year before 2011 Fukushima nuclear disaster, TEPCO listed 10 entities as its major shareholders, amounting to 27.35% of all shares. Five of the ten were Japanese banks, two were Japanese insurance companies, the remaining two were Tokyo Metropolitan Government and a group of TECPO employees. The largest shareholder was Japan Trustee Services Bank (4.47%).

On 11 April 2012 TEPCO announced that the Tokyo Metropolitan Government had temporarily become the largest shareholder of the firm with 9.37 percent voting rights, after former largest share holders Dai-ichi Life Nippon Life Insurance Co. and Nippon Life Insurance Co. had sold their 3.42 and 3.29 percent stakes in the company. The two life insurance companies had lost their interest in TEPCO after the shares had lost almost all their value at the stock market. At the next shareholders meeting of TEPCO in June 2012, Tokyo hoped to put a halt to TEPCO&#x27;s plans raising the price of electricity. This position was changed by later ownership changes.

===Community compensation===
Tokyo Electric Power could face 2 trillion yen ($23.6 bln) in special losses in the current business year to March 2012 to compensate communities near its crippled Fukushima nuclear plant, according to JP Morgan.

==Salary pay cuts==
The company workers agreed to a management proposal to cut their pay as a sense of responsibility for the world&#x27;s worst nuclear disaster. Annual remuneration for board members would be reduced by 50 percent since April 2011, while payment for managers would be cut by 25 percent and workers by 20 percent both since July 2011 and bonuses since June 2011. The company expects to save about 54 billion yen ($659 million) a year from the pay cuts.

In July 2012 it was announced that annual salaries of managers would be reduced by at least 30%, with workers pay cut remaining at 20%. On average employees pay would be cut by 23.68%. In addition, the portion of the employee health insurance program that the company covers would be reduced from 60% to 50%, the standard in Japan.

==Power stations and generation capacity==
* Hydro: 160 / 8,521.0 MW
* Thermal (oil, coal, LN(P)G, geothermal): 26 / 36,995.0 MW
* Nuclear: 3 / 17,308.0 MW
* Wind: 1 / 1.0 MW
* Total: 190 / 62,825.0 MW

===Position in the industry===
TEPCO is the largest electric utility in Japan and the 4th largest electric utility in the world after German RWE, French Électricité de France and Germany&#x27;s E.ON. As TEPCO stands in a leading position in this industry, they have relatively a strong effect for Japanese economics, environment, and energy industry.

===Management and finance===
For the fiscal years ending in 2011, 2012 the company had a pretax loss, in 2013 the deficit was 377.6 billion yen. In the following year 2014 red figures were expected too.

===Generation===
The company&#x27;s power generation consists of two main networks. Fossil fuel power plants around Tokyo Bay are used for peak load supply and nuclear reactors in Fukushima and Niigata Prefecture provide base load supply. Additionally, hydroelectric plants in the mountainous areas outside the Kanto Plain, despite their relatively small capacity compared to fossil fuel and nuclear generation, remain important in providing peak load supply. The company also purchases electricity from other regional or wholesale electric power companies like Tohoku Electric Power, J-POWER, and Japan Atomic Power Company.

===Transmission and distribution===
The company has built a radiated and circular grid between power plants and urban/industrial demand areas. Each transmission line is designed to transmit electricity at high-voltage (66-500kV) between power plants and substations. Normally transmission lines are strung between towers, but within the Tokyo metropolitan area high-voltage lines are located underground.

From substations, electricity is transmitted via the distribution grid at low-voltage (22-66kV). For high-voltage supply to large buildings and factories, distribution lines are directly connected to customers&#x27; electricity systems. In this case, customers must purchase and set up transformers and other equipment to run electric appliances. For low voltage supply to houses and small shops, distribution lines are first connected to the company&#x27;s transformers (seen on utility poles and utility boxes), converted to 100/200V, and finally connected to end users.

Under normal conditions, TEPCO&#x27;s transmission and distribution infrastructure is notable as one of the most reliable electricity networks in the world. Blackout frequency and average recovery time compares favorably with other electric companies in Japan as well as within other developed countries. The company instituted its first-ever rolling blackouts following the shutdown of the Fukushima I and II plants which were close to the epicenter of the March 2011 earthquake. For example, on the morning of Tuesday, March 15, 2011, 700,000 households had no power for three hours. The company had to deal with a 10 million kW gap between demand and production on March 14, 2011.

==Accidents and controversies==

===Safety incidents===
On August 29, 2002, the government of Japan revealed that TEPCO was guilty of false reporting in routine governmental inspection of its nuclear plants and systematic concealment of plant safety incidents. All seventeen of its boiling-water reactors were shut down for inspection as a result. TEPCO&#x27;s chairman Hiroshi Araki, President Nobuya Minami, Vice-President Toshiaki Enomoto, as well as the advisers Shō Nasu and Gaishi Hiraiwa stepped-down by September 30, 2002. The utility &quot;eventually admitted to two hundred occasions over more than two decades between 1977 and 2002, involving the submission of false technical data to authorities&quot;. Upon taking over leadership responsibilities, TEPCO&#x27;s new president issued a public commitment that the company would take all the countermeasures necessary to prevent fraud and restore the nation&#x27;s confidence. By the end of 2005, generation at suspended plants had been restarted, with government approval.

In 2007, however, the company announced to the public that an internal investigation had revealed a large number of unreported incidents. These included an unexpected unit criticality in 1978 and additional systematic false reporting, which had not been uncovered during the 2002 inquiry. Along with scandals at other Japanese electric companies, this failure to ensure corporate compliance resulted in strong public criticism of Japan&#x27;s electric power industry and the nation&#x27;s nuclear energy policy. Again, the company made no effort to identify those responsible.

===2008 Kashiwazaki-Kariwa shutdown===
In 2008, Tokyo Electric was forced to shut down the Kashiwazaki-Kariwa Nuclear Power Plant following the 2007 Chūetsu offshore earthquake. To meet demand, the company purchased electricity from competitors and restarted thermal power plants, resulting in significant additional oil and gas consumption. These activities caused the company to post its first loss in 28 years.

===2011 Fukushima nuclear disaster===

On 11 March 2011, several nuclear reactors in Japan were badly damaged by the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami.

The Tōkai Nuclear Power Plant lost external electric power, experienced the failure of one of its two cooling pumps, and two of its three emergency power generators. External electric power could only be restored two days after the earthquake.

The Japanese government declared an &quot;atomic power emergency&quot; and evacuated thousands of residents living close to TEPCO&#x27;s Fukushima I plant. Reactors 4, 5 and 6 had been shut down prior to the earthquake for planned maintenance. The remaining reactors were shut down automatically after the earthquake, but the subsequent tsunami flooded the plant, knocking out emergency generators needed to run pumps which cool and control the reactors. The flooding and earthquake damage prevented assistance being brought from elsewhere. Over the following days there was evidence of partial nuclear meltdowns in reactors 1, 2 and 3; hydrogen explosions destroyed the upper cladding of the building housing reactors 1 and 3; an explosion damaged reactor 2&#x27;s containment; and severe fires broke out at reactor 4.

The Fukushima nuclear disaster revealed the dangers of building multiple nuclear reactor units close to one another. This proximity triggered the parallel, chain-reaction accidents that led to hydrogen explosions blowing the roofs off reactor buildings and water draining from open-air spent fuel pools—a situation that was potentially more dangerous than the loss of reactor cooling itself. Because of the proximity of the reactors, Plant Director Masao Yoshida &quot;was put in the position of trying to cope simultaneously with core meltdowns at three reactors and exposed fuel pools at three units&quot;.

The Japanese authorities rated the events at reactors 1, 2 and 3 as a level 5 (Accident With Wider Consequences) on the International Nuclear Event Scale, while the events at reactor 4 were placed at level 3 (Serious Incident). The situation as a whole was rated as level 7 (Major Accident). On 20 March, Japan&#x27;s chief cabinet secretary Yukio Edano &quot;confirmed for the first time that the nuclear complex — with heavy damage to reactors and buildings and with radioactive contamination throughout — would be closed once the crisis was over.&quot; At the same time, questions are being asked, looking back, about whether company management waited too long before pumping seawater into the plant, a measure that would ruin and has now ruined the reactors; and, looking forward, &quot;whether time is working for or against the workers and soldiers struggling to re-establish cooling at the crippled plant.&quot; One report noted that defense minister, Toshimi Kitazawa, on 21 March had committed &quot;military firefighters to spray water around the clock on an overheated storage pool at Reactor No. 3.&quot; The report concluded with &quot;a senior nuclear executive who insisted on anonymity but has many contacts in Japan sa[ying that] ... caution ... [as] plant operators have been struggling to reduce workers’ risk ... had increased the risk of a serious accident. He suggested that Japan&#x27;s military assume primary responsibility. &#x27;It&#x27;s the same trade-off you have to make in war, and that is the sacrifice of a few for the safety of many,&#x27; he said. &#x27;But a corporation just cannot do that.&#x27;&quot;

There has been considerable criticism to the way TEPCO handled the crisis. It was reported that seawater was used only after Prime Minister Naoto Kan ordered it following an explosion at one reactor the evening of 12 March, though executives had started considering it that morning. TEPCO didn&#x27;t begin using seawater at other reactors until 13 March. Referring to that same early decision-making sequence, &quot;Michael Friedlander, a former senior operator at a Pennsylvania power plant with General Electric reactors similar to the troubled ones in Japan, said the crucial question is whether Japanese officials followed G.E.’s emergency operating procedures.&quot; Kuni Yogo, a former atomic energy policy planner in Japan&#x27;s Science and Technology Agency and Akira Omoto, a former TEPCO executive and a member of the Japanese Atomic Energy Commission both questioned TEPCO&#x27;s management&#x27;s decisions in the crisis. Kazuma Yokota, a safety inspector with Japan&#x27;s Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency, or NISA, was at Fukushima I at the time of the earthquake and tsunami and provided details of the early progression of the crisis.

The Fukushima disaster displaced 50,000 households in the evacuation zone because of radioactivity releases into the air, soil and sea. In 2012, it was reported that 8.5 tonnes of radioactive water had leaked from Fukushima Daiichi No.4.

In June 2012, TEPCO revealed, that in 2006 and 2008 TEPCO-employees made two studies in which the effect of tsunami-waves higher than the &quot;official&quot; expected height of 5.7 meters was studied on the performance of the reactors. This was done after the large Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004. The conclusion from the simulation in 2006 was, that a 13.5 meter wave would cause a complete loss of all power and would make it impossible to inject water into reactor No.5. The costs to protect the plant for such an event was estimated to be about 25 million dollars. In 2008, the effect of a 10 meter high tsunami was calculated. TEPCO failed in both cases to take advantage of this knowledge, and nothing was done to prevent such an event to happen, because the study sessions were conducted only as a training for junior employees, and the company did not really expect such large tsunamis.

TEPCO subsequently signed a partnership with French company Areva to treat the contaminated water.

In 2016, three former TEPCO executives, chairman Tsunehisa Katsumata and two vice presidents, were indicted for negligence resulting in death and injury. All were acquitted by the Tokyo District Court on September 19, 2019.

====Company future====
On 30 March 2011, the president of TEPCO, Masataka Shimizu, was hospitalized with symptoms of dizziness and high blood pressure in the wake of an increasingly serious outlook for the Fukushima plant and increasing levels of radiation from the stricken plant, as well as media reports of TEPCO&#x27;s imminent nationalization or bankruptcy triggered by the situation at the Fukushima plant.

On July 31, 2012, TEPCO was substantially nationalized by receiving a capital injection of 1 trillion yen ($12.5bn) from the Nuclear Damage Liability Facilitation Fund (currently Nuclear Damage Compensation and Decommissioning Facilitation Corporation), a government-backed support body. The Fund holds the majority (50.11%) of voting rights with an option to raise that figure to 88.69% by converting preferred stocks into common stocks. This Japan&#x27;s biggest utility had received by the end of February 2016 at least 5.7609 trillion yen in state support since the tsunami. The total cost of the disaster was estimated at $100bn in May 2012. In April, all Japanese nuclear reactors were closed.

=== Response to the 2022 Russian Invasion of Ukraine ===
TEPCO has continued its business operations in Russia, including the purchase of Russian gas despite international sanctions against Russia following its invasion of Ukraine in 2022. Unlike the many international corporations that have scaled back or ceased their activities in Russia, TEPCO has opted to maintain its engagement. Research conducted by the Yale School of Management categorized the company in the &quot;Grade F&quot; tier, labeled &quot;Digging In,&quot; which denotes entities that have defied calls to exit or reduce operations in Russia. This decision has drawn criticism for undermining global efforts to isolate Russia economically and exert pressure to end its aggression.

==Offices==
==Power plants==

===Nuclear===
In March 2008, Tokyo Electric announced that the start of operation of four new nuclear power reactors would be postponed by one year due to the incorporation of new earthquake resistance assessments. Units 7 and 8 of the Fukushima Daiichi plant would now enter commercial operation in October 2014 and October 2015, respectively. However, following the nuclear crisis of 2011, these plans have been cancelled.
According to TEPCO&#x27;s official regulatory paper, starting operation of Higashidori is expressed as &#x27;Not yet determined&#x27;.

=== Fossil fuel ===
===Hydro===
TEPCO has a total of 160 hydroelectric stations with a total capacity of 8,520 MW. The largest pumped-storage plants are:
* Nagawado Dam (623 MW)
* Shin-Takasegawa Pumped Storage Station (1,280 MW)
* Tamahara Pumped Storage Power Station (1,200 MW)
* Shiobara Pumped Storage Plant (900 MW)
* Imaichi Pumped Storage Plant (1,050 MW)
* Kazunogawa Pumped Storage Power Station (800 MW)
* Kannagawa Hydropower Plant (2,820 MW)

==Electric vehicle batteries and recharging==

Under the lead of an organization affiliated with the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, the Tokyo Electric Power Company is working out next-gen car battery norms.
It has developed a specification for high-voltage DC automotive fast charging using a JARI Level 3 DC connector, and formed the CHΛdeMO (stands for Charge and Move) association with Japanese automakers Mitsubishi, Nissan and Subaru to promote it.

==TEPCO to cancel nuclear promotion abroad==
Early June 2012 TEPCO announced that it would cancel all export of nuclear expertise abroad, because it needed to focus on the stabilisation of the damaged reactors in Fukushima. All participation in a program to supply and run two nuclear reactors at a plant in Vietnam would be cancelled. This project undertaken by International Nuclear Energy Development, a public company set up in 2010 by heavy machinery producers and power companies, including TEPCO, aims to promote Japanese nuclear expertise and exports. According to Naomi Hirose, director of TEPCO, &quot;Our atomic power engineers still need to do a lot more to stabilise and decommission the reactors&quot; at the crippled Fukushima Daiichi plant, and: &quot;It is impossible&quot; to abandon the domestic task and promote exports.

== See also ==

* Denko-chan (でんこちゃん), recently discontinued mascot character, designed by manga artist Shungicu Uchida
* Masataka Shimizu, TEPCO president during the March 11th 2011 disaster
* CHAdeMO, electric vehicle standard
* Nuclear power in Japan
* International Nuclear Energy Development of Japan Co., Ltd (JINED)
* Innovation Network Corporation of Japan (INCJ)
* Radiation effects from Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster
* Subaru R1e
* Masao Yoshida (nuclear engineer)
* Shunichi Yamashita, physician in radiation sickness field
* Murder of Yasuko Watanabe (familiarly known as &quot;TEPCO OL murder case&quot; in Japan)
* Fukushima 50, name for workers remaining on site of the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* tokyo electric power company / gettyimages</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1326624" start="14" end="30" title="electric utility" label="electric utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="31" end="46" title="holding company" label="holding company"/>
<link wikidata="Q132480" start="70" end="82" title="Kantō region" label="Kantō region"/>
<link wikidata="Q132720" start="84" end="104" title="Yamanashi Prefecture" label="Yamanashi Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q131320" start="133" end="152" title="Shizuoka Prefecture" label="Shizuoka Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="173" end="178" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346569" start="212" end="225" title="Uchisaiwaicho" label="Uchisaiwaicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q214051" start="227" end="241" title="Chiyoda, Tokyo" label="Chiyoda, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="285" end="301" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="307" end="313" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108241" start="415" end="420" title="JINED" label="JINED"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972218" start="422" end="426" title="INCJ" label="INCJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q725100" start="475" end="513" title="Kashiwazaki-Kariwa Nuclear Power Plant" label="Kashiwazaki-Kariwa Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36204" start="680" end="714" title="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami" label="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q171178" start="824" end="858" title="Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster" label="Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q114295" start="1476" end="1513" title="Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant" label="Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q154605" start="2027" end="2036" title="total war" label="total war"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="2042" end="2053" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q471889" start="2097" end="2126" title="Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers" label="U.S./Allied occupation forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q44009" start="2158" end="2187" title="government-granted monopolies" label="government-granted monopolies"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2503" end="2515" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="2801" end="2824" title="environmental pollution" label="environmental pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="3582" end="3596" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096907" start="4197" end="4207" title="electrical grid" label="power grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356921" start="4338" end="4358" title="Electricity retailer" label="Electricity retailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q676081" start="4599" end="4617" title="electricity market" label="electricity market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074185" start="5537" end="5566" title="Tokyo Metropolitan Government" label="Tokyo Metropolitan Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6157881" start="5627" end="5654" title="Japan Trustee Services Bank" label="Japan Trustee Services Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q192314" start="6554" end="6563" title="JP Morgan" label="JP Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q138133" start="7714" end="7717" title="RWE" label="RWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q274591" start="7726" end="7747" title="Électricité de France" label="Électricité de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="7752" end="7759" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q270223" start="7767" end="7771" title="E.ON" label="E.ON"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="8213" end="8224" title="Fossil fuel" label="Fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q141017" start="8245" end="8254" title="Tokyo Bay" label="Tokyo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="8289" end="8304" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q71707" start="8309" end="8318" title="Fukushima Prefecture" label="Fukushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q132705" start="8323" end="8341" title="Niigata Prefecture" label="Niigata Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124865" start="8440" end="8451" title="Kanto Plain" label="Kanto Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q592765" start="8691" end="8712" title="Tohoku Electric Power" label="Tohoku Electric Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805077" start="8714" end="8721" title="Electric Power Development Company" label="J-POWER"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636542" start="8727" end="8753" title="Japan Atomic Power Company" label="Japan Atomic Power Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096907" start="8838" end="8842" title="Grid (electricity)" label="grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438438" start="10079" end="10095" title="rolling blackout" label="rolling blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q821301" start="10501" end="10520" title="First Koizumi Cabinet" label="government of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="11309" end="11314" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229735" start="11571" end="11591" title="cover up" label="unreported incidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321523" start="11611" end="11638" title="criticality accident" label="unexpected unit criticality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886977" start="11944" end="11965" title="nuclear energy policy" label="nuclear energy policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q725100" start="12124" end="12162" title="Kashiwazaki-Kariwa Nuclear Power Plant" label="Kashiwazaki-Kariwa Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q629485" start="12177" end="12209" title="2007 Chūetsu offshore earthquake" label="2007 Chūetsu offshore earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q36204" start="12565" end="12599" title="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami" label="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q738945" start="12606" end="12631" title="Tōkai Nuclear Power Plant" label="Tōkai Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q171178" start="12984" end="13001" title="Fukushima I nuclear accidents" label="Fukushima I plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="13153" end="13163" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="13184" end="13191" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q105807" start="13442" end="13458" title="nuclear meltdown" label="nuclear meltdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q321832" start="13954" end="13969" title="spent fuel pool" label="spent fuel pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018775" start="14117" end="14130" title="Masao Yoshida (nuclear engineer)" label="Masao Yoshida"/>
<link wikidata="Q185657" start="14398" end="14431" title="International Nuclear Event Scale" label="International Nuclear Event Scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q732087" start="14620" end="14631" title="Yukio Edano" label="Yukio Edano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155846" start="15237" end="15253" title="Toshimi Kitazawa" label="Toshimi Kitazawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q47846" start="16060" end="16069" title="Naoto Kan" label="Naoto Kan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="16388" end="16400" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="16418" end="16434" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054379" start="16658" end="16687" title="Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology" label="Science and Technology Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986481" start="16750" end="16783" title="Japanese Atomic Energy Commission" label="Japanese Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411197" start="16908" end="16944" title="Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency" label="Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q455484" start="18272" end="18277" title="Areva" label="Areva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19130" end="19202" title="Nuclear Damage Compensation and Decommissioning Facilitation Corporation" label="Nuclear Damage Compensation and Decommissioning Facilitation Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17373979" start="19824" end="19833" title="International sanctions during the Russo-Ukrainian War" label="sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="19863" end="19882" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047426" start="20065" end="20090" title="Yale School of Management" label="Yale School of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q114295" start="20671" end="20688" title="Fukushima Daiichi" label="Fukushima Daiichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q339353" start="21123" end="21144" title="pumped-storage hydroelectricity" label="pumped-storage plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360224" start="21152" end="21164" title="Nagawado Dam" label="Nagawado Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161509" start="21176" end="21214" title="Shin-Takasegawa Pumped Storage Station" label="Shin-Takasegawa Pumped Storage Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563482" start="21228" end="21265" title="Tamahara Pumped Storage Power Station" label="Tamahara Pumped Storage Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q12000225" start="21279" end="21308" title="Shiobara Pumped Storage Plant" label="Shiobara Pumped Storage Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435710" start="21320" end="21348" title="Imaichi Pumped Storage Plant" label="Imaichi Pumped Storage Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563495" start="21362" end="21401" title="Kazunogawa Pumped Storage Power Station" label="Kazunogawa Pumped Storage Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142420" start="21413" end="21439" title="Kannagawa Hydropower Plant" label="Kannagawa Hydropower Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="21720" end="21722" title="direct current" label="DC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21756" end="21781" title="JARI Level 3 DC connector" label="JARI Level 3 DC connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023606" start="21798" end="21805" title="CHΛdeMO" label="CHΛdeMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q36033" start="21872" end="21882" title="Mitsubishi Motors" label="Mitsubishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="21884" end="21890" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q172741" start="21895" end="21901" title="Subaru" label="Subaru"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22790" end="22796" title=":ja:でんこちゃん" label="でんこちゃん"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081347" start="22864" end="22879" title="Shungicu Uchida" label="Shungicu Uchida"/>
<link wikidata="Q513350" start="22882" end="22898" title="Masataka Shimizu" label="Masataka Shimizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36204" start="22927" end="22951" title="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami" label="March 11th 2011 disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023606" start="22954" end="22961" title="CHAdeMO" label="CHAdeMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067468" start="22991" end="23013" title="Nuclear power in Japan" label="Nuclear power in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108241" start="23016" end="23082" title="JINED" label="International Nuclear Energy Development of Japan Co., Ltd (JINED)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972218" start="23085" end="23131" title="INCJ" label="Innovation Network Corporation of Japan (INCJ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q898678" start="23134" end="23191" title="Radiation effects from Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster" label="Radiation effects from Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7630818" start="23194" end="23204" title="Subaru R1e" label="Subaru R1e"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018775" start="23207" end="23239" title="Masao Yoshida (nuclear engineer)" label="Masao Yoshida (nuclear engineer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056248" start="23242" end="23260" title="Shunichi Yamashita" label="Shunichi Yamashita"/>
<link wikidata="Q6938103" start="23302" end="23327" title="Murder of Yasuko Watanabe" label="Murder of Yasuko Watanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359551" start="23361" end="23363" title="Office lady" label="OL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343528" start="23394" end="23406" title="Fukushima 50" label="Fukushima 50"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880636" wikidata="Q721372" url="?curid=880636" title="Howard Barker">
<text>Howard Barker (born 28 June 1946) is a British playwright, screenwriter and writer of radio drama, painter, poet, and essayist, writing predominantly on playwriting and the theatre. The author of an extensive body of dramatic works since the 1970s, he is best known for his plays &quot;Scenes from an Execution&quot;, &quot;Victory&quot;, &quot;The Castle&quot;, &quot;The Possibilities&quot;, &quot;The Europeans&quot;, &quot;&quot; and &quot;Gertrude – The Cry&quot; as well as being a founding member of, primary playwright for and stage designer for British theatre company The Wrestling School.

==The Theatre of Catastrophe==
Barker has coined the term &quot;Theatre of Catastrophe&quot; to describe his work. His plays often explore violence, sexuality, the desire for power, human motivation and the limits of language.

Rejecting the widespread notion that an audience should share a single response to the events onstage, Barker works to fragment response, forcing each viewer to wrestle with the play alone. &quot;We must overcome the urge to do things in unison&quot;, he writes. &quot;To chant together, to hum banal tunes together, is not collectivity.&quot; Where other playwrights might clarify a scene, Barker seeks to render it more complex, ambiguous, and unstable.

Only through a tragic renaissance, Barker argues, will beauty and poetry return to the stage. &quot;Tragedy liberates language from banality&quot;, he asserts. &quot;It returns poetry to speech.&quot;

==Themes==
Barker frequently turns to historical events for inspiration. His play &quot;Scenes from an Execution&quot;, for example, centers on the aftermath of the Battle of Lepanto (1571) and a fictional female artist commissioned to create a commemorative painting of the Venetian victory over the Ottoman fleet. &quot;Scenes from an Execution&quot;, originally written for BBC Radio 3 and starring Glenda Jackson in 1984, was later adapted for the stage. The short play &quot;Judith&quot; revolves around the Biblical story of Judith, the legendary heroine who decapitated the invading general Holofernes.

In other plays, Barker has fashioned responses to famous literary works. &quot;Brutopia&quot; is a challenge to Thomas More&#x27;s &quot;Utopia&quot;. &quot;Minna&quot; is a sardonic work inspired by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing&#x27;s Enlightenment comedy &quot;Minna von Barnhelm&quot;. In &quot;Uncle Vanya&quot;, he poses an alternative vision to Anton Chekhov&#x27;s drama of the same name. For Barker, Chekhov is a playwright of bad faith, a writer who encourages us to sentimentalize our own weaknesses and glamorize inertia. Beneath Chekhov&#x27;s celebrated compassion, Barker argues, lies contempt. In his play, Barker has Chekhov walk into Vanya&#x27;s world and express his disdain for him. &quot;Vanya, I have such a withering knowledge of your soul,&quot; says the Russian playwright. &quot;Its pitiful dimensions. It is smaller than an aspirin that fizzles in a glass. . .&quot; However, Chekhov dies, and Vanya finds the resoluteness to stride out of the confines of his creator&#x27;s world.

Barker&#x27;s protagonists are conflicted, often perverse, and their motivations appear enigmatic. In &quot;A Hard Heart&quot;, Riddler, described by the playwright as &quot;A Woman of Originality&quot;, is called upon to use her considerable brilliance in fortifications and tactics to save her besieged city. Each choice she makes appears to render the city more vulnerable to attack, but that outcome seems to exhilarate rather than upset her. &quot;My mind was engine-like in its perfection,&quot; she exults in the midst of destruction. Barker&#x27;s heroes are drawn into the heart of the paradoxical, fascinated by contradiction.

The 1995 edition of the encyclopaedic &quot;The Cambridge Guide to Theatre&quot; describes Barker as a playwright &quot;adept at choosing telling dramatic situations in which many different incidents can take place, but he reverses what might be regarded as the moral expectations [as well as] the expected moral order of capitalist societies. […] Barker deliberately attempts to upset expectations, denying the value of reason, continuity and naturalism, but there is a certain predictability about his wildness. His characters seem to be at emotional extremes, to speak in the same overwrought, rhetorical language.&quot;

==Productions==
Barker has acknowledged he has had greater success as playwright internationally than in his home country of Britain and many of his plays have been translated into other languages. He has noted that his plays have been more successful when performed abroad in America, Australia and Europe, especially mainland Europe where Barker has been celebrated as &quot;one of the major writers of modern European theatre&quot;.

In Britain, Barker is &quot;largely unknown&quot; and he has been described as &quot;cut[ting] a Byronic dash in British Theatre – sardonic, detached, the insider&#x27;s outsider.&quot; Barker&#x27;s work has influenced and inspired a number of notable British playwrights, including Sarah Kane, David Greig, Lucy Kirkwood, and Dennis Kelly. Noted actors Ian McDiarmid and Fiona Shaw have received acclaim for their performances in Barker&#x27;s plays.

In Britain, Howard Barker formed The Wrestling School Company in 1988 to produce his own work in his native country.

There has been a small flurry of productions of Barker&#x27;s plays on the London Fringe since 2007, including some non-Wrestling School productions which seem to fare better critically. Notable among these have been &quot;Victory&quot; and &quot;Scenes from An Execution&quot;, which received acclaimed productions at the Arcola and the Hackney Empire respectively. In 2012 the National Theatre staged a production of &quot;Scenes from an Execution&quot;, starring Fiona Shaw and Tim McInnerny.

==Works==

===Stage plays===
* &quot;Cheek&quot; (1970)
* &quot;No One Was Saved&quot; (1970) – Script unpublished
* &quot;Edward – the Final Days&quot; (1972) – Script unpublished
* &quot;Alpha Alpha&quot; (1972) – Script unpublished
* &quot;Faceache&quot; (1972) – Script unpublished
* &quot;Skipper&quot; (1973) – Script unpublished
* &quot;My Sister and I&quot; (1973) – Script unpublished
* &quot;Rule Britannia&quot; (1973) – Script unpublished
* &quot;Bang&quot; (1973) – Script unpublished
* &quot;Claw&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Stripwell&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Wax&quot; (1976) – Script unpublished
* &quot;Fair Slaughter&quot; (1977)
* &quot;That Good Between Us&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Birth on a Hard Shoulder&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Downchild&quot; (1977)
* &quot;The Hang of the Gaol&quot; (1978)
* &quot;The Love of a Good Man&quot; (1978)
* &quot;The Loud Boy&#x27;s Life&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Crimes in Hot Countries&quot; (1980) (also performed as &quot;Twice Dead&quot;)
* &quot;No End of Blame&quot; (1981)
* &quot;The Poor Man&#x27;s Friend&quot; (1981)
* &quot;The Power of the Dog&quot; (1981)
* &quot;Victory&quot; (1983)
* &quot;A Passion in Six Days&quot; (1983)
* &quot;The Castle&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Women Beware Women&quot;, adaptation of Thomas Middleton (1986)
* &quot;The Possibilities&quot; (1986)
* &quot;The Bite of the Night&quot; (1986)
* &quot;The Europeans&quot; (1987)
* &quot;The Last Supper&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Rome&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Seven Lears&quot;(1989)
* &quot;Golgo&quot; (1989)
* &quot;(Uncle) Vanya&quot;, adaptation of Chekhov&#x27;s &quot;Uncle Vanya&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Ten Dilemas in the Life of a God&quot; (1992)
* &quot;&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Ego in Arcadia&quot; (1992)
* &quot;A Hard Heart&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Minna&quot;, adaptation of Lessing&#x27;s &quot;Minna von Barnhelm&quot; (1993)
* &quot;All He Fears&quot;, a specialist play for marionettes (1993)
*&quot;The Early Hours of a Reviled Man&quot;
*&quot;Stalingrad&quot;
*&quot;12 Encounters with a Prodigy&quot;
*&quot;The Twelfth Battle of Isonzo&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Found in the Ground&quot;
*&quot;The Swing at Night&quot;, a specialist play for marionettes (2001)
*&quot;Knowledge and a Girl&quot;
*&quot;Hated Nightfall&quot; and &quot;Wounds to the Face&quot; (1995)
*&quot;The Gaoler&#x27;s Ache for the Nearly Dead&quot; (1997)
*&quot;Ursula; Fear of the Estuary&quot; (1998)
*&quot;Und&quot; (1999)
*&quot;The Ecstatic Bible&quot; (2000) Prizewinner Adelaide International Festival co-production Brink Theatre (SA) and Wrestling School
*&quot;He Stumbled&quot; (2000)
*&quot;A House of Correction&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Gertrude - The Cry&quot; (2002)
*&quot;13 Objects&quot; and &quot;Summer School&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Dead Hands&quot; (2004)
*&quot;The Fence in Its Thousandth Year&quot; (2005)
*&quot;The Seduction of Almighty God by the Boy Priest Loftus in the Abbey of Calcetto, 1539&quot; (2006)
*&quot;Christ&#x27;s Dog&quot; (2006)
*&quot;The Forty (Few Words)&quot; (2006)
*&quot;I Saw Myself&quot; (2008)
*&quot;The Dying of Today&quot; (2008)
*&quot;A Wounded Knife&quot; (2009)

===Radio plays===
* &quot;One afternoon on the 63rd level of the north face of the pyramid of Cheops the Great&quot; (1970) – Script unpublished.
* &quot;Henry V in two parts&quot; (1971) – Script unpublished.
* &quot;Herman, with Mille and Mick&quot; (1972) – Script unpublished.
* &quot;Scenes from an Execution&quot; (1984)
* &quot;The Early Hours of a Reviled Man&quot; (1990)
* &quot;A Hard Heart&quot; (1992)
* &quot;A House of Correction&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Albertina&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Knowledge and a Girl&quot; (2002)
* &quot;The Moving and the Still&quot; (2003) – Broadcast in 2004.
* &quot;The Quick and the Dead&quot;, Radio 3 (2004)
* &quot;Two skulls&quot;, broadcast on Danish radio (2005)
* &quot;The Road, The House, The Road&quot; (2006) broadcast on Radio 4 to commemorate his sixtieth birthday.
* &quot;Let Me&quot; (2006) broadcast to commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of the Third Programme (Radio 3)

===Television plays and films===
* &quot;Cows&quot; (1972)
* &quot;Made (1972)&quot; feature film based on his play &quot;No One Was Saved&quot;.
* &quot;Mutinies&quot; (1974)
* &quot;The Chauffeur and the Lady&quot; (1974)
* &quot;Prowling Offensive&quot; (1975) – not transmitted
* &quot;Conrod&quot;
* &quot;Aces High&quot; (1976) feature film adapted from R.C. Sheriff&#x27;s play &quot;Journey&#x27;s End&quot;.
* &quot;Heroes of Labour&quot; (1976) – unproduced
* &quot;All Bleeding&quot; (1976) – unproduced
* &quot;Credentials of a Sympathiser&quot; (1976)
* &quot;Sympathiser&quot; (1977) – unproduced
* &quot;Russia&quot; (1977) – unproduced
* &quot;Heaven&quot; (1978) – unproduced
* &quot;Pity in History&quot; (1984)
* &quot;The Blow&quot;, film (1985)
* &quot;Brutopia&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Christ&#x27;s Dog&quot; (2011) short film adapted from his play of the same name. 
* &quot;In Mid Wickedness&quot; (2013) short film in the Georgian language adapted from his play &quot;The Forty&quot;. 
* &quot;Not Him&quot; (2014) short film based on Barker&#x27;s short play of the same name from &quot;The Possibilities&quot;.
* &quot;Don&#x27;t Exaggerate&quot; (2015) short film adapted from Howard Barker&#x27;s work of the same name.

===Other writings===
Barker has also authored several volumes of poetry (&quot;Don&#x27;t Exaggerate&quot;, &quot;The Breath of the Crowd&quot;, &quot;Gary the Thief&quot;, &quot;Lullabies for the Impatient&quot;, &quot;The Ascent of Monte Grappa&quot;, and &quot;The Tortman Diaries&quot;), an opera (&quot;Terrible Mouth&quot; with music by Nigel Osborne), the text for &quot;Flesh and Blood&quot;, a dramatic scene for two singers and orchestra by David Sawer, and three collections of writings on the theatre (&quot;Arguments for a Theatre&quot;, &quot;Death, The One and The Art of Theatre&quot;, &quot;A Style And Its Origins&quot;).

==Personal life==
Barker divorced in the 1980s and has lived on his own in Brighton since then.

==Further reading==
*
*
*Rabey, David Ian (2009), &quot;Howard Barker: Ecstasy and Death: An Expository Study of His Drama, Theory and Production Work, 1988-2008&quot;, Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 9781403994738
* Rabey, David Ian, and Goldingay, Sarah (eds.; 2013), &quot;Howard Barker&#x27;s Art of Theatre: Essays on His Plays, Poetry and Production Work&quot;, Manchester University Press. ISBN 9780719089299

==References==
== External links ==
* Official Site
* The Wrestling School&#x27;s page on Barker 
* Special section on Howard Barker in &quot;Hyperion: On the Future of Aesthetics&quot;, Vol. V, Issue 1, May 2010. This features &quot;Cruelty, Beauty, and the Tragic Art of Howard Barker&quot; by Rainer J. Hanshe, &quot;Access to the Body: The Theatre of Revelation in Beckett, Foreman, and Barker&quot; by George Hunka, excerpts from Barker&#x27;s &quot;Death, The One, and The Art of Theatre&quot;, which is introduced by Karoline Gritzner, and &quot;The Sunless Garden of the Unconsoled: Some Destinations Beyond Catastrophe&quot;, a new and previously unpublished essay by Howard Barker, which is introduced by David Kilpatrick. The section also features high-resolution color reproductions of numerous paintings of Barker&#x27;s.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q721372" start="0" end="13" title="Howard Barker" label="Howard Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q214917" start="47" end="57" title="playwright" label="playwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q28389" start="59" end="71" title="screenwriter" label="screenwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="86" end="97" title="radio drama" label="radio drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="99" end="106" title="painter" label="painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="108" end="112" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35760" start="118" end="126" title="essayist" label="essayist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430782" start="286" end="310" title="Scenes from an Execution" label="Scenes from an Execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q104866107" start="345" end="355" title="The Castle (play)" label="The Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553413" start="444" end="462" title="Gertrude – The Cry" label="Gertrude – The Cry"/>
<link wikidata="Q55099406" start="578" end="598" title="The Wrestling School" label="The Wrestling School"/>
<link wikidata="Q124490" start="740" end="748" title="violence" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q154136" start="750" end="759" title="Human sexuality" label="sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="776" end="781" title="Power (philosophy)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q644302" start="789" end="799" title="motivation" label="motivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430782" start="1576" end="1600" title="Scenes from an Execution" label="Scenes from an Execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q165425" start="1653" end="1677" title="Battle of Lepanto (1571)" label="Battle of Lepanto (1571)"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="1763" end="1771" title="Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1789" end="1796" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q749608" start="1865" end="1876" title="BBC Radio 3" label="BBC Radio 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q182408" start="1890" end="1904" title="Glenda Jackson" label="Glenda Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q202129" start="2019" end="2025" title="Book of Judith" label="Judith"/>
<link wikidata="Q204933" start="2053" end="2063" title="decapitate" label="decapitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q625748" start="2086" end="2096" title="Holofernes" label="Holofernes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="2211" end="2222" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q404158" start="2236" end="2242" title="Utopia (More book)" label="Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34628" start="2299" end="2323" title="Gotthold Ephraim Lessing" label="Gotthold Ephraim Lessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="2331" end="2344" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685" start="2446" end="2459" title="Anton Chekhov" label="Anton Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q753298" start="2467" end="2489" title="Uncle Vanya" label="drama of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706138" start="2530" end="2539" title="bad faith" label="bad faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="3119" end="3130" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q483372" start="3700" end="3707" title="paradox" label="paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4645" end="4652" title="America" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="4654" end="4663" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="4668" end="4674" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="4687" end="4702" title="mainland Europe" label="mainland Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018644" start="4902" end="4909" title="Byronic" label="Byronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q231141" start="5089" end="5099" title="Sarah Kane" label="Sarah Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q726345" start="5101" end="5112" title="David Greig (dramatist)" label="David Greig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698397" start="5114" end="5127" title="Lucy Kirkwood" label="Lucy Kirkwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189253" start="5133" end="5145" title="Dennis Kelly (writer)" label="Dennis Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q315495" start="5160" end="5173" title="Ian McDiarmid" label="Ian McDiarmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q73612" start="5178" end="5188" title="Fiona Shaw" label="Fiona Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="5756" end="5772" title="Royal National Theatre" label="National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q552162" start="5858" end="5871" title="Tim McInnerny" label="Tim McInnerny"/>
<link wikidata="Q104866107" start="7057" end="7067" title="The Castle (play)" label="The Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569768" start="7089" end="7107" title="Women Beware Women" label="Women Beware Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q344865" start="7129" end="7145" title="Thomas Middleton" label="Thomas Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685" start="7435" end="7442" title="Chekhov" label="Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q753298" start="7456" end="7467" title="Uncle Vanya" label="Uncle Vanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q34628" start="7662" end="7676" title="Gotthold Ephraim Lessing" label="Lessing&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209859" start="7683" end="7701" title="Minna von Barnhelm" label="Minna von Barnhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q189888" start="7765" end="7776" title="marionettes" label="marionettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189888" start="8033" end="8044" title="marionettes" label="marionettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553413" start="8510" end="8528" title="Gertrude - The Cry" label="Gertrude - The Cry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763209" start="8694" end="8779" title="The Seduction of Almighty God by the Boy Priest Loftus in the Abbey of Calcetto, 1539" label="The Seduction of Almighty God by the Boy Priest Loftus in the Abbey of Calcetto, 1539"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836286" start="8913" end="8931" title="The Dying of Today" label="The Dying of Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430782" start="9271" end="9295" title="Scenes from an Execution" label="Scenes from an Execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q749608" start="9618" end="9625" title="BBC Radio 3" label="Radio 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="9756" end="9763" title="BBC Radio 4" label="Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726678" start="9981" end="9992" title="Made (1972 film)" label="Made (1972)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544006" start="10225" end="10234" title="Aces High (film)" label="Aces High"/>
<link wikidata="Q941966" start="10274" end="10286" title="R.C. Sheriff" label="R.C. Sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q12833234" start="10305" end="10323" title="Journey&amp;#x27;s End" label="Journey&amp;#x27;s End"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="10858" end="10875" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989587" start="11504" end="11517" title="Nigel Osborne" label="Nigel Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407526" start="11612" end="11623" title="David Sawer" label="David Sawer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747553" start="12260" end="12287" title="Manchester University Press" label="Manchester University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880647" wikidata="Q4812495" url="?curid=880647" title="At the Earth's Core">
<text>At the Earth&#x27;s Core may refer to:

*&quot;At the Earth&#x27;s Core&quot; (novel) (1914), by Edgar Rice Burroughs
*&quot;At the Earth&#x27;s Core&quot; (film) (1976)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2870358" start="41" end="85" title="At the Earth&amp;#x27;s Core (novel)" label="&amp;quot;At the Earth&amp;#x27;s Core&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199617" start="119" end="162" title="At the Earth&amp;#x27;s Core (film)" label="&amp;quot;At the Earth&amp;#x27;s Core&amp;quot; (film)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880654" wikidata="Q35301" url="?curid=880654" title="Quebec Winter Carnival">
<text>The Quebec Winter Carnival (), commonly known in both English and French as Carnaval, is a pre-Lenten festival held in Quebec City, Quebec, Canada. After being held intermittently since 1894, the &quot;Carnaval de Québec&quot; has been celebrated annually since 1955. That year, &quot;Bonhomme Carnaval&quot;, the mascot of the festival, made his first appearance. Up to one million people attended the &quot;Carnaval de Québec&quot; in 2006, making it, at the time, the largest winter festival in the world (since overtaken by the Harbin Festival). It is, however, the largest winter festival in the Western Hemisphere.

==Activities and attractions==
The most famous attractions of this winter festival are the night-time and daytime parades led by mascot Bonhomme Carnaval. The parades wind through the upper city, decorated for the occasion with lights and ice sculptures. 

Numerous public and private parties, shows and balls are held across the city, some of them outside in the bitter cold, a testimony to the Québécois&#x27; fabled joie de vivre.

Other major events include:

*A masquerade ball with up to 400 participants at the grand ballroom of the Château Frontenac
*The opening and closing ceremonies taking place at the Ice Palace before thousands of participants, Bonhomme and the mayor of Quebec
*Outdoor sport events (snowboarding, ice canoe, snowshoes, hockey, dog-sledding, etc., some of them part of World Championship tournaments) inside and outside the city
*Free outdoor public banquets (brunch, breakfast, etc.)
*The Canadian, Québécois, International and Student artist snow sculpture contests on the Plains of Abraham, the main setting of the carnival. The Plains are a public city park and stay open for leisure activities, including snowshoeing and cross-country skiing trails, during carnival time. Part of the Plains around the Citadel is transformed into an outdoor winter amusement park with various family-themed activities, including the display of the three main snow-sculpting contests (Canada&#x27;s provinces, Quebec&#x27;s regions, International) and the traditional &quot;bikini snow bath&quot; event (bain de neige).

Outdoor dance parties are held at the Ice Palaces.

*Kiosks and other outlets in the city sell the Bonhomme effigy tag that grants admission into most of the events, although some are free outside the main site.
*Most commercial main streets are decorated and some bars and restaurants set up a winter patio in front of their establishments.
*&quot;Bonhomme&quot; – short for &quot;bonhomme de neige&quot; (&quot;snowman&quot;) is the official ambassador of the festivities, the castle lord of the Ice Palace. Bonhomme is described as a seven-foot-tall, four-hundred pound snowman sporting a red cap, black buttons and a ceinture fléchée that gives acknowledgement to French-Canadian and Métis style clothing.
*It is traditional to drink &quot;Caribou&quot;, a hot alcoholic beverage, to keep warm.
*The public auction is a fundraising event in aid of the carnival. This features many goods and services donated for silent auction and live auction.

==Feasts and restaurants==
*The Business Leaders&#x27; Luncheon, organized by the Québec City Chamber of Commerce
*The &#x27;Restaurant Partners&#x27; Campaign is a 179-day promotion during which Québec City restaurants offer customers a special menu for a fixed price throughout the carnival (including appetizer, soup, or salad, a main course, and a dessert).

==Races and tournaments==
*A sleigh race in which drivers and their horses take part in a single- and double-harness race on the Plains of Abraham
*An ice canoe race on the St. Lawrence river
*The Quebec International Pee-Wee Hockey Tournament, founded in 1960 by Gérard Bolduc, Paul Dumont and others, was part of the program until 1977.
*The Snowboard World Cup in Quebec City (not part of the carnival official program).

== Themes ==

=== 1970s ===
* In 1972, the theme was &quot;Un carnaval pour tout le monde&quot; (A Carnival for Everyone).

=== 1990s ===
* In 1990, the theme was &quot;Au cœur du monde&quot; (At the Heart of the World).
* In 1991, the theme was &quot;Pour apprivoiser l&#x27;hiver&quot; (To Tame Winter).

=== 2000s ===

* In 2005, the theme was &quot;Le carnaval s&#x27;enflamme&quot; (The Carnival Catches Fire).
* In 2006, the theme was &quot;Le carnaval surprend&quot; (The Carnival Astonishes).
* In 2007, the theme was &quot;Le carnaval vous met au défi&quot; (The Carnival Defies You).
* In 2008, the theme was &quot;Le carnaval donne le ton&quot; (The Carnival Gives the Rhythm) .
* In 2009, the theme was &quot;Le carnaval vous entraîne dans la mascarade&quot; (The Carnival Teaches You Masquarade).

== Queens and duchesses ==
Duchesses were present at the &quot;Carnaval de Québec&quot; from 1955 to 1996. After a period of 17 years, they returned for the 2014 to 2018 carnivals. Originally, the duchess would represent a local organization, but as of 1957 they represented different sectors of Québec. On May 23, 2018, it was announced that the duchesses would no longer be a part of the &quot;Carnaval de Québec.&quot;

== Statistics ==

=== Visitors ===
* In 1964, 260 000 people visited Québec to celebrate the &quot;Carnaval de Québec&quot;.
* In 1994, Quebec had more than 500 000 visitors, with over 20% coming from outside of Quebec, the majority of them from the United States or Europe.
* In 2008, an estimated 1.2 million tourists visited Quebec to attend the &quot;Carnaval de Québec&quot; in celebration of the city&#x27;s 400th anniversary. 

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Winter festival

==References==
== External links ==
* Quebec Winter Carnaval virtual tour in panoramic photography
* Tornoipee-wee.qc.ca
* Fissnowboard.com
* Icehotel-canada.com </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35301" start="4" end="26" title="Quebec Winter Carnival" label="Quebec Winter Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q35301" start="76" end="84" title="Quebec Winter Carnival" label="Carnaval"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91" end="110" title="Lent#Pre-Lenten observances" label="pre-Lenten festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="119" end="130" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960307" start="532" end="547" title="Harbin International Ice and Snow Sculpture Festival" label="Harbin Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810939" start="1041" end="1054" title="joie de vivre" label="joie de vivre"/>
<link wikidata="Q745964" start="1162" end="1179" title="Château Frontenac" label="Château Frontenac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726825" start="1628" end="1645" title="Plains of Abraham" label="Plains of Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q483985" start="2734" end="2741" title="snowman" label="snowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943844" start="2782" end="2798" title="ceinture fléchée" label="ceinture fléchée"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938772" start="2905" end="2912" title="Caribou (drink)" label="Caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q177923" start="2972" end="2979" title="auction" label="auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q181388" start="3503" end="3509" title="sleigh" label="sleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118526" start="3625" end="3634" title="ice canoe" label="ice canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535360" start="3671" end="3717" title="Quebec International Pee-Wee Hockey Tournament" label="Quebec International Pee-Wee Hockey Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q60379317" start="3738" end="3751" title="Gérard Bolduc" label="Gérard Bolduc"/>
<link wikidata="Q60694507" start="3753" end="3764" title="Paul Dumont" label="Paul Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4191987" start="5595" end="5610" title="Winter festival" label="Winter festival"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880658" wikidata="Q6767556" url="?curid=880658" title="Mark Everett">
<text>Mark Everett may refer to:

* Mark Oliver Everett (born 1963), musician
* Mark Everett (runner) (born 1968), American 800 meters athlete
* Manuel Benitez (1969–2008), child-actor whose stage name was Mark Everett
* Mark Everett (cricketer) (born 1967), former English cricketer
==See also==
* Mark Everett Fuller, U.S. judge</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6767556" start="0" end="12" title="Mark Everett" label="Mark Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q11907" start="30" end="49" title="Mark Oliver Everett" label="Mark Oliver Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q958642" start="74" end="95" title="Mark Everett (runner)" label="Mark Everett (runner)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752445" start="139" end="153" title="Manuel Benitez" label="Manuel Benitez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767558" start="215" end="239" title="Mark Everett (cricketer)" label="Mark Everett (cricketer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767691" start="293" end="312" title="Mark Everett Fuller" label="Mark Everett Fuller"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880660" wikidata="Q589875" url="?curid=880660" title="Principal Park">
<text>Principal Park, formerly Sec Taylor Stadium, is a minor league baseball stadium in Des Moines, Iowa. It is the home field of the International League&#x27;s Iowa Cubs.

==Features==
Principal Park is at the confluence of the Des Moines River and the Raccoon River in downtown Des Moines. The stadium seats 11,500 fans, with 4,088 club seats and has 45 luxury suites, 12 of which are in a building in left field that also houses the Cub Club restaurant. The Iowa State Capitol building is visible from beyond the center field fence, while some seats also provide views of the Des Moines skyline.

==History==

The first ballpark at this site was Pioneer Memorial Stadium in 1947. It was renamed Sec Taylor Stadium in honor of longtime &quot;Des Moines Register&quot; sports editor Garner &quot;Sec&quot; Taylor on September 2, 1959. The park served as home of the Des Moines Bruins of the Class A Western League (1947–1958) and the Des Moines Demons of the Class B Three–I League (1959–1961). It became the home of the Iowa Cubs (originally the Iowa Oaks of the American Association) in 1969.

By the late 1980s the original stadium was becoming run down, and was starting to develop a seedy reputation as the wooden seats and bleachers were splintering and unpainted. After Des Moines voters approved a bond issue to rebuild Sec Taylor Stadium in August 1990, most of the original stadium was demolished after the 1991 season. The present facility, complete with sky boxes, plastic seats, metal bleachers and a family picnic area, was dedicated on April 16, 1992. During part of the 1993 season the stadium was submerged by the Great Flood of 1993, but the team still went on to win the American Association championship. The ballpark hosted the Triple-A All-Star Game in 1997. A team of American League-affiliated All-Stars defeated a team of National League-affiliated All-Stars, 5–3.

In 2004, Chicago Cubs pitchers Mark Prior and Kerry Wood—both former I-Cubs players—pitched rehabilitation starts in Des Moines and attracted sellout crowds in the process. Wood made two additional rehab starts at Principal Park on June 14, 2005 and one start on May 12, 2006.

On August 5, 2004, Sec Taylor Stadium was renamed Principal Park after the Principal Financial Group purchased the naming rights to the facility. The playing field is still known as Sec Taylor Field. The $2.5 million deal covered part of a $6.8 million renovation project that took place during the 2005–2006 off–season. The project included the addition of over 1,000 new seats in the right field grandstand, replacement of all other seats, construction of new right field bleachers, installation of a new scoreboard and video board, replacement of the stadium field lighting system, and other structural changes.

On August 26, 2004, the ballpark hosted a concert featuring Bob Dylan and Willie Nelson.

Principal Park hosted its first Iowa High School Athletic Association state baseball tournament in 2005 and is scheduled to host the tournament through 2020.

Principal Park&#x27;s single–game attendance record was set on June 8, 2007, when 15,188 fans watched an I–Cubs game against the New Orleans Zephyrs. However, the highest attendance for any event at the stadium was set on September 25, 2009, when a Dave Matthews Band concert brought in a sellout crowd of 18,158.

On June 14, 2008, the Iowa Cubs beat the Nashville Sounds 5–4. The paid attendance was 0 due to flooding concerns in the Downtown Des Moines area.

The stadium hosted live watch parties during the 2015 and 2016 playoff runs for the parent Chicago Cubs, the latter resulting in the franchise&#x27;s first World Series championship in 108 years.

==Renovations==

In 1995, the ballpark added a new look with a remodeled clubhouse and 12 skyboxes in left field. The $2 million clubhouse expansion featured new locker room facilities for both the Cubs and visiting clubs. The locker room complex also included: new offices for the manager and coaches, laundry and storage facilities, an expanded training room, an indoor batting cage, a new weight room and a family lounge.

Many new features were added prior to the 2000 season. A skybox was added to the first base side, 88 new Home Plate Club seats were constructed behind home plate and a $100,000 sound system was installed. The Cub Club also was extensively remodeled and Principal Park became a smoke-free facility.

After the completion of the 2002 season, a new playing surface was installed at Principal Park. The three-month-long project cost just under $1 million, and features the same grass as Wrigley Field and one of the best playing fields in the minor leagues.

Over the winter between the 2005 and 2006 seasons, Principal Park underwent an extensive renovation at a cost of $6.8 million. New seats were installed throughout the ballpark, a new scoreboard and videoboard were installed and a fountain in right field was completed for the 2007 season. A bleacher seating area in front of the scoreboard and a giant kids&#x27; playland was installed on the first base concourse.

A new video board was added to right field in 2015. A ribbon board and LED lighting was added in 2017.

==References==
==External links==

* Principal Park at the Iowa Cubs&#x27; website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q589875" start="0" end="14" title="Principal Park" label="Principal Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q589875" start="25" end="43" title="Principal Park" label="Sec Taylor Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="50" end="71" title="minor league baseball" label="minor league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q483110" start="72" end="79" title="stadium" label="stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q39709" start="83" end="99" title="Des Moines, Iowa" label="Des Moines, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351657" start="129" end="149" title="International League" label="International League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276590" start="157" end="166" title="Iowa Cubs" label="Iowa Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q492787" start="225" end="241" title="Des Moines River" label="Des Moines River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415981" start="250" end="263" title="Raccoon River" label="Raccoon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977124" start="457" end="475" title="Iowa State Capitol" label="Iowa State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917258" start="740" end="759" title="The Des Moines Register" label="Des Moines Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q94977375" start="780" end="809" title="Garner Taylor" label="Garner &amp;quot;Sec&amp;quot; Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263506" start="863" end="880" title="Des Moines Bruins" label="Des Moines Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263515" start="931" end="948" title="Des Moines Demons" label="Des Moines Demons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996672" start="964" end="978" title="Three–I League" label="Three–I League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867334" start="1061" end="1081" title="American Association (20th century)" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742723" start="1628" end="1647" title="Great Flood of 1993" label="Great Flood of 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843316" start="1746" end="1768" title="Triple-A All-Star Game" label="Triple-A All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="1788" end="1803" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="1844" end="1859" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="1897" end="1909" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036670" start="1919" end="1929" title="Mark Prior" label="Mark Prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q968334" start="1934" end="1944" title="Kerry Wood" label="Kerry Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403513" start="2241" end="2266" title="Principal Financial Group" label="Principal Financial Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189307" start="2281" end="2294" title="naming rights" label="naming rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="2842" end="2851" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q206112" start="2856" end="2869" title="Willie Nelson" label="Willie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q195849" start="3160" end="3179" title="New Orleans Zephyrs" label="New Orleans Zephyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q832086" start="3280" end="3298" title="Dave Matthews Band" label="Dave Matthews Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148274" start="3543" end="3547" title="2015 Chicago Cubs season" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189266" start="3552" end="3556" title="2016 Chicago Cubs season" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="3585" end="3597" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906838" start="3644" end="3675" title="2016 World Series" label="first World Series championship"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880666" wikidata="Q1942165" url="?curid=880666" title="Pigeonholing">
<text>Pigeonholing is a process that attempts to classify disparate entities into a limited number of categories (usually, mutually exclusive ones).

The term usually carries connotations of criticism, implying that the classification scheme referred to inadequately reflects the entities being sorted, or that it is based on stereotypes.

== Pitfalls ==
Various classification schemes often suffer from pitfalls such as these:

*The categories may be poorly defined, inadequately described, or subjective. 
**Example: A poor person and a rich person may have different ideas about what counts as &quot;too expensive&quot;.
*A single entity may be suited to more than one category. 
**Example: Rhubarb is both &quot;poisonous&quot; (the leaves) and &quot;safe to eat&quot; (the stem).
*Entities may not fit into any available category. 
**Example: A person who is moving from one city to another does not live in either city.
*Entities may change over time, so they no longer fit the category in which they have been placed. 
**Example: Certain species of fish may change from male to female during their life.
**Example: A child who is categorized as &quot;unable to read&quot; may learn to read soon afterwards.
*Some properties are better viewed as a continuum than as separate categories.
**Example: There are people of every height, so categorizing all of them as &quot;short&quot;, &quot;average&quot;, and &quot;tall&quot; can result in people of almost exactly the same height being put in different categories. The tallest &quot;short&quot; person and the shortest &quot;average&quot; person will be almost the same height.

An example of pigeonholing in everyday conversation occurs when a person making an apolitical or barely political comment is assumed to have a certain political belief, without ascertaining their political stance. Such an erroneous designation is especially erroneous when assigning it to people who live in places where the left–right dichotomy is not present.

==See also==
* Archetype
* Labelling
* Pigeonhole principle
* Typecasting

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1942165" start="0" end="12" title="Pigeonholing" label="Pigeonholing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582682" start="96" end="106" title="Categorization" label="categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q167172" start="320" end="330" title="stereotype" label="stereotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="489" end="499" title="subjectivity" label="subjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535" start="688" end="695" title="Rhubarb" label="Rhubarb"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="1050" end="1054" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209454" start="1059" end="1085" title="sequential hermaphroditism" label="change from male to female"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251388" start="1248" end="1257" title="continuum (measurement)" label="continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858446" start="1711" end="1721" title="apoliticism" label="apolitical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921172" start="1953" end="1963" title="left–right political spectrum" label="left–right"/>
<link wikidata="Q131714" start="2006" end="2015" title="Archetype" label="Archetype"/>
<link wikidata="Q380709" start="2018" end="2027" title="Labelling" label="Labelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q188276" start="2030" end="2050" title="Pigeonhole principle" label="Pigeonhole principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="2053" end="2064" title="Typecasting" label="Typecasting"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880668" wikidata="Q708640" url="?curid=880668" title="Jiandao">
<text>Jiandao or Chientao, known in Korean as Gando or Kando, is a historical border region along the north bank of the Tumen River in Jilin Province, Northeast China that has a high population of ethnic Koreans. The word &quot;Jiandao&quot;, literally &quot;Middle Island&quot;, originally referred to a shoal in Tumen River between today&#x27;s Chuankou Village, Kaishantun in Longjing, Jilin, China and Chongsŏng, Onsong County in North Korea. The island was an important landmark for immigrants from the Korean Peninsula looking for settlements across the river. As the number of immigrants increased, the area covered by the name &quot;Jiandao&quot; gradually changed to reflect the areas of Korean settlement.

In the early 20th century, an expanding Japanese Empire argued that ethnic Koreans living in this area should be placed under its jurisdiction. As one of its first set of attempts to annex northeast China and conquer other parts of mainland China, Imperial Japanese forces in Korea invaded Jiandao in 1907, but Japan withdrew its forces to Korea in 1909 and, under diplomatic pressure from China, recognized the border along Tumen River that had existed before the invasion.

The Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture of present-day Jilin Province covers roughly the same region as historical Jiandao. The prefecture is approximately 42,000 square kilometers in size and is home to about 810,000 ethnic Koreans.

In China, Yanbian is the name used, and Jiandao is not used, due to its association with Japanese colonial occupation. Both North Korea and South Korea recognize the region as a part of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, but there are some liberal and left-wing nationalist elements in South Korea that endorse the idea that the region should be a part of modern-day Korea. These groups claim what happened in Jiandao between 1907 and 1909 (Japan&#x27;s invasion and subsequent withdrawal) was an illegal transfer of Korean territory between Japan and China.

== History ==
Many different states and tribes succeeded each other in ruling the area during ancient times. These included Buyeo, Goguryeo and Goguryeo&#x27;s successor state Balhae. Goguryeo, one of the Three Kingdoms of Korea, controlled northern Korea and southern Manchuria, including the territory known as Gando/Jiandao. Balhae was a state that existed in the area during the Tang dynasty in China and the Unified Silla Period in Korea. China emphasizes Balhae&#x27;s temporary tributary relationship to the Tang, while Korea emphasizes that Balhae was a successor state and a cultural extension of Goguryeo.

Balhae was destroyed by the Khitan Liao dynasty in 926, and was formally annexed in 936. Over the next nine to ten centuries the region was administered by the Liao (Khitans), Jin (Jurchens), Yuan (Mongols), Ming and then the Qing.

In 1712, the border between Qing and Joseon was formally demarcated. For years, Qing officials did not allow people to move to Northeastern China, as it believed that should a Han majority government rise again in parts of China south of the Great Wall, the Manchus could retreat to their original homeland. Joseon officials also did not allow its subjects to move to Northeastern China. These governmental regulations, with the general marshy nature of the area, left these lands north of the Tumen River relatively undeveloped and the region was sparsely populated by Manchu tribes for a long time. Qing officials regularly inspected this region and occasional Korean intruders were detained and sent back to Korea. However, by the late 19th century, peasants in northern Korea were migrating to northeast China to flee famine and poverty. More arrived as refugees when Japan invaded Korea in 1894.

From 1901, The Korean Empire prepared to take control of Jiandao. In 1901, Korean General Yi Hak-gyun, Diplomat Sands in Korea, and captain Payeur were sent to observe Jiandao. The French envoy, Victor Collin de Plancy, reported that Korean government would benefit by taxing Jiandao&#x27;s inhabitants, and would increase jobs and influence by sending officials there. He also reported that the Russian legation opposed an invasion because this might cause the loss of Russian territory. In 1901, Korea deployed police in Jiandao, and this continued until 1906. The Korean Government sent Yi Beom-yun, who was not part of the Imperial Korean Army, as a Jiandao observer to invade Jiandao in 1903. In Jiandao, Yi established Sa-po dae, which was a militia consisting of both a righteous army, and Imperial Korean Army. This army fought against Japan during the Russo-Japanese War. In 1904, the Japanese embassy in Korea reported the Korean government as claiming that there was no document that explicitly recorded Jiandao as part of the Qing territory.

After the Russo-Japanese War, Japan began the process that led to the formal annexation of Korea. In 1905, the Korean Empire became a protectorate of the Empire of Japan, effectively losing diplomatic rights, and became a part of the Imperial Japan in 1910. In the early 20th century, Korean immigration to Manchuria steadily increased, either from refugees fleeing Japanese rule, or from encouragement by the Japanese government of Korea of emigration to develop the land. Some local Chinese governments welcomed the Korean immigrants, as they were a source of labor and agricultural skill.

In the meantime, Japan began to expand into northeast China. One of the regions the Japanese targeted was Jiandao (known in Korean as Gando). The Japanese claimed that Jiandao included territory of four counties (Yanji, Wangqing, Helong and Hunchun) of Jilin Province. The Japanese further claimed ethnic Koreans living in this region should be placed under the jurisdiction of Imperial Japan.

The Japanese first infiltrated Jiandao in April 1907 to collect information and data. On August 7, 1907, Japanese troops invaded Jiandao and claimed that the &quot;Jiandao Issue&quot; was &quot;unsettled&quot; (see: Gando Massacre).

In the Gando Convention of 1909, Japan affirmed territorial rights of the Qing over Jiandao after the Chinese foreign ministry issued a thirteen-point refutation statement asserting its rightful ownership. Japan agreed to withdraw its invading troops back to Korea in two months. The treaty also contained provisions for the protection and rights of ethnic Koreans under Chinese rule. Nevertheless, there were large Korean settlements and the area remained under significant Japanese influence.

Despite the agreement, Koreans in Jiandao continued to be a source of friction between the Chinese and Japanese governments. Japan maintained that all ethnic Koreans were Japanese nationals, subject to Japanese jurisdiction and law, and demanded rights to patrol and police the area. The Qing and subsequent local Chinese governments insisted on its territorial sovereignty over the region.

After the Mukden Incident of 1931, the Japanese military (the Kwantung Army) invaded Manchuria. Between 1931 and 1945, Manchuria was under the control of Manchukuo, a Japanese puppet state. From 1934 the area formed a new Jiandao Province of Manchukuo after the old Jilin Province was split into Binjiang, Jiandao and a rump Jilin. This period initiated a new wave of Korean immigration, as the Japanese government actively encouraged (or forced) Korean settlement in order to colonize and develop the region. The Japanese also moved to suppress resistance in the region. Within three and half years (from September 1931 to March 1935), Japanese regular forces and police murdered 4520 people. During and after the 1930s, many ethnic Koreans in the region joined and participated in the Chinese Communist Party.

In December 1938, a counterinsurgency unit called the Gando Special Force was organized by the Japanese Kwantung Army to combat communist guerrillas within the region. The top commander of this battalion-size force was Japanese. Historian Philip Jowett noted that during the Japanese occupation of Manchuria, the Gando Special Force had &quot;earned a reputation for brutality and was reported to have laid waste to large areas which came under its rule.&quot;

On 1 October 1943, Jiandao Province was incorporated as a district into the Dongman Consolidated Province but this district was itself abolished on 28 May 1945 and Jiandao was once again a province.

After World War II and the liberation of Korea, many Korean expatriates in the region moved back to Korea, but a significant number remained in Manchuria; descendants of these people form much of the Korean ethnic minority in China today. The area was first nominally part of the Republic of China&#x27;s new Songjiang Province but with the communist seizure of power in 1949, Sonjiang&#x27;s borders were changed and Jiandao became part of Jilin.

The area is now the Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture in Jilin.

== Boundary claims ==
The claims by some of the Korean irredentists over Gando stem from what is perceived as an ambiguity in the original Sino-Korean boundary agreement.

After several attempts by the Kangxi Emperor to negotiate the issue, in 1712, the Joseon of Korea and Qing of China agreed to delineate the boundaries of the two countries at the Yalu and Tumen Rivers. The Qing delegation was led by Mukedeng, and the Joseon delegation was led by Pak Kwon, and the two held a joint commission to survey and demarcate the boundaries between the two states. Efforts were taken to locate the sources of the Yalu and Tumen rivers at Baekdu Mountain. Owing to Pak&#x27;s age, they agreed for Mukedeng&#x27;s team to ascend the summit alone. Mukedeng&#x27;s team quickly identified the source of the Yalu, but identification for the Tumen proved more complicated. At last a spot was decided, and a stele was erected as a boundary marker. Over the next year, a fence was built to demarcate the areas where the Tumen river ran underground.

Pak Kwon was instructed by the Joseon government to retain all territory south of the Yalu and Tumen rivers, a goal he accomplished. However, some Korean officials lamented the loss of claims on areas north of the river and criticized Pak Kwon for not accompanying Mukedeng to the summit. The territorial claims stem from the territories held by Goguryeo and Balhae. Nonetheless, the border remained uncontentious for the next 150 years. Cross-border movements were forbidden, and was punishable by death after trespassers were detained and repatriated back to their respective countries.

In the 1870s the Qing government reversed its policy of prohibiting entry to Manchuria, and began allowing Han Chinese settlers into the territory in response to growing Russian encroachment. The area around Gando was opened up to settlement in 1881, but Chinese settlers quickly discovered some Korean farming communities already settled in the area. It was apparent that despite the decreed punishment, severe droughts in northern Korea had motivated Korean farmers to seek new lands. The Jilin general-governor Ming-An&#x27;s official response was to lodge a protest to the Joseon government and offer to allow the Korean population to stay if they agreed to become Qing subjects and adopt Qing customs and dress. Joseon&#x27;s response was to encourage the farmers not to register as Qing subjects but to return to Korea within the year.

The farmers, unwilling to abandon their homes, argued that because of the ambiguity in the naming of the Tumen river, they were actually already in Korean territory. The Yalu River boundary is of little dispute, but the interpretation of the Tumen River boundary 土門 (토문) causes problems. The name of the river itself originates from the Jurchen word &quot;tumen&quot;, meaning &quot;ten thousand&quot;. The official boundary agreement in 1712 identified the Tumen river using the characters 土門 (Tǔmen) for the phonetic transcription. However, the modern Tumen River is written as 圖們 (Túmen) in modern Chinese and as 豆滿 in both modern Korean (두만 Duman) and Japanese (とまん Toman). Some Koreans hence claim that the &quot;Tumen&quot; referred to in the treaty is actually a tributary of the Songhua River. Under this interpretation, Gando (where the Koreans settled) would be part of Korean territory.

This confusion arises as the two names sound identical, and neither name is of Chinese origin. The two rivers can be seen in the following map from the period. Korean claims are based on maps showing the border river as 土門 and the claim that this is a different river than the one used for the modern border. However, it is uncertain which modern river the Korean claim corresponds to, as there is no modern tributary of the Songhua River with that name:
* Satellite view of same location; Baekdu Mountain, Lake Tianchi, and the Tumen River are visible
* Satellite view of the Songhua river and Baekdu Mountain, for comparison purposes

This interpretation of the boundary gradually developed into Joseon official policy. O Yunjung, a Korean official appointed to review the claims made by the farmers and investigate the sources of the river, adopted the latter interpretation and declared that the region did not belong to China. Joseon and Qing officials met in 1885 and 1887 to resolve the dispute, but with little result. Korean officials suggested on starting from the stele and tracing the river downwards, while Qing officials proposed starting at the mouth of the Tumen River and moving upstream. From 1905 onwards, Korea came under the influence and control of Japan and was unable to effectively pursue these claims.

After the liberation of Korea in 1945, some Koreans believed that Jiandao should be given to Korean rule, but the military control by United States of America in the south and Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in the north hindered any unified Korean claim to the territory. The chaos of the Korean War and the geopolitical situation of the Cold War effectively diminished any opportunity for Koreans to highlight the Gando issue. In 1962, North Korea and China signed the Sino–North Korean Border Treaty, which set the Korean border at Yalu and Tumen, effectively foregoing territorial claims to Gando. South Korea also recognizes this as the boundary between Korea and China.

Today, none of the governments involved (North Korea, South Korea, China, or Japan) make the claim that Gando is Korean territory. In addition, there is very little enthusiasm for irredentism among the Korean minority in China. Although there are occasional arguments over historical interpretation, this issue arouses very little emotion or official interest on the part of any of the parties, and relations between China and both Koreas remain warm.

In 2004 the South Korean government issued a statement to the effect that it believed that the Gando Convention was null and void. The resultant controversy and strong negative reaction from the PRC led to a retraction of the statement, along with an explanation that its issuance was an &quot;administrative error.&quot;

A small number of South Korean activists believe that under a unified Korea, the treaties signed by North Korea can be deemed null, allowing the unified Korea to actively seek regress for Gando. However, the current political situation makes this a faint possibility at best. Also, some scholars claim that China&#x27;s efforts to incorporate the history of Goguryeo and Balhae into Chinese history is an effectively pre-emptive move to squash any territorial disputes that might arise regarding Gando before a unified Korea can claim such or the Korean ethnic minority in the Manchuria region claim to become part of Korea.

==Images==

The following maps, made by Korea from the 18th century to the 19th century, show Sino-Korean borders to be aligned along the Yalu and Tumen Rivers, essentially the same as those today (between China and North Korea):
However, there is an exception in the last map, as it shows the border visibly protruding north of the Tumen River.

Some Korean claims to Gando are based on other maps. The following were made by western missionaries. However, the first is explicitly stated as a map of &quot;Quan-Tong Province&quot; (now Liaoning province, China) and Kau-li (Korea), and the second is stated as a map of the Chinese Tartary (&quot;la Tartarie Chinoise&quot;). Compared to the Korean-made maps above, the coastlines and rivers are also significantly less accurate, but the Sino-Korean border is not placed at the Yalu/Amnok River, which is quite clear in the following maps:

Note that two almost identical versions of a first map exists, showing significant differences in the border. One shows the boundaries similar to modern-day province and country borders, while the other shows the Sino-Korean border significantly further north.
==See also==
* Gando Convention
* Heaven Lake
* Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 

== Notes ==
==External links==
* China shock for South Korea</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q708640" start="0" end="7" title="Jiandao" label="Jiandao"/>
<link wikidata="Q708640" start="11" end="19" title="Jiandao" label="Chientao"/>
<link wikidata="Q708640" start="40" end="45" title="Jiandao" label="Gando"/>
<link wikidata="Q708640" start="49" end="54" title="Jiandao" label="Kando"/>
<link wikidata="Q55499" start="114" end="125" title="Tumen River" label="Tumen River"/>
<link wikidata="Q45208" start="129" end="143" title="Jilin" label="Jilin Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q713327" start="373" end="381" title="Longjing, Jilin" label="Longjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q705188" start="411" end="424" title="Onsong County" label="Onsong County"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="502" end="518" title="Korea" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="751" end="766" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japanese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16171951" start="779" end="793" title="Koreans in China" label="ethnic Koreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="987" end="992" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q714984" start="1191" end="1227" title="Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture" label="Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="1547" end="1558" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q31179156" start="1665" end="1672" title="Liberalism in South Korea" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202972" start="1677" end="1698" title="left-wing nationalist" label="left-wing nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q28511" start="2109" end="2114" title="Buyeo" label="Buyeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28370" start="2116" end="2124" title="Goguryeo" label="Goguryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28322" start="2161" end="2167" title="Balhae" label="Balhae"/>
<link wikidata="Q165292" start="2190" end="2213" title="Three Kingdoms of Korea" label="Three Kingdoms of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="2368" end="2380" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q715257" start="2398" end="2411" title="Unified Silla" label="Unified Silla"/>
<link wikidata="Q218332" start="2630" end="2636" title="Khitan people" label="Khitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958" start="2637" end="2649" title="Liao dynasty" label="Liao dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958" start="2762" end="2766" title="Liao dynasty" label="Liao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066" start="2778" end="2781" title="Jin dynasty (1115–1234)" label="Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q753880" start="2783" end="2791" title="Jurchen people" label="Jurchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="2794" end="2798" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="2800" end="2807" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="2810" end="2814" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="2828" end="2832" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="2962" end="2980" title="Manchuria" label="Northeastern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="3011" end="3014" title="Han Chinese" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="3143" end="3149" title="Joseon" label="Joseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q55499" start="3329" end="3340" title="Tumen River" label="Tumen River"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233" start="3752" end="3765" title="Korean Empire" label="Korean Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q111625894" start="3827" end="3838" title="Yi Hak-gyun" label="Yi Hak-gyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925809" start="3932" end="3955" title="Victor Collin de Plancy" label="Victor Collin de Plancy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4327" end="4338" title=":ko:이범윤" label="Yi Beom-yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360447" start="4364" end="4384" title="Imperial Korean Army" label="Imperial Korean Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q122761491" start="4514" end="4528" title="Righteous armies" label="righteous army"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="4598" end="4616" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q233254" start="4917" end="4923" title="Eulsa Treaty" label="became"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="4926" end="4938" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="4946" end="4961" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="5202" end="5230" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="Japanese government of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673773" start="5996" end="6010" title="Gando Massacre" label="Gando Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q705443" start="6021" end="6037" title="Gando Convention" label="Gando Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q242099" start="6912" end="6927" title="Mukden Incident" label="Mukden Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="7021" end="7030" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623" start="7056" end="7065" title="Manchukuo" label="Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361067" start="7198" end="7206" title="Binjiang Province" label="Binjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q842055" start="7769" end="7788" title="Gando Special Force" label="Gando Special Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q646394" start="7819" end="7832" title="Kwantung Army" label="Kwantung Army"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8253" end="8282" title="Dongman Consolidated Province" label="Dongman Consolidated Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8383" end="8395" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="8657" end="8674" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q516223" start="8686" end="8704" title="Songjiang Province" label="Songjiang Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q45208" start="8818" end="8823" title="Jilin" label="Jilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q714984" start="8846" end="8882" title="Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture" label="Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="9096" end="9110" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q107635" start="9528" end="9543" title="Baekdu Mountain" label="Baekdu Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="9791" end="9796" title="stele" label="stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="10599" end="10608" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="10629" end="10640" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q56731" start="11702" end="11709" title="Jurchen language" label="Jurchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55499" start="11919" end="11930" title="Tumen River" label="Tumen River"/>
<link wikidata="Q210326" start="12152" end="12165" title="Songhua River" label="Songhua River"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13727" end="13751" title="United States of America" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13769" end="13804" title="Union of Soviet Socialist Republics" label="Union of Soviet Socialist Republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="13887" end="13897" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="13936" end="13944" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q484464" start="13988" end="13995" title="Koreans" label="Koreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15097457" start="14068" end="14099" title="Sino–North Korean Border Treaty" label="Sino–North Korean Border Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q182274" start="14454" end="14465" title="irredentism" label="irredentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q705443" start="14822" end="14838" title="Gando Convention" label="Gando Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="14922" end="14925" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="PRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="16213" end="16221" title="Liaoning" label="Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q705443" start="16843" end="16859" title="Gando Convention" label="Gando Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q714023" start="16862" end="16873" title="Heaven Lake" label="Heaven Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q714984" start="16876" end="16912" title="Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture" label="Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880675" wikidata="Q2018849" url="?curid=880675" title="Oldsmobile Bravada">
<text>The Oldsmobile Bravada is a mid-size luxury SUV that was sold by Oldsmobile from 1991 to 2004. The only SUV ever marketed by Oldsmobile, the Bravada was the first light truck offered by General Motors outside of the Chevrolet and GMC divisions since 1924. The flagship of the GM midsize SUV line, the Bravada served as the most luxurious GM SUV prior to the introduction of the GMC Yukon Denali and Cadillac Escalade. 

The first two generations of the Bravada were derived from the Chevrolet (S-10) Blazer and GMC Jimmy, offered solely as a five-door wagon. The third generation of the model line adopted a dedicated SUV platform, shared with the Chevrolet TrailBlazer and GMC Envoy. Coinciding with the 2004 retirement of the Oldsmobile brand, GM rebranded the Bravada from 2005 to 2009 as the Buick Rainier and the Saab 9-7X (becoming the first SUV for both brands). 


==First generation (1991–1994)==

For 1991, Oldsmobile introduced the Bravada as its first-ever sport-utility vehicle. Launched alongside the newly introduced four-door version of the Chevrolet S-10 Blazer, the Bravada was the first Oldsmobile truck-based vehicle since the 1920s. In contrast to its divisional counterparts, the Bravada was sold only as a four-door SUV; no two-door body nor any pickup truck version was produced. The first generation was sold exclusively in the United States. 

The first luxury SUV produced by GM, the Bravada was designed with its a distinctive exterior separate from its divisional counterparts. In contrast to the larger Jeep Grand Wagoneer (discontinued after 1991), the Bravada was not fitted with wagon-style woodgrain exterior trim; instead, the body adopted a nearly monochromatic appearance with lower body cladding (similar to the GMC Typhoon). A body-color headlight surround was styled with a traditional Oldsmobile split grille; aluminum wheels were standard equipment. Other standard features included standard remote keyless entry, anti-lock brakes (ABS), and the use of SmartTrak all-wheel drive. 

As with its Chevrolet/GMC counterpart, the Bravada was fitted with a standard 4.3L V6; for 1992, its output was increased from 160 hp to 200 hp. In contrast to the part-time four-wheel drive system of the Blazer/Jimmy, the Bravada was fitted with SmartTrak full-time all-wheel drive. Shared with the GMC Typhoon and the AWD Astro/Safari vans, SmartTrak used a BorgWarner 4472 transfer case; though forgoing low-range gearing, the system offered a 65%/35% rear/front torque split, shifting it when the system detected slippage. 

During its production, the first-generation Bravada underwent minor detail changes. For 1992, the instrument panel was revised to further distinguish itself from the Blazer/Jimmy. For 1993, an overhead console was added (including a compass, temperature, and reading lights). As an option, a Gold package featured gold-colored badging and wheels. 

===Engines===
* 1991 – 4.3 L &quot;LB4&quot; V6, TBI, 160 hp (119 kW)/230 lb·ft (312 N·m) (VIN Z)
* 1992–1994 – 4.3 L &quot;L35 Vortec 4300&quot; V6, CPFI, 200 hp (149 kW) (VIN W)

===Fuel economy===
According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the first-generation Bravada averaged in the city, and on the highway. 

==Second generation (1996–2001)==
After skipping the 1995 model year, Oldsmobile released its second-generation Bravada for 1996. Again sharing a body with the Chevrolet Blazer/GMC Jimmy, the Bravada was again produced only in a four-door body configuration. Distinguished by its lower bodyside trim (matching the bumpers) and the split front grille, the Bravada was fitted with six-spoke aluminum wheels (in line with the Oldsmobile Aurora).

Though sharing a dashboard with its counterparts (with driver-side airbag), the Bravada was fitted with woodgrain trim, leather seats, and interior trim (styled similarly to the Aurora), and a console-mounted transmission shifter (becoming a special-edition option on the Blazer in 1999).

Retuned to , the 4.3-liter V6 with sequential central port injection was again the standard engine, still fitted with the SmartTrak all-wheel drive system as standard. For 1997, four-wheel disc brakes (with ABS) became standard; the rear spoiler was deleted.
===1998===

For 1998, the second-generation Bravada underwent a mid-cycle facelift. Along with redesigned bumpers and lower body trim, the front fascia was redesigned with a larger grille, replacing the Oldsmobile &quot;Delta Rocket&quot; emblem with the new &quot;Rocket O&quot; emblem. The interior was revised, adopting heated seats and a dual-airbag dashboard. The SmartTrak system underwent a redesign, adopting the computer controlled NP-136 transfer case. In the interest of fuel economy, the system operated as rear-wheel drive in normal operations, sending torque to the front wheels only when detecting wheel slip.

For 1999, OnStar was introduced as a cellular-phone unit; in 2001, the system was integrated into the rearview mirror with available features like hands-free calling and virtual advisor. A Bose sound system also became an available option for 1999.

For 2000, a two-tone exterior option was introduced for the first time (named the Platinum Edition).

===Fuel economy===
According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the second-generation Bravada averaged in the city, and on the highway.

==Third generation (2002–2004)==
Oldsmobile launched the third generation of the Bravada in February 2001 for the 2002 model year. Serving as the launch model of the all-new GMT360 architecture (a platform dedicated to mid-size SUVs), the Bravada was now the counterpart of the Chevrolet TrailBlazer, GMC Envoy, and Isuzu Ascender. Now fitted with a distinct body (sharing only its doors with the GMC Envoy), the model line was styled in line with the Oldsmobile Aurora and Alero sedans, including a rounded front fascia and integrating the grilles into the bumpers and headlamp clusters. Reportedly, the only parts that remained from the previous generation were the automatic transmission and the transfer case on four-wheel-drive models.

The GMT360 platform brought several functional changes to the model line. A rear-wheel drive layout, with traction control, became standard for the first time (making it the first rear-wheel-drive Oldsmobile since the 1992 Custom Cruiser), with all-wheel drive retained as an option. The 4.3-liter V6 was retired in favor of a , 4.2-liter &quot;Atlas&quot; inline-six (RPO LL8) (the first Oldsmobile to offer such a layout since the 1976 Omega).

In contrast to its Chevrolet, GMC, or Isuzu counterparts, the Bravada was not offered in a long-wheelbase, seven-passenger configuration, nor with a 5.3L V8 engine.

The launch of the GMT360 Bravada coincided with the retirement of the Oldsmobile division, with the vehicle ending production after only three model years. On January 12, 2004, the final Oldsmobile Bravada rolled off the assembly line. The last 500 examples were produced as Final 500 Special Editions; each example featured custom seat embroidering and exterior badging inspired by vintage Oldsmobile logos, dark cherry metallic paint, unique chrome alloy wheels, and a medallion identifying the production number of the vehicle (1 to 500).

Though GM discontinued the Oldsmobile Bravada, its body lived on in two different vehicles: the Buick Rainier (2004–2007) served as its direct replacement with the flagship Saab 9-7X (2005–2009) also using its bodyshell.


===Fuel economy===
According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the third-generation Bravada averaged in the city, and on the highway.

== Sales ==
Sales by calendar year:
==References==



 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2018849" start="4" end="22" title="Oldsmobile Bravada" label="Oldsmobile Bravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010528" start="28" end="36" title="Mid-size car" label="mid-size"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581707" start="37" end="43" title="Luxury car" label="luxury"/>
<link wikidata="Q192152" start="44" end="47" title="sport utility vehicle" label="SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q204327" start="65" end="75" title="Oldsmobile" label="Oldsmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="216" end="225" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28993" start="230" end="233" title="GMC (automobile)" label="GMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513733" start="378" end="394" title="GMC Denali" label="GMC Yukon Denali"/>
<link wikidata="Q830369" start="399" end="416" title="Cadillac Escalade" label="Cadillac Escalade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071078" start="483" end="506" title="Chevrolet S-10 Blazer" label="Chevrolet (S-10) Blazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071078" start="511" end="520" title="GMC Jimmy (S-15)" label="GMC Jimmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071321" start="648" end="669" title="Chevrolet TrailBlazer (SUV)" label="Chevrolet TrailBlazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485939" start="674" end="683" title="GMC Envoy" label="GMC Envoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q798992" start="749" end="758" title="Rebadging" label="rebranded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002843" start="796" end="809" title="Buick Rainier" label="Buick Rainier"/>
<link wikidata="Q420787" start="818" end="827" title="Saab 9-7X" label="Saab 9-7X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071078" start="1057" end="1078" title="Chevrolet S-10 Blazer" label="Chevrolet S-10 Blazer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1380" end="1390" title="Luxury SUV#Luxury SUV/Crossover" label="luxury SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q823115" start="1533" end="1552" title="Jeep Wagoneer (SJ)" label="Jeep Grand Wagoneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485944" start="1750" end="1761" title="GMC Typhoon" label="GMC Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190660" start="1956" end="1972" title="anti-lock brakes" label="anti-lock brakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12211810" start="2005" end="2020" title="all-wheel drive" label="all-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071036" start="2348" end="2360" title="Chevrolet Astro" label="Astro/Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q825943" start="2384" end="2394" title="BorgWarner" label="BorgWarner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2937" end="2940" title="Chevrolet 90° V6 engine#LB1 and LB4" label="LB4"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856569" start="2947" end="2949" title="V6" label="V6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2951" end="2954" title="Fuel injection#Throttle body injection" label="TBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="2968" end="2970" title="kW" label="kW"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3026" end="3041" title="Chevrolet 90° V6 engine#L35 CPI" label="L35 Vortec 4300"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856569" start="3048" end="3050" title="V6" label="V6"/>
<link wikidata="Q308881" start="3052" end="3056" title="CPFI" label="CPFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q304948" start="3075" end="3078" title="VIN" label="VIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="3119" end="3164" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018846" start="3662" end="3679" title="Oldsmobile Aurora" label="Oldsmobile Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q99905" start="3750" end="3756" title="airbag" label="airbag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569419" start="4868" end="4874" title="OnStar" label="OnStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="5246" end="5291" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513798" start="5540" end="5546" title="GMT360" label="GMT360"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071321" start="5644" end="5665" title="Chevrolet TrailBlazer" label="Chevrolet TrailBlazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485939" start="5667" end="5676" title="GMC Envoy" label="GMC Envoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674938" start="5682" end="5696" title="Isuzu Ascender" label="Isuzu Ascender"/>
<link wikidata="Q12211810" start="6353" end="6368" title="All-wheel drive vehicle" label="all-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513828" start="6453" end="6458" title="GM Atlas engine" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q625034" start="6546" end="6551" title="Oldsmobile Omega" label="Omega"/>
<link wikidata="Q204327" start="6791" end="6801" title="Oldsmobile" label="Oldsmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002843" start="7360" end="7373" title="Buick Rainier" label="Buick Rainier"/>
<link wikidata="Q420787" start="7437" end="7446" title="Saab 9-7X" label="Saab 9-7X"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="7523" end="7568" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880676" wikidata="Q6273457" url="?curid=880676" title="Jonathan Idema">
<text>Jonathan Keith &quot;Jack&quot; Idema (May 30, 1956January 21, 2012) was an American con artist, mercenary and former United States Army reserve non-commissioned officer, known for his vigilante activities during the War in Afghanistan.

Formerly a soldier in the U.S. Army Special Forces, Idema never saw combat and left the military in 1984 to form several companies centered around counterterrorism and internal security. Idema made numerous unverified claims about his military service and supposed terrorist threats, and experienced several lawsuits over various feuds.

In September 2004, Idema was found guilty of running an unlawful and unsanctioned private prison in Afghanistan and torturing Afghan citizens. At the time, Idema had been falsely portraying himself as a U.S. government-sponsored special forces operative on a mission to apprehend terrorists. The U.S. government repeatedly denied most of his claims.

Idema served three years of a ten-year sentence. He was released early by Afghanistan&#x27;s then-president Hamid Karzai in April 2007, and left Afghanistan in early June for Mexico, where he died of AIDS in late January 2012.

==Early life==
Idema was raised in Poughkeepsie, New York, graduating from high school there in 1974. His father, former Marine and World War II veteran Herman John Idema, believed that his son was a &quot;dedicated American&quot;. Herman John Idema died in November 2008.

==Military service==
Idema enlisted in the U.S. Army in February 1975. Two years after his enlistment, in 1977, he trained and qualified for the United States Army Special Forces.

The nature of Idema&#x27;s military service in the Special Forces is contentious. Tod Robberson of &quot;The Dallas Morning News&quot; noted that there was a discrepancy between what Idema claimed his military experience was and what is stated in his official military record. Idema repeatedly stated that he acquired 12 years of Special Forces service, 22 years of combat training, and 18 years of covert operations experience. However, per official records, Idema&#x27;s military career was short and contained several reports of poor performance, with no recorded combat experience.

According to his military record obtained in the course of his 1994 fraud trial, after serving one term in the Special Forces, Idema was not allowed to reenlist. He had received numerous negative remarks from superior officers, in addition to participating in three non-judicial punishment proceedings between April 29, 1976 and April 28, 1977. Idema was cited for &quot;failure to obey orders, being derelict in the performance of his duty, and being disrespectful to a superior commanding officer.&quot; One superior officer, Captain John D. Carlson, stated that Idema was &quot;without a doubt the most unmotivated, unprofessional, immature enlisted man I have ever known.&quot;

Idema was given an honorable discharge and allowed to join the United States Army Reserve 11th Special Forces Group working to provide logistical support. In a November 1, 1980 letter of reprimand, Major Paul R. Decker wrote that Idema &quot;consistently displayed an attitude of noncooperation with persons outside his immediate working environment, disregard for authority and gross immaturity characterized by irrationality and a tendency toward violence.&quot; In January 1981, Idema was relieved of his Army Reserve duties; his last position was the assistant sergeant of operations and intelligence. After leaving the Army Reserves, he became a member of the Individual Ready Reserve until he left the military completely in 1984.

==Business interests==
Several years after he left the Army, Idema became involved in the paintball business, opening a paintball supply and equipment company in Fayetteville, North Carolina, named Idema Combat Systems. He later segued that business into a paramilitary clothier and supply company operating under the same name.

Sometime in the early 1980s Idema founded Counterr Group (also known as US Counter-Terrorist Group), a business entity which, according to its website, specialized in expert training for counter-terrorism, assault tactics, and other security-related services. Counterr Group&#x27;s legal status and ownership was questionable; according to a &quot;Soldier of Fortune&quot; article published in 2004, Idema was mentioned as the owner. The company website listed an address in North Carolina, but there was no record of the company&#x27;s registration in that state. However, a company called &quot;Counter Group, Inc.&quot; had been incorporated in 1997 by William L. London, a lawyer who represented Idema in several lawsuits. The status for this company was listed as &quot;suspended&quot; as of 2004.

Counterr Group Academy was operational for at least ten years, from the late 1970s to the late 1980s. It was based at a small airstrip south of Route 199 in Red Hook, New York. There were several permanent staff, as well as visiting staff, all under the direction of Keith Idema. At least ten formal courses of training were offered. These included basic firearm safety, offered to the general public, as well as pistol, rifle and shotgun programs in both assault and combat roles, offered only to active military servicemen and police. Rappelling, both with and without a firearm component, was offered at the on-ground rappelling tower. The facilities included both interior and exterior &quot;Hogan&#x27;s Alley&quot; style environments, equipped with reactive targets. Courses consisted of both classroom study and field exercises.

All advanced training was in a live-fire environment. Combat and assault courses lasted for three days. Trainees, up to 20 per course, lived and slept on the premises. Nighttime courses were conducted with starlight scopes.

The only company in North Carolina registered to Jonathan Idema is Idema Combat Systems, which, according to state records, was incorporated in January 1991 and dissolved in July 1994. The websites for Counter Group are registered to Thomas R. Bumback, a business associate of Idema&#x27;s who is believed to be the company&#x27;s current director. There is a record of Counterr Group being formed in Poughkeepsie, New York in 1983, but the company is listed as &quot;inactive.&quot;

Idema also owned a company called Special Operations Exposition and Trade Show Inc., which hosted organized conventions for military equipment suppliers.

There are two other known companies, Isabeau Dakota, Inc. and Star America Aviation Company, Ltd., that have connections to Idema. The latter claims to be an aviation support company founded in July 2008 with operations based out of Dubai. Both companies are registered to William &quot;Skip&quot; London in North Carolina, but Isabeau Dakota is listed as a shell company; its last annual report, filed in 2002, identifies H. John Idema (Idema&#x27;s father) of Poughkeepsie as president and sole officer, and it lists no significant assets or business activity. The website for Star America Aviation is also registered to Bumback and the websites for Counterr Group and Star America Aviation are very similar, including the use of imagery depicting Idema in Afghanistan and prior to his arrest.

Idema&#x27;s Afghan charity Northern Alliance Assistance in Fayetteville, North Carolina was later listed as a dog kennel.

==Legal issues==
In addition to his occasional entrepreneurial pursuits, Idema had a substantial criminal record. Over the years, Idema was charged with impersonating an officer, conspiracy, passing bad checks, assault, possession of stolen property, and discharging a firearm into a dwelling. In January 1994, Idema was arrested and charged with 58 counts of wire fraud, having allegedly defrauded 59 companies of about $260,000. He was convicted of the charges, sentenced to six years in prison (paroled after having served three years) and was subsequently ordered to pay restitution.

Idema was also involved in multiple lawsuits, including suits against journalists, an aid worker, a colonel, his father, and the U.S. government. A prominent lawsuit filed by Idema against Steven Spielberg and Dreamworks Studios contended that Idema was the basis of a character in the 1997 Dreamworks film &quot;The Peacemaker&quot;. The claim was dismissed, and Idema was ordered to pay $267,079 in legal fees.

On August 15, 2001, a jury awarded Idema $781,818 for property damage and $1 million for punitive damages. The award came after a jury decided that a property manager improperly sold some of his belongings while Idema was serving his fraud sentence. Two property managers were hired by Idema to take care of a building that housed equipment for two of his businesses, Special Operations Exposition and Trade Show Inc., and Idema Combat Systems. According to the lawsuit, equipment was missing, damaged or destroyed, and holes were punched in the walls of the building. Idema sued both property managers and their wives on April 10, 2000, but everyone except for one property manager was later dropped from the suit. Idema never collected the $1.8 million because the property manager that was found liable declared bankruptcy, and Idema settled for $650,000 that he obtained through lawsuits filed against insurance carriers. Idema&#x27;s father was the insured.

In June 2005, an investigator sued Idema alleging that he wasn&#x27;t paid when Idema won the $1.8 million lawsuit. The investigator claimed that Idema orally agreed to pay 15% of any amount collected, he also claimed that Idema failed to pay court reporters, expert witnesses, and others who helped him with his case.

==Lithuania and nuclear weapons smuggling claim==
In 1993 Idema was contracted to train police forces in Lithuania. After his return, he contacted officials from both the United States Department of Defense (DoD) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), claiming to have uncovered a conspiracy by the Russian mafia to smuggle nuclear materials out of Lithuania. According to Idema, FBI agents demanded he provide the names of his contacts. He refused, claiming that the FBI was infiltrated by KGB agents and that his sources would have been killed.

It was around this time that Idema was being investigated for wire fraud and eventually convicted in 1994. The FBI began their investigation into Idema&#x27;s activities as early as May 1991, before he even approached the FBI about Lithuania.

==Afghanistan==
===Entry and credentials===
Illegal entry into Afghanistan was one of the charges leveled against Idema and two other Americans accompanying him, former soldier Brent Bennett and television journalist Edward Caraballo. That charge was eventually dropped.

Idema first traveled to Afghanistan in November 2001 to conduct what he said was &quot;humanitarian aid&quot; work, when he was actually working for the National Geographic Channel with Gary Scurka. It was at this time that he involved himself in the research Robin Moore was conducting for his book &quot;The Hunt for Bin Laden&quot;.

According to Scurka, a reporter for CBS News, Idema contacted him a few weeks after the September 11 attacks and announced he was going to Afghanistan to do humanitarian aid work with Knightsbridge International and the Partners International Foundation, two aid groups run by former military personnel. This led to Scurka and Idema presenting a film documentary project for National Geographic.

Idema, Scurka, and Greg Long (a member of the Partners International Foundation) traveled to Tashkent, Uzbekistan, where they were arrested for visa problems and held in a cell overnight. The three were freed after their captors received a letter from the U.S. embassy in Uzbekistan, written by an officer in the Defense Attaché&#x27;s Office, describing Idema and Scurka as &quot;contracting officers from the Defense Department who arrived in Uzbekistan for an official trip.&quot; The letter, which was verified as authentic by the director of the Department of State&#x27;s press office, was dated November 2, 2001, and asked Uzbekistan&#x27;s Ministry of Foreign Affairs for help in issuing visas to Idema, Gary Scurka, and Greg Long.

Idema then joined the Partners International Foundation at the same time Scurka received a National Geographic assignment to produce a documentary on humanitarian aid work in Afghanistan. A memo signed by the president of the National Geographic Channel says Scurka would be going to Afghanistan with Knightsbridge International, and the leader of Knightsbridge, Edward Artis, would be working with Idema. Artis was sued by Idema.

Author Robert Young Pelton believes that Idema then used those letters and what appeared to be a falsified or modified military ID. Idema claimed he had a visa similar to those carried by U.S. Army Special Forces to convince the Afghan commanders and other people of his official status.

After Idema entered Afghanistan, both humanitarian organizations quickly became wary of Idema&#x27;s intentions. In December 2001, Artis wrote to the U.S. Army Special Operations Command warning them of Idema&#x27;s activities, stating:

Idema later filed suit against Artis and Knightsbridge, but the case was dismissed and a monetary judgement was in turn placed against him.

===Activities===
Idema led a group he called &quot;Task Force Saber 7&quot;, consisting of two other Americans and several Afghans. The group may have been operating in Afghanistan with independent financial backing or with funds from the lawsuit settlements Idema had won a few years earlier. He frequently interacted with reporters, often going to great lengths in his interviews to stress connections with the CIA and Special Forces. Some supporters suggest that he was a former member of an unspecified covert operations unit, reactivated and positioned in Afghanistan to hunt for Osama bin Laden as part of Alec Station. A relationship to the Northern Alliance was denied by their official representative in the United States.

Some critics of Idema claim that his attempts to create a high profile with the media make it unlikely that Idema was officially connected with any branch of the military; covert operatives go to great lengths to avoid public appearances and media, and are barred from unauthorized contact. The fact that Caraballo, who was not a soldier, was with Idema in Afghanistan to document his activities strained credibility that Idema was operating covertly. It is also unlikely Idema would be selected to a government job in an official capacity giving his service record.

Idema was known to have a volatile temper that seemed to be particularly directed against news correspondents assigned to Kabul. On several occasions, Idema threatened journalists with bodily harm or death, and in one particular instance, at a dinner in December 2001, he threatened to kill a reporter from &quot;Stars and Stripes&quot; because the reporter had disclosed Idema&#x27;s fraud conviction.

It has been recorded that Idema frequently contacted the DoD through the front office of General William G. Boykin in the Pentagon, and that his information was duly acknowledged. However, all of those contacts were outside the U.S. military operating channels, and were all one-sided calls from Afghanistan via Idema&#x27;s personal satellite phone. Boykin&#x27;s office repeatedly asked Idema to stop making these unsolicited phone calls, because they were disruptive and time-consuming, and Boykin could not be of assistance. Idema continued calling Boykin&#x27;s office anyway to establish some sort of self-serving relationship until his arrest. While the U.S. government was aware of Idema&#x27;s activities in Afghanistan, they stated there was unequivocally no relationship between them.

The United States Central Command stated that International Security Assistance Force forces received one detainee from Idema on May 3, 2004. Idema claimed that the individual was associated with the Taliban. Once in ISAF custody however, the detainee was determined not to be who Idema claimed, and was released in the first week of July.

The United States was not the only government that had contact with Idema in Afghanistan. On three occasions, Idema tricked the Canadian-led NATO mission into providing explosives experts and bomb-sniffing dogs. According to a spokesman for the ISAF, Idema called for and received technical support after his vigilante team raided compounds on the 20th, 22nd, and 24th of June 2004. ISAF personnel believed they were &quot;providing legitimate support to a legitimate security agency.&quot;

Idema also received assistance from Yunus Qanuni, former minister, senior Afghan government security advisor, and influential member of the Northern Alliance. In one video tape presented at Idema&#x27;s trial, Qanuni thanked Idema for uncovering an assassination plot against him and volunteered his personal security forces to help Idema with arrests. Another tape appeared to show Qanuni&#x27;s security troops assisting Idema in a house raid.

On July 4, 2004, the United States Central Command released a media advisory that read:

In perhaps the most terse assessment of Idema&#x27;s alleged involvement in Operation Enduring Freedom, Billy Waugh, senior CIA covert operative and decorated former Special Forces member who was part of the Agency-run &quot;Jawbreaker&quot; team, said:

===Arrest, trial and sentencing===
Idema and his associates Brent Bennett and Edward Caraballo were arrested on July 5, 2004 by Afghan police during a raid in which they found eight Afghan men, some hanging from their feet, bound and hooded in detention. The arrest of Idema occurred only about three months after &quot;60 Minutes II&quot; broke the story about the Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse scandal.

Idema claimed to have had private contact with Lieutenant General Boykin and several other senior Pentagon officials, and at his trial introduced taped conversations with staff of General Boykin&#x27;s office, although not directly with Boykin himself. In the conversations, the staff members said that they would pass Idema&#x27;s information along to proper authorities. However, the judge stated that the videos were &quot;inconclusive&quot; and that he lacked concrete, documentary evidence. American Embassy officials stated that as far as they knew, neither Mr. Idema nor anyone in his group was working for a government agency, and the military issued statements saying Idema was impersonating government or military officials and did not represent either.

He further tried to prove his official status when he claimed to be working for the US Counter Terrorism Group, the same group that some sources say he founded. He claimed his group had prevented assassination attempts on Education Minister Yunus Qanuni and Defense Minister Marshal Mohammad Qasim Fahim. He also claimed the FBI interrogated several militants captured by his group and that after his arrest, the FBI removed from his premises hundreds of videos, photos, and documents. Some of the pieces were later returned to Idema and his defense team.

The DoD&#x27;s only official contact with Idema was accepting one prisoner who was held for a month by the U.S. military, but added that officials declined his offer to work with the government in capturing terror suspects in Afghanistan. In early 2004, Idema was in contact with Heather Anderson, the Pentagon&#x27;s Acting Director of Security. Anderson was under the supervision of the chief official responsible for intelligence matters in Donald Rumsfeld&#x27;s office. Idema told the Afghan court that Anderson commended his work, but Anderson said she later turned down Idema&#x27;s request to work in Afghanistan for the Pentagon. Idema continued to contact Anderson&#x27;s office in hopes of establishing a relationship.

Idema, Caraballo and Bennett were charged with entering the country illegally, running a private prison, and torture. John Tiffany served as Idema&#x27;s attorney. During the trial, Idema charged that he, Caraballo, and Bennett were being beaten while in Afghan custody; however, U.S. authorities stated the men were being treated humanely.

On 15 September 2004, a three-judge Afghan panel headed by Judge Abdul Baset Bakhtyari sentenced both Idema and Bennett to a ten-year prison term, while Caraballo received eight years. Idema and Bennett&#x27;s sentences were later cut to five and three respectively. Caraballo claimed he was filming Idema and Bennett for a documentary on counterterrorism. Four Afghans working with Idema were sentenced to between one and five years imprisonment.

Caraballo was later pardoned by President Hamid Karzai and returned to the United States. Bennett was released early for good behavior on September 30, 2006.

Caraballo&#x27;s lawyer said that the day before Caraballo left Afghanistan, Caraballo and Bennett lived in a filthy 6x8 ft. cell with four suspected Al-Qaeda members; the American prisoners were moved to a different prison for better protection. In a more recent assessment, the cell in which the prisoners lived was described as &quot;posh&quot;.

===Amnesty and refusal to leave prison===
On April 10, 2007, the Associated Press reported that Idema would soon be released from prison and then sent back to the United States, and that the Afghan government had granted him amnesty. However, under the amnesty that commuted his sentence he was effectively released on April 4.

Idema refused to leave the prison, first demanding that his passport, personal effects, and documents that he claimed proves his official connection with the U.S. government, be returned to him. According to him, he was owed compensation for $500,000 worth of equipment, mostly computers, weapons, and cameras, that was confiscated by the Afghan government when he was arrested. Having obtained through the offices of the U.S. Embassy in Kabul a new passport and money to apply for a visa to India, Idema insisted that his belongings be returned and that a pet dog previously owned by Bennett be allowed to travel with him.

Idema also filed another lawsuit against the U.S. government, reaffirming allegations initially made in 2005 that he and his associates had been illegally imprisoned, except now with the additional claim that he had been tortured. According to U.S. District Judge Emmet G. Sullivan, &quot;Petitioners allege that United States officials ordered their arrest, ordered their torture, stole exculpatory evidence during their trial and appeal, exerted undue influence over Afghan judges, and either directly or indirectly ordered judges who found petitioners innocent not to release petitioners from prison.&quot; This was a shift from the earlier strategy on the part of Idema to exonerate himself on the basis that he was acting on a Pentagon-approved mission. Instead the focus was on the trial itself, specifically whether or not due process was observed, with the added claim of being a torture victim. In both instances Idema accused the U.S. government of deliberately withholding information.

Judge Sullivan subsequently ordered the FBI and the Department of State to answer the allegations. Attorneys from the United States Department of Justice requested the case be dismissed on the grounds that Idema&#x27;s sentence had been commuted. Idema&#x27;s lawyer said the government coordinated Idema&#x27;s amnesty to avoid having to respond to allegations of misconduct.

Idema&#x27;s allegations of withheld evidence were originally made during his Afghan trial in 2004. When the men were arrested in early July, the tapes were confiscated by the FBI. Caraballo&#x27;s lawyer, Michael Skibbie, claimed that he was only allowed to access a portion of the tapes weeks after he requested access. Several of the tapes were used; however, Skibbie said several important tapes were damaged, missing or partly erased after the FBI took custody of them. Some of the footage Skibbie obtained was shown in court. The court tapes showed Idema being greeted at an airport by high-ranking Afghan officials, Idema being thanked by Qanuni, security forces working with Idema, captured suspects confessing during interrogation, and ISAF forces helping Idema.

While these proceedings were being conducted, Idema said that another reason he had not left was because he feared for his life, ostensibly at the hands of the Afghan government, saying &quot;I could drive through the Policharki gates right now. Then what happens? I get arrested. [The intelligence service] will arrest me for not having an Afghan visa and they&#x27;ll torture me and kill me. If I&#x27;m lucky, I&#x27;m only going to be tortured.&quot; On June 2, 2007, Idema left the prison and was immediately flown out of the country.

==Personal life==
After leaving Afghanistan, Idema moved to Mexico to become a proprietor of Blue Lagoon Boat Tours out of Bacalar, on the Yucatán Peninsula, under the name of &quot;Black Jack&quot;. He was charged by his former girlfriend Penny Alesi of infecting her with HIV when he knew he had the disease. His arrest warrant and publicity surrounding charges were picked up by Mexican and American media.

According to Alesi, he had also claimed to have had nine wives, although only one of them may have been legal. At his death, he was listed as having no immediate survivors.

According to his father&#x27;s obituary notice, Idema was described as a &quot;Green Beret with an organization involved in the War on Terror.&quot;

==Relationship with the media==
Idema had some success convincing members of the media that he was a terrorism expert. This allowed him to secure interviews and in some instances get his &quot;terrorism videos&quot; broadcast on television. After indicating to journalists that he had the videos in his possession, he would usually agree to provide them in exchange for money. Since Idema&#x27;s questionable history has come to light, the news media has been criticized for its willingness to distribute any content or information coming from him.

==Controversies==
At the center of the controversy is Idema&#x27;s claim that he was in Afghanistan on behalf of the U.S. government and that he was an advisor to the Northern Alliance. At other times, Idema told people he was in Afghanistan doing humanitarian work or that he was a &quot;security consultant&quot; for journalists. He also actively sought media attention for himself and his activities, to the point of offering interviews in return for payment, even though he himself said he was operating covertly.

Many believe Idema to be a con artist or impostor, based on his refusal or inability to demonstrate verifiable proof for his claims, on legal records that contradict his assertions about his background, as well as on a prior conviction for mail fraud and a history of criminal activity. Some have suggested that he may also be delusional in having concocted a fantasy-type personality for himself as a highly trained covert operative combating international terrorism, despite a brief and mostly non-notable military record (which states that Idema was in the Special Forces strictly in a support capacity). This opinion was echoed by Major Scott Nelson, the U.S. military spokesperson in Kabul at the time of Idema&#x27;s arrest in 2004. The judge in Idema&#x27;s 1994 fraud trial also questioned Idema&#x27;s psychological state and ordered him to undergo evaluation prior to his sentencing. The report said that while he was not &quot;mentally ill&quot;, Idema had a &quot;personality disorder which would affect his interaction with persons exhibiting similar traits, such as supervisors, attorneys, doctors, judges and other persons in positions of power or authority.&quot;

In the early 1990s, claimed that he had learned the Russian mafia planned to smuggle nuclear weapons out of Russia, that he participated in covert operations in Latin America, and that as a soldier he parachuted out of airplanes accompanied by his bomb-sniffing dog Sarge, who he intended to clone.

Idema was not without supporters, usually found among blogs sympathetic to his situation. The contributors to these blogs believed that he was being unjustly punished for actions condoned, if not officially sanctioned, by the U.S. military. However, there has been little support for Idema&#x27;s claims in general media outlets. Indeed, many members of the media who encountered Idema while they were on assignment in Afghanistan regard him as a fraud.

===Lithuania===
In 1995, while Idema was awaiting sentencing for fraud charges, he agreed to provide information to CBS News about the nuclear materials smuggling plot he allegedly uncovered. Gary Scurka produced a &quot;60 Minutes&quot; piece entitled &quot;The Worst Nightmare&quot;, based in part on Idema&#x27;s account. According to Scurka, the network declined to credit Idema during the broadcast because of the fraud conviction, even though he was a major source for the story. A CBS spokesperson claimed that the story took 6 months to fully investigate, by which time it was very different from the one Idema gave. Both the &quot;60 Minutes&quot; story and a companion piece published in &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; received the Renner Award for Outstanding Crime Reporting.

The lack of credit given to Idema prompted Scurka and Caraballo to begin making a documentary film with the working title, &quot;Any Lesser Man: The Keith Idema Story&quot;. According to promotional materials, the documentary was to be &quot;the real story of one lone Green Beret&#x27;s private war against KGB Nuclear Smuggling, Soviet spies, Arab terrorists, and the FBI.&quot; It was never completed.

===Marecek murder trial===
Idema and Scurka again worked together as consultants for the &quot;48 Hours&quot; story about Colonel George Marecek, a highly decorated Special Forces soldier accused and later convicted of murdering his wife. The two were fired from the project because they were determined to be taking an advocacy role for the defense. They opened a &quot;Free Marecek&quot; office in the town where the trial was taking place. In December 2000, &quot;48 Hours&quot; ran the story on Marecek which included material from Idema, and Scurka&#x27;s research. Idema also took a leading part in the formation of Point Blank News to support Marecek.

===September 11 attacks===
On the day following the attacks, Idema gave an interview as a &quot;counterterrorism adviser&quot; to KTTV, the Fox network affiliate in Los Angeles. During his news appearance, he claimed that the hijackers might have seized three Canadian jetliners, in addition to four American planes.

===Afghanistan===
====Al Qaeda hoax training footage====
Idema sold tapes to many publishers that he claimed showed an Al-Qaeda training camp in action. The tapes showed men in camouflaged tunics and ski masks storming buildings, practicing drive-by shootings, and attacking golf courses. CBS bought the right to broadcast the tapes before any other network. They were used in a &quot;60 Minutes II&quot; episode called &quot;Heart of Darkness&quot; in January 2002. CBS presented Idema and the tapes he supplied as reliable.

Idema made more money from the same tapes when he sold the rights to rebroadcast the Al-Qaeda training camp footage with still pictures to &quot;The Boston Globe&quot;, MSNBC, NBC, ABC, BBC, and others.

The authenticity of the several hours of tape is disputed because the supposed tactics shown are not used by Al-Qaeda. The &quot;Al-Qaeda&quot; fighters shown in the footage also occasionally communicated in English and laughed, providing credence to the notion that the tapes were staged. Some major outlets, including NBC Nightly News and CNN, declined to broadcast the tapes due to credibility concerns.

====Idema in September 2008 Al-Qaeda video====
Al-Qaeda itself appears to have used some of Idema&#x27;s footage in their September 2008 video release. In a segment released by ABC, Idema appears &quot;to threaten to kill an Afghan citizen during an interrogation.&quot; Al Qaeda claims to have &quot;captured&quot; the footage from Idema, but its provenance remains unclear.

====State-sponsored terrorism====
Idema sought to show that he had inside knowledge of Al-Qaeda&#x27;s collaboration with state governments. For instance, he made suggestions that there was collaboration among North Korea, several Middle-Eastern countries, and Al-Qaeda, and that there was ample evidence linking &quot;Iraq, Iran, and Saudi Arabia to Al-Qaeda and to the attacks on September 11,&quot; and that in Afghanistan, the link between Iraq and Al-Qaeda was &quot;common knowledge.&quot; He also said that Iraq under Saddam Hussein was a supporter of Al-Qaeda and other terrorist organizations &quot;with money, with equipment, with technology, with weapons of mass destruction.&quot; He also claimed to have firsthand knowledge of nuclear weapons being smuggled from Russia to Iraq, Iran, and North Korea.

====Idema in September 2009 Al-Qaeda video====
An Al-Qaeda video released in September 2009 appears to contain video clips of Idema torturing an Afghan by dunking his head in a bucket of water. This footage was used to make the case that the U.S. is involved in torture in Afghanistan, despite the U.S. government denying Idema worked for them.

==Media coverage==
* &quot;Task Force Dagger: The Hunt for bin Laden&quot; (), by &quot;The Green Berets&quot; author Robin Moore, had sections devoted to Idema. They referred to him as a special forces operative named &quot;Jack&quot; (he was also featured on the book&#x27;s cover). Unknown to Moore, Idema had added a number of fictional episodes to the book that he would later use to support his claims. In the manuscript Idema also included appeals for donations to charities listed under his and his wife&#x27;s address. He managed to do this by altering the final manuscript without Moore&#x27;s consent before it was sent to the publisher. Random House quietly dropped the book from print after publishing what had become a work of fiction that even its author had disavowed. Moore has since regretted Idema&#x27;s involvement and insisted that the publisher refused to include his corrections.
*Robert Young Pelton, in his book about private security contractors, &quot;Licensed to Kill: Hired Guns in the War on Terror&quot; (), devotes a chapter to Idema&#x27;s exploits in Afghanistan, including his controversial involvement in Moore&#x27;s book &quot;Task Force Dagger: The Hunt for bin Laden&quot;.
* Peter Bergen&#x27;s article published in &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, &quot;Jack Idema: Shadow Warrior,&quot; examines Idema&#x27;s military career.
* Eric Campbell&#x27;s book on reporting in war zones, &quot;Absurdistan&quot; (), has a few chapters on Idema.
* &quot;Newsweek&quot; had a short section on Idema called &quot;An Afghan Mystery&quot; by John Barry and Owen Matthews in the July 26, 2004 edition.
* In February 2009, in an article entitled &quot;Laptop may hold key to high-level scam&quot;, the &quot;Post-Tribune of Northwest Indiana&quot; wrote of a police report that Idema had attempted to obtain a laptop used by jailed military imposter Joseph A. Cafasso, also a former Fox News consultant, from the 63-year-old woman with whom Cafasso had recently been living. The woman was frightened of Idema and so turned the laptop over to police.
* On June 25, 2022, video blog Oki’s Weird Stories released a documentary about Idema, titled &quot;The King of Stolen Valor,&quot; featuring previously unseen materials and original eyewitness testimonials, on their YouTube channel. 

==Death==
Idema died of AIDS on January 21, 2012, in Mexico.

==FBI investigation==
Documents released under FOIA show that the Department of Justice and FBI had been operating an active investigation of Idema as-from 2005.

==See also==
*David Passaro
*Niels Holck

==References==
==External links==
* Obituary from the Economist
* BBC News profile of Idema
* Jonathan Idema: Our Man in Kabul?, from crimelibrary.com.
* Transcript of an episode of &quot;Mediawatch&quot; from the Australian Broadcasting Corporation about the al Qaeda tape controversy. Includes links to email documents from Idema to &quot;60 Minutes&quot;, images of Idema allegedly interrogating Afghanis, and a copy of his military record.
* US Bounty Hunter Trial, General material about his actions and information about the Al Qaeda training videos he found. Describes the arrest and trial.
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6273457" start="0" end="37" title="Jonathan Idema" label="Jonathan Keith &amp;quot;Jack&amp;quot; Idema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="85" end="95" title="Con-artist" label="con artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="97" end="106" title="mercenary" label="mercenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="118" end="136" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036662" start="137" end="144" title="United States Army Reserve" label="reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="145" end="169" title="non-commissioned officer" label="non-commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q124653834" start="185" end="194" title="Vigilantism" label="vigilante"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="217" end="235" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="War in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q482421" start="264" end="288" title="United States Army Special Forces" label="U.S. Army Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="385" end="401" title="counterterrorism" label="counterterrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047930" start="406" end="423" title="internal security" label="internal security"/>
<link wikidata="Q386432" start="658" end="672" title="private prison" label="private prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="676" end="687" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="779" end="794" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893188" start="805" end="829" title="United States special operations forces" label="special forces operative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="856" end="866" title="Terrorism" label="terrorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q43944" start="1035" end="1047" title="Hamid Karzai" label="Hamid Karzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1102" end="1108" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="1127" end="1131" title="HIV/AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q178093" start="1190" end="1212" title="Poughkeepsie (city), New York" label="Poughkeepsie, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="1276" end="1282" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1287" end="1299" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q193891" start="1300" end="1307" title="veteran" label="veteran"/>
<link wikidata="Q482421" start="1574" end="1607" title="United States Army Special Forces" label="United States Army Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q889935" start="1715" end="1738" title="The Dallas Morning News" label="The Dallas Morning News"/>
<link wikidata="Q896627" start="2463" end="2486" title="Nonjudicial punishment" label="non-judicial punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036662" start="2943" end="2969" title="United States Army Reserve" label="United States Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533579" start="3057" end="3076" title="letter of reprimand" label="letter of reprimand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025246" start="3545" end="3569" title="Individual Ready Reserve" label="Individual Ready Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q192832" start="3708" end="3717" title="paintball" label="paintball"/>
<link wikidata="Q331104" start="3780" end="3808" title="Fayetteville, North Carolina" label="Fayetteville, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="4135" end="4152" title="Counterterrorism" label="counter-terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489274" start="4296" end="4314" title="Soldier of Fortune (magazine)" label="Soldier of Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="4423" end="4437" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022757" start="4909" end="4927" title="Red Hook, New York" label="Red Hook, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q332231" start="5289" end="5299" title="Rappelling" label="Rappelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146888" start="5448" end="5466" title="Hogan&amp;#x27;s Alley (FBI)" label="Hogan&amp;#x27;s Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652870" start="5795" end="5811" title="AN/PVS-4" label="starlight scopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q178093" start="6215" end="6237" title="Poughkeepsie, New York" label="Poughkeepsie, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="6687" end="6692" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q290000" start="6812" end="6825" title="shell company" label="shell company"/>
<link wikidata="Q331104" start="7311" end="7339" title="Fayetteville, North Carolina" label="Fayetteville, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209588" start="7528" end="7552" title="impersonating an officer" label="impersonating an officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q708433" start="7595" end="7624" title="possession of stolen property" label="possession of stolen property"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735709" start="7735" end="7745" title="wire fraud" label="wire fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="8153" end="8169" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q192557" start="8174" end="8192" title="DreamWorks Pictures" label="Dreamworks Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141706" start="8271" end="8297" title="The Peacemaker (1997 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Peacemaker&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007956" start="9750" end="9763" title="Lithuanian Police Force" label="police forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="9767" end="9776" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="9833" end="9868" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="9883" end="9914" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q817144" start="9969" end="9982" title="Russian mafia" label="Russian mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="10161" end="10164" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5998956" start="10506" end="10519" title="Illegal entry" label="Illegal entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961310" start="10639" end="10652" title="Brent Bennett" label="Brent Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="10657" end="10667" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="10668" end="10678" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342204" start="10679" end="10695" title="Edward Caraballo" label="Edward Caraballo"/>
<link wikidata="Q826745" start="10821" end="10837" title="humanitarian aid" label="humanitarian aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q157118" start="10887" end="10914" title="National Geographic (American TV channel)" label="National Geographic Channel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10920" end="10931" title="Gary Scurka" label="Gary Scurka"/>
<link wikidata="Q921925" start="10994" end="11005" title="Robin Moore" label="Robin Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q861764" start="11107" end="11115" title="CBS News" label="CBS News"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="11159" end="11179" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422550" start="11255" end="11282" title="Knightsbridge International" label="Knightsbridge International"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11291" end="11324" title="Partners International Foundation" label="Partners International Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q269" start="11561" end="11569" title="Tashkent" label="Tashkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="11571" end="11581" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251359" start="11781" end="11810" title="Defense Attaché System" label="Defense Attaché&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="12019" end="12038" title="United States Department of State" label="Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188630" start="12116" end="12143" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Uzbekistan)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12572" end="12584" title="Edward Artis" label="Edward Artis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351328" start="12648" end="12667" title="Robert Young Pelton" label="Robert Young Pelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342591" start="13080" end="13116" title="United States Army Special Operations Command" label="U.S. Army Special Operations Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="13722" end="13725" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546073" start="13816" end="13833" title="Covert operation" label="covert operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="13894" end="13909" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640634" start="13921" end="13933" title="Bin Laden Issue Station" label="Alec Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q309368" start="13957" end="13974" title="Northern Alliance" label="Northern Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813221" start="14923" end="14940" title="Stars and Stripes (newspaper)" label="Stars and Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578906" start="15111" end="15128" title="William G. Boykin" label="William G. Boykin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="15132" end="15144" title="the Pentagon" label="the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476046" start="15815" end="15844" title="United States Central Command" label="United States Central Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="15857" end="15896" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="International Security Assistance Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="16011" end="16018" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q38523" start="16344" end="16362" title="Detection dog" label="bomb-sniffing dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q134069" start="16680" end="16692" title="Yunus Qanuni" label="Yunus Qanuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q326668" start="17256" end="17282" title="Operation Enduring Freedom" label="Operation Enduring Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913445" start="17284" end="17295" title="Billy Waugh" label="Billy Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q482421" start="17346" end="17360" title="Special Forces (United States Army)" label="Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17399" end="17421" title="United States invasion of Afghanistan#First move" label="&amp;quot;Jawbreaker&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961310" start="17495" end="17508" title="Brent Bennett" label="Brent Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641678" start="17755" end="17768" title="60 Minutes II" label="60 Minutes II"/>
<link wikidata="Q334720" start="17801" end="17838" title="Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse" label="Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q134069" start="18855" end="18867" title="Yunus Qanuni" label="Yunus Qanuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q167526" start="18897" end="18917" title="Mohammed Fahim" label="Mohammad Qasim Fahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q184650" start="19615" end="19630" title="Donald Rumsfeld" label="Donald Rumsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="20568" end="20579" title="Documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q43944" start="20735" end="20747" title="Hamid Karzai" label="Hamid Karzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="21002" end="21010" title="Al-Qaeda" label="Al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="21267" end="21283" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q894835" start="21953" end="21974" title="Embassy of the United States, Kabul" label="U.S. Embassy in Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="22023" end="22028" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373483" start="22420" end="22437" title="Emmet G. Sullivan" label="Emmet G. Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419722" start="22544" end="22564" title="exculpatory evidence" label="exculpatory evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068288" start="22986" end="22997" title="due process" label="due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="23272" end="23307" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798487" start="24523" end="24533" title="Pul-e-Charkhi prison" label="Policharki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709140" start="24969" end="24976" title="Bacalar, Quintana Roo" label="Bacalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q130978" start="24985" end="25002" title="Yucatán Peninsula" label="Yucatán Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="25120" end="25123" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="26677" end="26687" title="Confidence trick" label="con artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q19647010" start="26691" end="26699" title="List of impostors" label="impostor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189643" start="26977" end="26987" title="Delusion" label="delusional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546073" start="27067" end="27083" title="covert operative" label="covert operative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893188" start="27210" end="27224" title="United States Special Forces" label="Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="27939" end="27945" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="27992" end="28005" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q120877" start="28123" end="28128" title="Cloning" label="clone"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="28185" end="28189" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q861764" start="28702" end="28710" title="CBS News" label="CBS News"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="28807" end="28817" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="29290" end="29318" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031546" start="29886" end="29894" title="48 Hours (TV series)" label="48 Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077406" start="30581" end="30585" title="KTTV" label="KTTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="30591" end="30594" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="30616" end="30627" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="30888" end="30896" title="Al-Qaeda" label="Al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259359" start="31010" end="31028" title="Drive-by shooting" label="drive-by shootings"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="31441" end="31457" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="31465" end="31470" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="31472" end="31475" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="31477" end="31480" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="31482" end="31485" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q594503" start="31820" end="31836" title="NBC Nightly News" label="NBC Nightly News"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="31841" end="31844" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="32495" end="32506" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="32604" end="32608" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="32610" end="32614" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="32620" end="32632" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="32810" end="32824" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="32943" end="32970" title="weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738131" start="33535" end="33551" title="The Green Berets (book)" label="The Green Berets"/>
<link wikidata="Q921925" start="33565" end="33576" title="Robin Moore" label="Robin Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="34096" end="34108" title="Random House" label="Random House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351328" start="34352" end="34371" title="Robert Young Pelton" label="Robert Young Pelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057214" start="34391" end="34419" title="private military company" label="private security contractors"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="34705" end="34730" title="Rolling Stone (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Rolling Stone&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="34931" end="34939" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6280768" start="35321" end="35338" title="Joseph A. Cafasso" label="Joseph A. Cafasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q674926" start="35541" end="35551" title="video blog" label="video blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="35583" end="35594" title="documentary" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="35738" end="35745" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003780" start="35866" end="35870" title="Freedom of Information Act (United States)" label="FOIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4665759" start="35996" end="36009" title="David Passaro" label="David Passaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q12328806" start="36011" end="36022" title="Niels Holck" label="Niels Holck"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880677" wikidata="Q220959" url="?curid=880677" title="NGC 404">
<text>NGC 404 is a field galaxy located about 10 million light years away in the constellation Andromeda. It was discovered by William Herschel in 1784, and is visible through small telescopes. NGC 404 lies just beyond the Local Group and does not appear gravitationally bound to it. It is located within 7 arc-minutes of second magnitude star Mirach, making it a difficult target to observe or photograph and granting it the nickname &quot;Mirach&#x27;s Ghost&quot;.

== Physical characteristics ==

NGC 404 is a very isolated dwarf lenticular galaxy, a bit more luminous and smaller than the Small Magellanic Cloud. Unlike many other early-type galaxies, it is very rich in neutral hydrogen, most of it concentrated in a pair of large rings around it. It also has star formation both in its center and in its outermost regions, albeit at a low level.

Both the outer gas disk and its star formation are assumed to have been triggered by one or several mergers with smaller galaxies roughly 1 billion years ago and it has been proposed NGC 404 is a former spiral galaxy that was transformed into a lenticular one by that event.

==LINER emission==

NGC 404 contains a low-ionization nuclear emission-line region (LINER), a type of region that is characterized by spectral line emission from weakly ionized atoms.
A nuclear star cluster is also present as well as (likely) a supermassive black hole, with a mass of several tens of thousands solar masses.

==Distance measurements==

At least two techniques have been used to measure distances to NGC 404. The infrared surface brightness fluctuations distance measurement technique estimates distances to spiral galaxies based on the graininess of the appearance of their bulges. The distance measured to NGC 404 using this technique in 2003 is 9.9 ± 0.5 Mly (3.03 ± 0.15 Mpc).

However, NGC 404 is close enough that red supergiants can be imaged as individual stars. The light from these stars and knowledge of how they should compare to nearby stars within the Milky Way galaxy allows for direct measurement of the distance to the galaxy. This method is referred to as the tip of the red giant branch (TRGB) method. The estimated distance to NGC 404 using this technique is 10.0 ± 1.2 Mly (3.1 ± 0.4 Mpc). Averaged together, these distance measurements give a distance estimate of 10.0 ± 0.7 Mly (3.07 ± 0.21 Mpc).

==Possible satellite==

In 2018 a possible satellite designated Donatiello I was identified. Donatiello I is a dwarf spheroidal galaxy with little recent star formation. Difficulty in establishing the exact distance to the galaxy leaves its status as a satellite unconfirmed.

==Gallery==

==Notes==


==References==
==External links==

* Encyclopedia of Astrobiology, Astronomy &amp; Spaceflight Entry
* Curdridge Observatory article
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q220959" start="0" end="7" title="NGC 404" label="NGC 404"/>
<link wikidata="Q211301" start="13" end="25" title="field galaxy" label="field galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="51" end="61" title="light year" label="light year"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="75" end="88" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9256" start="89" end="98" title="Andromeda (constellation)" label="Andromeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="121" end="137" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944" start="217" end="228" title="Local Group" label="Local Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="301" end="311" title="arc-minute" label="arc-minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q13043" start="338" end="344" title="Mirach" label="Mirach"/>
<link wikidata="Q14534" start="495" end="498" title="New General Catalogue" label="NGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q192078" start="528" end="545" title="lenticular galaxy" label="lenticular galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49984" start="588" end="610" title="Small Magellanic Cloud" label="Small Magellanic Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406191" start="670" end="686" title="neutral hydrogen" label="neutral hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="760" end="774" title="star formation" label="star formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518150" start="948" end="955" title="galaxy merger" label="mergers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14534" start="1031" end="1034" title="New General Catalogue" label="NGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488" start="1051" end="1064" title="spiral galaxy" label="spiral galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557101" start="1163" end="1206" title="low-ionization nuclear emission-line region" label="low-ionization nuclear emission-line region"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="1258" end="1271" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="1293" end="1296" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369949" start="1310" end="1330" title="nuclear star cluster" label="nuclear star cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q40392" start="1369" end="1392" title="supermassive black hole" label="supermassive black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="1435" end="1445" title="solar mass" label="solar mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999487" start="1562" end="1592" title="surface brightness fluctuation" label="surface brightness fluctuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="1798" end="1801" title="light-year" label="Mly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="1815" end="1818" title="parsec" label="Mpc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898" start="1860" end="1875" title="red supergiants" label="red supergiants"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="2006" end="2015" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q374911" start="2118" end="2145" title="tip of the red giant branch" label="tip of the red giant branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q58209661" start="2425" end="2437" title="Donatiello I" label="Donatiello I"/>
<link wikidata="Q654754" start="2472" end="2495" title="dwarf spheroidal galaxy" label="dwarf spheroidal galaxy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880681" wikidata="Q406873" url="?curid=880681" title="Steinitz">
<text>Steinitz may refer to:

* Steinitz, Germany, a town in the district of Altmarkkreis Salzwedel in Saxony-Anhalt in Germany
* Steinitz (surname)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1772489" start="26" end="43" title="Steinitz, Germany" label="Steinitz, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q14795973" start="124" end="142" title="Steinitz (surname)" label="Steinitz (surname)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880686" wikidata="Q641074" url="?curid=880686" title="NGC 281">
<text>NGC 281, IC 11 or Sh2-184 is a bright emission nebula and part of an H II region in the northern constellation of Cassiopeia and is part of the Milky Way&#x27;s Perseus Spiral Arm. This 20×30 arcmin sized nebulosity is also associated with open cluster IC 1590, several Bok globules and the multiple star, B 1. It collectively forms Sh2-184, spanning over a larger area of 40 arcmin. A recent distance from radio parallaxes of water masers at 22 GHz made during 2014 is estimated it lies 2.82±0.20 kpc. (9200 ly.) from us. Colloquially, NGC 281 is also known as the Pacman Nebula for its resemblance to the video game character.

Edward Emerson Barnard discovered the nebula in August 1883, describing it as &quot;a large faint nebula, very diffuse&quot;. Multiple star &#x27;B 1&#x27; or β 1 was later discovered by S. W. Burnham, whose bright component is identified as the highly luminous O6 spectral class star, HD 5005 or HIP 4121. It consists of an 8th-magnitude primary with four companions at distances between 1.4 and 15.7 arcsec. There has been no appreciable change in this quintuple system since the first measures were made in 1875.

The nebula region is visible in amateur telescopes from dark sky locations.
In his book &quot;Deep Sky Wonders&quot;, Walter Scott Houston describes the appearance of the nebula in small telescopes:
:&quot;There was a faint glow in the immediate vicinity of the multiple star, with an occasional impression of a much larger nebulosity...Its surface brightness was much less than that of M33 in Triangulum or NGC 205, the distant companion of the Andromeda galaxy.&quot;

==Gallery==

==References==
== External links ==

*NGC 281 Astronomy picture of the Day (August 23, 2005) at NASA
*NGC 281 at ESA/Hubble
*NGC 281 at Deep Space Map</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q641074" start="0" end="7" title="NGC 281" label="NGC 281"/>
<link wikidata="Q641074" start="9" end="14" title="NGC 281" label="IC 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q641074" start="18" end="25" title="NGC 281" label="Sh2-184"/>
<link wikidata="Q202265" start="38" end="53" title="emission nebula" label="emission nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11282" start="69" end="80" title="H II region" label="H II region"/>
<link wikidata="Q10464" start="114" end="124" title="Cassiopeia constellation" label="Cassiopeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="144" end="153" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q32895" start="161" end="179" title="Perseus Spiral Arm" label="Perseus Spiral Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="192" end="198" title="arc minute" label="arcmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387" start="240" end="252" title="open cluster" label="open cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497471" start="253" end="260" title="IC 1590" label="IC 1590"/>
<link wikidata="Q213936" start="270" end="281" title="Bok globule" label="Bok globule"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="413" end="421" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q487875" start="433" end="438" title="maser" label="maser"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="446" end="449" title="hertz" label="GHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q641074" start="566" end="579" title="NGC 281" label="Pacman Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913000" start="607" end="627" title="Pac-Man (character)" label="video game character"/>
<link wikidata="Q204999" start="630" end="652" title="Edward Emerson Barnard" label="Edward Emerson Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q543217" start="817" end="830" title="S. W. Burnham" label="S. W. Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="1032" end="1038" title="second of arc" label="arcsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966101" start="1265" end="1285" title="Walter Scott Houston" label="Walter Scott Houston"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880687" wikidata="Q258381" url="?curid=880687" title="Emanuel Sandhu">
<text>Emanuel Sandhu (born November 18, 1980) is a Canadian figure skater and dancer. He is the 2004 Grand Prix Final champion and a three-time Canadian national champion.

==Personal life==
Sandhu was born on November 18, 1980, in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. He was raised in Richmond Hill, Ontario, with his younger brothers Chris and Daniel. His father, Lokraj, is Indian Sikh and his mother, Enza, was born in Italy. He is fluent in English, French, and Italian. Sandhu dabbles in modeling and singing.

== Career ==

===Skating===
Sandhu began figure skating at the age of eight. A year later, he was discovered by coach Joanne McLeod who would serve as his coach for his entire career. Sandhu later relocated to Burnaby, British Columbia, to continue training at the B.C. Centre of Excellence with McLeod, whom he credited as being his biggest support system.

He had early success in Canada, placing second in his first Canadian nationals. Sandhu&#x27;s success qualified him for the 1998 Olympics in Nagano, but the Canadian Olympic committee refused to send him because, while he met the criteria of the Canadian Figure Skating Association, he did not meet theirs. He had missed the Grand Prix season because of injury while Langdon did not. Sandhu was a recipient of the Indo-Canadian Chamber of Commerce Lifetime Achievement Award in 1998.

Sandhu qualified for the 2002 Olympics in Salt Lake City, but was forced to withdraw before the short program due to injury. He also withdrew from the World Championships that year. Sandhu&#x27;s father had left the family years earlier, and Sandhu was reunited with him prior to the 2002 Olympic Games. Sandhu stated that he was almost relieved to have to withdraw with an injury, because it was difficult dealing with his father&#x27;s return.

Sandhu was the Canadian Nationals Champion in 2001, 2003 and 2004, and he won the Grand Prix Final in 2004, his most successful season. In winning the Grand Prix Final, Sandhu beat reigning World Champion Evgeni Plushenko and is one of only two people (with Brian Joubert) to beat Plushenko in the 2002-2006 quadrennium. This win was even more notable because Sandhu was a substitute, not having medaled at his Grand Prix events that season. Sandhu went on to win his third Canadian title and to take the silver medal at the 2004 Four Continents, his highest placement at the event.

Despite his various victories, Sandhu was inconsistent at major events. He kept his eligibility following the 2006 Olympics season. He competed at Cup of China, where he won the bronze medal, and Cup of Russia, where he placed fifth. At the 2007 Nationals, he was unable to hold onto silver and dropped to third, his lowest placement at the senior level at Nationals. His season continued its downward trend as he placed ninth at the 2007 Four Continents. He placed 16th at the 2007 Worlds.

In 2011, Sandhu performed in the Art on Ice show in China. He also registered to compete in a qualifying competition for the 2012 Canadian Nationals, his first competition since 2007. He withdrew because of a foot injury and lack of preparation time due to ice shows.

Sandhu returned to competition in December 2012 at the 2013 Skate Canada Challenge; he finished fifth, which qualified him for the 2013 Canadian Nationals. Commenting on his decision to return to competition, Sandhu said, &quot;I don&#x27;t want the feeling I have when I look back on the sport to be one that isn&#x27;t full of joy, happiness and satisfaction. I probably would think about it the rest of my life if I didn&#x27;t try.&quot; He trained without a coach in Burnaby, British Columbia. Sandhu went on to finish 9th in the short program and 11th overall at the 2013 Canadian Nationals.

===Dance===
Sandhu began studying ballet at the age of three and continued to dance until the end of high school. He graduated from The National Ballet School of Canada.

In May 2008, Sandhu auditioned for &quot;So You Think You Can Dance Canada&quot; in Vancouver, British Columbia, and qualified for the final audition round in Toronto. He succeeded past all but the final round of auditions and was cut when selections were made for the show&#x27;s Top 20.

Sandhu again auditioned during the second season of &quot;So You Think You Can Dance Canada&quot;, but this time made it into the Top 20. He finished in the Top 6 as the third-ranked male dancer.

==Programs==
==Competitive highlights==
&quot;GP: Grand Prix; JGP: Junior Grand Prix&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* Skate Canada profile
* Modeling portfolio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q258381" start="0" end="14" title="Emanuel Sandhu" label="Emanuel Sandhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q38108" start="54" end="67" title="figure skater" label="figure skater"/>
<link wikidata="Q622016" start="95" end="120" title="ISU Grand Prix of Figure Skating Final" label="Grand Prix Final champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861055" start="138" end="164" title="Canadian Figure Skating Championships" label="Canadian national champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="226" end="233" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="235" end="242" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q52998" start="269" end="291" title="Richmond Hill, Ontario" label="Richmond Hill, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="360" end="365" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="406" end="411" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q244025" start="710" end="717" title="Burnaby" label="Burnaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="719" end="735" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835280" start="765" end="790" title="B.C. Centre of Excellence" label="B.C. Centre of Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q992223" start="1996" end="2012" title="Evgeni Plushenko" label="Evgeni Plushenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q297090" start="2049" end="2062" title="Brian Joubert" label="Brian Joubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790144" start="2099" end="2110" title="quadrennium" label="quadrennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035851" start="2316" end="2336" title="2004 Four Continents Figure Skating Championships" label="2004 Four Continents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144157" start="2522" end="2534" title="Cup of China" label="Cup of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144163" start="2571" end="2584" title="Cup of Russia" label="Cup of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861055" start="2616" end="2630" title="2007 Canadian Figure Skating Championships" label="2007 Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047641" start="2809" end="2829" title="2007 Four Continents Figure Skating Championships" label="2007 Four Continents"/>
<link wikidata="Q226057" start="2853" end="2864" title="2007 World Figure Skating Championships" label="2007 Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4509392" start="2992" end="3015" title="2012 Canadian Figure Skating Championships" label="2012 Canadian Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386312" start="3267" end="3290" title="2013 Canadian Figure Skating Championships" label="2013 Canadian Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386312" start="3709" end="3732" title="2013 Canadian Figure Skating Championships" label="2013 Canadian Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029229" start="3867" end="3903" title="The National Ballet School of Canada" label="The National Ballet School of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806385" start="3947" end="3980" title="So You Think You Can Dance Canada" label="So You Think You Can Dance Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950338" start="4231" end="4244" title="So You Think You Can Dance Canada (season 2)" label="second season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654923" start="4443" end="4453" title="ISU Grand Prix of Figure Skating" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232779" start="4460" end="4477" title="ISU Junior Grand Prix" label="Junior Grand Prix"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880697" wikidata="Q910401" url="?curid=880697" title="SAIC Motor">
<text>SAIC Motor Corp., Ltd. (formerly Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation) is a Chinese state-owned automobile manufacturer headquartered in Anting, Shanghai. Founded in 1955, it is currently the largest of the &quot;Big Four&quot; state-owned car manufacturers of China ahead of FAW Group, Dongfeng Motor Corporation, and Changan Automobile, with sales of 5.02 million vehicles in 2023.

The company traces its origins to the early years of the Chinese automobile industry in the 1940s, and SAIC was one of the few carmakers in Mao&#x27;s China, making the Shanghai SH760. Currently, it participates in the oldest surviving sino-foreign automotive joint venture with Volkswagen (SAIC-Volkswagen) since 1984, and in addition operates a joint venture with General Motors (SAIC-GM) since 1998. It also produces and sells passenger vehicles under its own branding, such as Roewe, MG, Maxus/LDV, Rising Auto, and IM Motors. It is also the largest shareholder of SAIC-GM-Wuling (SGMW), a joint venture selling Wuling and Baojun branded vehicles. In 2021, SAIC self-owned brands contributes 52% of SAIC&#x27;s sales.

The company ranked 84th on the Fortune Global 500 list in 2023. Including SGMW, it was also the third-largest plug-in electric vehicle (battery electric and plug-in hybrid) company and second-largest battery electric vehicle manufacturer in the world, with 10.5% and 13% global market share respectively in 2021.

==History==
===Origins to 2000===
Although it has a long history, originating from an automobile assembly factory established in Shanghai sometime around World War II, SAIC, unlike domestic rivals FAW Group and Dongfeng Motors, has only recently attained a position of prominence in the Chinese vehicle industry. A small company in the 1970s, SAIC owes its rise to more than an increase in domestic demand for passenger vehicles. A cooperative agreement made with Volkswagen in 1984 followed by the formal establishment of Shanghai Volkswagen Automotive Co. Ltd. in March 1985 allowed it to produce competitive cars with foreign technology. Early success at SAIC were a result of guidance provided by local Shanghai authorities; at one time SAIC was simply an extension of the Shanghai Municipal government. For these two reasons and more, SAIC grew swiftly. In the 11 years leading to 1996, annual production capacity increased ten-fold to 300,000 units/year, and the company established itself as one of the leading Chinese automakers.

During this period, SAIC effectively built an entire modern automotive component supply chain in Shanghai from scratch, and the number and quality of locally produced auto parts rose significantly. Cars that were previously assembled in China from knock-down kits provisioned by Volkswagen became products built from parts produced in Shanghai, and between 1990 and 1996 the city more than doubled its contribution to the national output of automotive components. In 1987, the only local parts used in one car, the Volkswagen Santana, were tires, radio, and antenna, but by 1998 over 90% of the components used in its manufacture were locally sourced. A goal set by the Shanghai Municipal government, creation of a local parts industry is an example of the influence that the local government has had on the development of SAIC.

In June 1997, SAIC formed a second major joint venture, Shanghai General Motors Co Ltd, with General Motors. The new joint venture began operations in 1998, and helped to drive a doubling in SAIC&#x27;s vehicle production between 2000 and 2004. SAIC also created joint ventures with component suppliers, such as the American Visteon.

===2000 to 2010===
At the start of the 2000s, SAIC made several acquisitions in Korea. In 2002 it participated in GM&#x27;s purchase of Korean automaker Daewoo, acquiring a 10% stake in the newly formed GM Daewoo company for US$59.7 million, and in 2004 it also assumed control of an ailing South Korean automaker, SsangYong Motor, paying US$500 million for 48.9% ownership of the company. Around this time SAIC created a new holding company for its subsidiaries employed in passenger car production, Shanghai Automotive Group.

In the middle of the decade, SAIC attempted to acquire the British automaker MG Rover, but in 2005 was outbid by another Chinese automaker, Nanjing Automobile. SAIC did manage to obtain some MG Rover technology that was incorporated into a new line of luxury sedans sold under the Roewe marque, and it subsequently purchased the winning bidder.

While the company saw sales success in the late 2000s, with 2.72 million vehicles sold in 2009, its 2004 purchase of an ownership stake in a Korean SUV-maker, Ssangyong, soured. In January 2009, after an additional US$45 million was provided to it by SAIC, SsangYong Motor Company was placed into receivership in Korea. Courts might have mandated SAIC reduce its ownership, and by 2010 a 51.33% share of the Korean company had become a 10% one. The 2009 Ssangyong failure also saw riot police quell protesting Ssangyong workers who staged a 77-day-long sit in.

===2010 to present===
In 2010, SAIC produced 3.58 million units, the largest output of any China-based automaker that year.

In June 2010, Magneti Marelli and Shanghai Automobile Gear Works (SAGW) officially launched a new joint venture plant in the Jiading district near Shanghai, China. SAGW, the main Chinese manufacturer of transmissions for the automotive sector, is a subsidiary of SAIC Motor.

In February 2011, SAIC unveiled a new commercial vehicles marque, Maxus.

In 2011, SAIC produced 3.97 million vehicles, the largest output of any China-based automaker that year.

In 2012, SAIC retained its top spot among domestic rivals by producing around 3.5 million units.

In 2023, SAIC received the equivalent of US$560 million in state subsidies. In July 2023, Audi and SAIC Group announced their partnership that the EV platform from IM Motors will be introduced into Audi&#x27;s electric models.

In September 2023, the European Commission (EC) launched an anti-subsidy investigation into Chinese electric vehicle manufacturers, including SAIC which exported electric vehicles in high volume under the MG brand to the region. In June 2024, the EC completed its investigation and announced new tariffs for Chinese-built electric vehicles (on top of an existing 10 percent tariff for all foreign-made vehicles regardless of engine type), which went into effect on 4 July 2024. Electric vehicles made by SAIC Motor would be subjected to the highest tariff of 38.1 percent. On 26 June, after receiving more information, the EU reduced the proposed tariffs from 38.1 percent to 37.6 percent for SAIC. The tariffs subjected to SAIC vehicles are the highest among Chinese electric vehicle manufacturers that are affected. SAIC released a statement condemning the decision, noting that the tariffs are a form of unfair market discrimination that went against the principles of free trade.

In July 2024, SAIC Motor issued a statement stating that it would formally request the European Commission to hold a hearing on the anti-subsidy investigation. The company claimed that the European Commission&#x27;s investigation asked SAIC to disclose its commercially sensitive information including battery-related chemical formulas, which SAIC declined as it is beyond the scope of a normal investigation.

In November 2024, SAIC Motor Passenger Vehicle, a subsidiary of SAIC, announced the reintegration of the Rising Auto brand into Roewe, ending its status as an independent brand. Rising Auto will be restructured as a premium electric vehicle product line under the Roewe brand.

=== Mergers and company name-changes ===
The present-day SAIC is the product of numerous mergers and corporate restructurings.

* In December 1955, &quot;Shanghai Internal Combustion Engine Components Company&quot; was founded.
* In March 1958, &quot;Shanghai Internal Combustion Engine Components Company&quot; and &quot;Shanghai Powertrain Equipment Manufacturing Company&quot; were merged into &quot;Shanghai Powertrain Machinery Manufacturing Company&quot;.
* In January 1960, &quot;Shanghai Powertrain Machinery Manufacturing Company&quot; was renamed &quot;Shanghai Agricultural Machinery Manufacturing Company&quot;.
* In April 1969, &quot;Shanghai Agricultural Machinery Manufacturing Company&quot; was renamed &quot;Shanghai Tractor Industry Company&quot;. &quot;Shanghai Automobile &amp; Tractor Company&quot; was established in July 1984.
* In March 1990, &quot;Shanghai Automobile &amp; Tractor Company&quot; was renamed &quot;Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation&quot;.
* In September 1995, &quot;Shanghai Automotive Industry Corp (Group)&quot; was founded.
==Brands==
SAIC sells vehicles under a variety of brands. Brands that are considered &quot;self-owned&quot; by SAIC include IM, Maxus, MG, Rising Auto, Roewe, Baojun, Wuling, Hongyan, and Sunwin.

=== IM ===
IM is a luxury electric vehicle brand launched by SAIC on 13 January 2021. Known as &quot;Zhiji Motor&quot; in Chinese, the brand was jointly developed in partnership with Shanghai&#x27;s Pudong New Area government and Alibaba. According to SAIC Motor, &quot;IM&quot; stands for &quot;Intelligence in Motion.&quot;

=== MG ===
MG Motor designs, develops and markets cars sold under the MG marque.

=== Roewe ===
Roewe was introduced by SAIC in 2006. It is sold in most export markets outside China under the MG Motor marque.

===Rising Auto===
Rising Auto was initially introduced as the &quot;R Brand&quot; in 2020, a sub-brand of SAIC&#x27;s Roewe division focused on electric vehicles. It operated as an independent brand beginning in 2021 but was reintegrated into Roewe in 2024. It currently serves as the premium product line under the Roewe brand.

=== Maxus ===
Maxus was formed in 2011 following the acquisition of LDV Group by SAIC in 2010, and produces MPVs, pickup trucks, and SUVs for both domestic sale and global export. 

=== Wuling/Baojun (SAIC-GM-Wuling) ===
SAIC-GM-Wuling (SGMW) is a joint venture between SAIC, General Motors, and Guangxi Automobile Group (formerly Wuling Group). Based in Liuzhou, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, in southwestern China, the company produces commercial and consumer vehicles marketed under the Wuling and Baojun brands. SGMW has achieved significant success in electric vehicle manufacturing, with its Wuling Hongguang Mini EV city car becoming the best-selling electric vehicle in China by volume in 2021. 

===Hongyan===
SAIC Hongyan was established in January 2003 as Chongqing Hongyan and traces its origins back to a Chinese manufacturer established in 1965. The company is focused on producing heavy trucks.

=== Sunwin ===

SAIC Sunwin is a brand specialized in producing passenger buses and trolleybuses.
=== Nanjing Iveco Auto Co Ltd (New Naveco) ===
In 2021, SAIC announced an increase in its holdings of Nanjing Iveco (Naveco). SAIC&#x27;s subsidiary, Nanjing Automobile Group holds a 50% stake, while SAIC itself holds 30.1%, and IVECO S.P.A. holds 19.9%. SAIC&#x27;s ownership of Naveco has now risen to 80.1%, making the Italian brand a strategic investor.

== Joint ventures ==
SAIC has joint ventures with foreign automakers like General Motors and Volkswagen to produce and sell their vehicles in China. Additionally, SAIC also has several joint venture operations outside China.

=== SAIC Volkswagen Automotive ===
SAIC Volkswagen (SAIC-VW), previously Shanghai Volkswagen, is a joint venture between SAIC and German manufacturer Volkswagen Group. Founded in 1984 as one of the early joint venture manufacturers in China, the company manufactures and sellsVolkswagen, Škoda and Audi vehicles in China. 

=== SAIC General Motors ===

SAIC General Motors (SAIC-GM), previously Shanghai GM, is a joint venture between SAIC and American manufacturer General Motors. Founded in 1997, it manufactures and sells Buick, Chevrolet, and Cadillac vehicles in China for the domestic market and exports.

=== SAIC-Charoen Pokphand ===
SAIC produces MG Motor vehicles through this joint venture with Charoen Pokphand for their Thailand subsidiary.

=== JSW MG Motor India ===

JSW MG Motor India, formerly known as MG Motor India until 2024, is SAIC&#x27;s joint venture for its operations in India. Established in 2019, it focuses on producing and marketing MG-branded vehicles. In 2023, it was restructured from a wholly-owned subsidiary into a joint venture with the Indian multinational conglomerate JSW Group.

=== Technomous ===
Established with Austrian technology provider TTTech in 2018 for Intelligent and Autonomous Driving solutions.

== Sales ==
== Overseas markets ==
=== UK ===
On 13 April 2011, vehicle assembly resumed at the MG Motor UK Longbridge plant as the first MG 6 to be produced in the United Kingdom came off the production line, but ended in 2016 when SAIC moved production to China. It retains a technical subsidiary SAIC Motor UK on site.

=== Philippines ===
On July 19, 2023, SAIC&#x27;s Philippines subsidiary SAIC Motor Philippines, Inc. has appointed the new distributor and importer of MG vehicles and services in the country with launch of the all-new 2024 MG4 EV and MG Marvel R for the local market by October 2023. Aside from importation, distribution, and aftersales operations, SMP’s functions also include the management of MG’s dealership network in the Philippines. This is currently composed of 42 authorized dealer locations and the addition of four more dealerships before the close of 2023, and a goal to have 60 MG dealerships running by 2025. 

=== US ===
In June 2012, SAIC&#x27;s United States-based subsidiary Shanghai Automotive Industries Corp USA, Inc. opened a new North American Operations Center in Birmingham, Michigan. The opening ceremony was attended by Rick Snyder, Governor of Michigan, Oakland County Executive L. Brooks Patterson, and senior executives from General Motors and SAIC Motor. The 30,000-square-foot, three-story facility will house nearly 100 staff and focus on sourcing components.

==Facilities==
SAIC has numerous production facilities in China, including sites in: Chongqing, Liuzhou, Qingdao, Shanghai, Shenyang, and Yantai. It also had an assembly plant in the United Kingdom, the Longbridge plant. It also has a plant in Chonburi, Thailand, Cikarang, Indonesia, and Halol, India.

===Research and development===
SAIC operated a large research and development centre in the United Kingdom, the SAIC Motor UK Technical Centre, which as of 2012 employed around 275 engineers and 25 designers. The UK Technical Centre was the principal site worldwide for the development of MG cars, also playing a major role in the development of Roewe products. However in June 2019, SAIC Motor closed the UK Technical Centre making over 300 engineers redundant in the process.

== See also ==

* Automobile manufacturers and brands of China
* List of automobile manufacturers of China
* Automotive industry in China

==Notes==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q910401" start="0" end="22" title="SAIC Motor" label="SAIC Motor Corp., Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q910401" start="33" end="73" title="SAIC Motor" label="Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598268" start="88" end="99" title="State-owned enterprises of China" label="state-owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q578770" start="141" end="147" title="Anting" label="Anting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="149" end="157" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q114465" start="217" end="225" title="Automotive industry in China" label="Big Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124351" start="280" end="289" title="FAW Group" label="FAW Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138452" start="291" end="317" title="Dongfeng Motor Corporation" label="Dongfeng Motor Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29366" start="323" end="341" title="Changan Automobile" label="Changan Automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313758" start="529" end="545" title="History of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China (1949–1976)" label="Mao&amp;#x27;s China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488502" start="558" end="572" title="Shanghai SH760" label="Shanghai SH760"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="649" end="662" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="668" end="678" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432633" start="680" end="695" title="SAIC Volkswagen" label="SAIC-Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="755" end="769" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488453" start="771" end="778" title="SAIC-GM" label="SAIC-GM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637227" start="870" end="875" title="Roewe" label="Roewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881443" start="877" end="879" title="MG Motor" label="MG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302845" start="881" end="886" title="Maxus" label="Maxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126555" start="887" end="890" title="LDV Group" label="LDV"/>
<link wikidata="Q112162285" start="892" end="903" title="Rising Auto" label="Rising Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q106617594" start="909" end="918" title="IM Motors" label="IM Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082637" start="958" end="972" title="SAIC-GM-Wuling" label="SAIC-GM-Wuling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817853" start="1005" end="1011" title="Wuling Motors" label="Wuling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883616" start="1016" end="1022" title="Baojun" label="Baojun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205234" start="1222" end="1246" title="plug-in electric vehicle" label="plug-in electric vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076882" start="1248" end="1264" title="Battery electric vehicle" label="battery electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483388" start="1269" end="1283" title="plug-in hybrid" label="plug-in hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124351" start="1623" end="1632" title="FAW Group" label="FAW Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138452" start="1637" end="1652" title="Dongfeng Motors" label="Dongfeng Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933280" start="2713" end="2727" title="knock-down kit" label="knock-down kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506352" start="2980" end="2998" title="Volkswagen Santana" label="Volkswagen Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q637474" start="3620" end="3627" title="Visteon" label="Visteon"/>
<link wikidata="Q221869" start="3945" end="3960" title="SsangYong Motor Company" label="SsangYong Motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12010087" start="4236" end="4244" title="MG Rover" label="MG Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584295" start="4299" end="4317" title="Nanjing Automobile" label="Nanjing Automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637227" start="4440" end="4445" title="Roewe" label="Roewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594302" start="4802" end="4814" title="receivership" label="receivership"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="5058" end="5064" title="strike action" label="sit in"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302845" start="5534" end="5539" title="Maxus" label="Maxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193219" start="5811" end="5820" title="Subsidy" label="subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q23317" start="5836" end="5840" title="Audi" label="Audi"/>
<link wikidata="Q910401" start="5845" end="5855" title="SAIC Group" label="SAIC Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="5997" end="6016" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="6946" end="6956" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q112162285" start="7475" end="7486" title="Rising Auto" label="Rising Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="8773" end="8778" title="brand" label="brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q106617594" start="8847" end="8849" title="IM Motors" label="IM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302845" start="8851" end="8856" title="Maxus" label="Maxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881443" start="8858" end="8860" title="MG Motor" label="MG"/>
<link wikidata="Q112162285" start="8862" end="8873" title="Rising Auto" label="Rising Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637227" start="8875" end="8880" title="Roewe" label="Roewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883616" start="8882" end="8888" title="Baojun" label="Baojun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817853" start="8890" end="8896" title="Wuling Motors" label="Wuling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140119" start="8898" end="8905" title="SAIC Hongyan" label="Hongyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20062788" start="8911" end="8917" title="Sunwin" label="Sunwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q125378" start="9119" end="9134" title="Pudong New Area" label="Pudong New Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359568" start="9150" end="9157" title="Alibaba Group" label="Alibaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q36018" start="9317" end="9326" title="MG marque" label="MG marque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881443" start="9439" end="9447" title="MG Motor" label="MG Motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126555" start="9855" end="9864" title="LDV Group" label="LDV Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="10035" end="10048" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="10063" end="10077" title="General Motors Corporation" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11109624" start="10083" end="10107" title="Guangxi Automobile Group" label="Guangxi Automobile Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q38968" start="10142" end="10149" title="Liuzhou" label="Liuzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="10151" end="10183" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190484" start="10188" end="10206" title="southwestern China" label="southwestern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817853" start="10281" end="10287" title="Wuling Motors" label="Wuling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883616" start="10292" end="10298" title="Baojun" label="Baojun"/>
<link wikidata="Q101479666" start="10389" end="10413" title="Wuling Hongguang Mini EV" label="Wuling Hongguang Mini EV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="10786" end="10796" title="trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="11189" end="11203" title="Joint venture" label="joint ventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="11661" end="11671" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q29637" start="11673" end="11678" title="Škoda Auto" label="Škoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q23317" start="11683" end="11687" title="Audi" label="Audi"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="11851" end="11865" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q27415" start="11910" end="11915" title="Buick" label="Buick"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="11917" end="11926" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q27436" start="11932" end="11940" title="Cadillac (automobile)" label="Cadillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q611064" start="12091" end="12107" title="Charoen Pokphand" label="Charoen Pokphand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108973" start="12495" end="12504" title="JSW Group" label="JSW Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982233" start="12746" end="12762" title="Longbridge plant" label="Longbridge plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253798" start="12776" end="12780" title="MG 6" label="MG 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162669" start="12937" end="12950" title="SAIC Motor UK" label="SAIC Motor UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="13011" end="13022" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q887111" start="13809" end="13820" title="Rick Snyder" label="Rick Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589680" start="13822" end="13842" title="Governor of Michigan" label="Governor of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="14141" end="14150" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q38968" start="14152" end="14159" title="Liuzhou" label="Liuzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q170322" start="14161" end="14168" title="Qingdao" label="Qingdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="14170" end="14178" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="14180" end="14188" title="Shenyang" label="Shenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q210493" start="14194" end="14200" title="Yantai" label="Yantai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982233" start="14259" end="14275" title="Longbridge plant" label="Longbridge plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q138589" start="14300" end="14308" title="Chonburi" label="Chonburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119913" start="14320" end="14328" title="Cikarang" label="Cikarang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707605" start="14345" end="14350" title="Halol" label="Halol"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162669" start="14472" end="14502" title="SAIC Motor UK" label="SAIC Motor UK Technical Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q127220506" start="14857" end="14901" title="Automobile manufacturers and brands of China" label="Automobile manufacturers and brands of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606415" start="14904" end="14945" title="List of automobile manufacturers of China" label="List of automobile manufacturers of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q114465" start="14948" end="14976" title="Automotive industry in China" label="Automotive industry in China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880699" wikidata="Q881176" url="?curid=880699" title="Blair Moody">
<text>Arthur Edson Blair Moody (February 13, 1902 – July 20, 1954), known as Blair Moody, was a journalist and Democratic U.S. Senator from the state of Michigan.

==Background==
Moody was born in New Haven, Connecticut, the son of Arthur Edson Blair Moody and Julia Downey Moody. and attended the public schools in Providence, Rhode Island. He graduated from Brown University with a degree in economics in 1922. Moody attended the University of Michigan; he received his A.B. degree in 1949, and his LL.B. degree in 1952. He was an instructor in history at the Moses Brown School, a preparatory school in Providence, in 1922-23.

A solid athlete, Moody lettered in football, baseball and track at Brown. He also was the heavyweight boxing champion at Brown at one time. He was offered a contract by the professional baseball team the St. Louis Cardinals to pitch, but declined.

==Career==
===Journalist===
Moody moved to Detroit, Michigan and worked from 1923 to 1951 as a reporter covering Washington, D.C., for the &quot;Detroit News&quot;, a newspaper owned by his uncle, William Scripps. He was a correspondent for &quot;Barron&#x27;s Financial Weekly&quot; from 1934 to 1948 and wrote for the North American Newspaper Alliance and the Bell Syndicate.

Moody was a combat war correspondent in 1944, covering the war in Italy, Africa, the United Kingdom, the Middle East, and Iran. He moderated a radio and television program &quot;Meet Your Congress&quot; from 1946 to 1952. He was a foreign correspondent during 1947–1948.

===Government service===
Following the death of U.S. Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg, Moody was appointed by Michigan Governor G. Mennen Williams on April 22, 1951, as a Democrat to the United States Senate. He served from April 23, 1951, to November 4, 1952. Moody was appointed to the Senate Banking and Currency Committee and the Committee on Expenditures in the Executive Departments. In July 1951, he was appointed to chair a subcommittee of Senate Small Business Committee, established to &quot;protect the interests of small business in the defense program.&quot; The committee&#x27;s purview included the perceived problem of steel cutbacks and unemployment in the auto industry. Moody also is remembered for his proposal for presidential debates, an idea that did not take hold until the 1960 Kennedy-Nixon televised debates. An unsuccessful candidate for election in 1952 (to the remainder of the unexpired Senate term), Moody lost to Republican Charles E. Potter in the Dwight D. Eisenhower presidential landslide.

===Later years===
Moody resumed his newspaper and television career as the host and moderator of the &quot;Meet Your Congress&quot; television show.

==Personal life and death ==
Blair Moody&#x27;s father Arthur Blair Moody was the son of Mary Blair Moody.

Moody married his first wife Mary Ann in 1930 and they had a son, Blair Jr. They were divorced in 1940 and Blair Sr. married his second wife, Ruth, in 1941; the marriage lasted until his death in 1954. Blair and Ruth Moody had two sons, Christopher and Robin.

From 1946 until 1954, Blair Moody is reported to have had an affair with Helen Knowland, the wife of his friend Republican Senator William Knowland. William Knowland is said to have later begun an affair with Ruth Moody.

Moody died age 52 on July 20, 1954, in Ann Arbor, Michigan, while campaigning for the Democratic nomination for the other U.S. Senate seat from Michigan, of a heart attack following complications of viral pneumonia.

Blair Moody Jr. was a Wayne County Circuit Court Judge, and a Justice of the Michigan Supreme Court. Christopher S. Moody was founder and President of Moody &amp; Associates, Inc., a nationwide insurance firm. Robert O. (Robin) Moody is the founder and President of Daedalus Books, the oldest independent bargain book wholesaler in America, established in 1980.

==Legacy==
An elementary school in Taylor, Michigan, was named for Senator Blair Moody. The school is in its original location with its original name and continues to educate students. A second elementary school was built adjacent to it in the 1960s.

==Works==
In 1941, Moody authored &quot;Boom or Bust&quot;, a book charting his post-World War II vision for American democracy. His focus was on transitioning to full employment, reducing the national debt, and identifying a strategy for &quot;how the national budget may actually be balanced.&quot;

* &quot;Boom or Bust&quot; (1941)

== See also ==
* Blair Moody Jr.

== References ==
== External links==
* Biographical Dictionary of the United States Congress 
* University of Michigan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q881176" start="0" end="24" title="Blair Moody" label="Arthur Edson Blair Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q881176" start="71" end="82" title="Blair Moody" label="Blair Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="105" end="115" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="116" end="128" title="U.S. Senator" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="138" end="143" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="147" end="155" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="191" end="213" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q18383" start="310" end="334" title="Providence, Rhode Island" label="Providence, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="354" end="370" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="426" end="448" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915727" start="556" end="574" title="Moses Brown School" label="Moses Brown School"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="829" end="848" title="St. Louis Cardinals (baseball)" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="917" end="934" title="Detroit" label="Detroit, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="987" end="1003" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2703792" start="1019" end="1031" title="Detroit News" label="Detroit News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568589" start="1071" end="1086" title="William Edmund Scripps" label="William Scripps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863797" start="1121" end="1151" title="Barron&amp;#x27;s (newspaper)" label="Barron&amp;#x27;s Financial Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053826" start="1194" end="1227" title="North American Newspaper Alliance" label="North American Newspaper Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883265" start="1236" end="1250" title="Bell Syndicate" label="Bell Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1319" end="1324" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1326" end="1332" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1338" end="1352" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="1358" end="1369" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1375" end="1379" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113691" start="1431" end="1449" title="Meet Your Congress" label="Meet Your Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388292" start="1586" end="1606" title="Arthur H. Vandenberg" label="Arthur H. Vandenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q732822" start="1649" end="1667" title="G. Mennen Williams" label="G. Mennen Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="1692" end="1700" title="U.S. Democratic Party" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="1708" end="1728" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064228" start="2478" end="2495" title="Charles E. Potter" label="Charles E. Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="2503" end="2523" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036409" start="2788" end="2804" title="Mary Blair Moody" label="Mary Blair Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915564" start="3199" end="3215" title="William Knowland" label="William Knowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q485172" start="3329" end="3348" title="Ann Arbor, Michigan" label="Ann Arbor, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="3449" end="3461" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="3495" end="3504" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707166" start="3507" end="3522" title="Blair Moody Jr." label="Blair Moody Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q195664" start="3529" end="3541" title="Wayne County, Michigan" label="Wayne County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311907" start="3542" end="3555" title="Circuit Court" label="Circuit Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415342" start="3584" end="3606" title="Michigan Supreme Court" label="Michigan Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208168" start="3773" end="3787" title="Daedalus Books (Ohio)" label="Daedalus Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q988136" start="3905" end="3921" title="Taylor, Michigan" label="Taylor, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707166" start="4476" end="4491" title="Blair Moody Jr." label="Blair Moody Jr."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880702" wikidata="Q739000" url="?curid=880702" title="Geely">
<text>Zhejiang Geely Holding Group Co., Ltd. (ZGH), commonly known as Geely Holding ( ; ), is a Chinese multinational conglomerate headquartered in Hangzhou, Zhejiang. The company is privately owned by Chinese entrepreneur Li Shufu, and mainly engaged in the automotive industry.

Geely was founded in 1986 as a refrigerator parts company, before transitioning to motorcycles in 1994 and entering the automotive industry in 1997. ZGH as a holding company was founded in 2003. , the company ranks 225 in the 2023 &quot;Fortune&quot; Global 500 list of the world&#x27;s largest companies. In 2024, the group produced a total of 3.33 million vehicles globally, including 1.48 million plug-in electric vehicles.

The company manufactures and sells vehicles under the brands of Geely, Lynk &amp; Co and Zeekr brands, which are part of the Geely Auto Group business unit, along with its subsidiaries and joint ventures such as Volvo Cars, Polestar, Proton, Smart and Lotus, as well as commercial vehicles under the London EV Company, Radar Auto / Riddara and Farizon brands. It produces motorcycles under its subsidiaries Zhejiang Geely Ming Industrial (Jiming and Geely), Qianjiang Motorcycle (QJMotor and Keeway), and Benelli. It also holds a 17% stake in Aston Martin and owns half of Horse Powertrain, an engine manufacturing joint venture with Renault.

Geely is a phonetic transliteration of the company&#x27;s native name (), which means &quot;auspicious&quot; or &quot;propitious&quot; in Chinese.

==Overview==
Geely entered the automotive industry in 1997, but only officially received national production license in November 2001. Following a restructuring of Geely, ZGH was established as a holding company largely owned by Li Shufu in March 2003. ZGH acquired the Swedish passenger car maker Volvo Cars from Ford Motor Company in 2010. It completed the acquisition of British taxi maker Manganese Bronze Holdings in 2013 and restructured it into London Electric Vehicle Company. In 2017, ZGH acquired a majority stake in British sports carmaker Lotus Cars in 2017.

ZGH&#x27;s business is divided into five business units: Geely Auto Group which includes the brands Geely Auto, Lynk &amp; Co, and Proton Holdings; Volvo Car Group which includes the brands Volvo Cars and Polestar; Geely New Energy Commercial Vehicle Group which include the brands London Electric Vehicle Company and Yuancheng (Farizon); Geely Group (New Business) which includes the brands Caocao, Terrafugia, Qianjiang Motorcycle, Joma, and other new businesses; and Mitime Group () which includes ZGH educational institutions, motorsports business, and tourism business.

Its global operations span the automotive value chain, from research and development and design to production, sales and service.
== History ==

Geely was established in 1986 in Ningbo, Zhejiang by Li Shufu as a refrigerator parts manufacturer located in Taizhou, Zhejiang. To start the company, Li Shufu had to borrow funds from his family. In 1994, Geely transitioned into the motorcycle industry by acquiring a state-run firm, and started producing China&#x27;s first scooter.

In 1997, Geely completed the construction of relevant factories and initial investment preparations to enter the automobile industry. This made Geely the first private automobile company in China, whereas other carmakers are state-owned enterprises such as Chery. Geely&#x27;s first car, the Geely Haoqing, rolled off the assembly line in Linhai, Zhejiang on 8 August 1998. However, Geely did not obtain its national production license until 9 November 2001, which delayed mass production until 2002. By 2002, the brand was ranked among the top ten in the Chinese automobile market.

In 2002, Geely was restructured from being a family-operated entity to a joint-stock company managed by professional management. On 24 March 2003, Zhejiang Geely Holding Group Co., Ltd. (ZGH) was established with a registered capital of . In January 2004, Li Shufu bought controlling shares in Guorun Holdings Co., Ltd., a company listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange under the trading code 0175HK. In March 2004, Guorun was renamed Geely Automobile Holdings Limited, a company under ZGH, retaining the same trading code. This strategy was seen as Geely&#x27;s &quot;backdoor&quot; entry into the Hong Kong stock market, providing a means to raise funds for the company.

In 2006, Geely bought a 19.97 percent equity stake in British company Manganese Bronze Holdings, the manufacturer of London black cabs. Both companies started a joint venture to produce the black cabs in China, with Geely holding 52 percent and the British company 48 percent. The company has since reduced costs by producing parts in China. In February 2013, ZGH fully acquired Manganese Bronze Holdings for , after the British company entered administration due to lack of funding. ZGH established a new company under its British subsidiary called The London Taxi Corporation, later renamed London Electric Vehicle Company, to resume assembly of the London black cab in Coventry, UK.

In 2009, Geely bought an Australian transmission company Drivetrain Systems International (DSI), at that time the second largest automatic transmission manufacturer for . In 2014, Geely sold 90% of its stake in DSI to multiple other Chinese companies after the company suffered losses.

=== Purchase of Volvo Cars (2008–2010) ===

Following continuing losses in that year, Ford Motor Company offered Volvo Cars for sale in December 2008. On 28 October 2009, Ford confirmed that, after considering several offers, the preferred buyer of Volvo Cars was ZGH. On 23 December 2009, Ford confirmed the terms of the sale to ZGH had been settled. A definitive agreement was signed on 28 March 2010 for . The European Commission and China&#x27;s Ministry of Commerce approved the deal on 6 and 29 July 2010, respectively. The deal closed on 2 August 2010 with Geely paying $1.3 billion cash and a $200 million note.&lt;ref name=&quot;www.ford.com/about-ford/news-announcements&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; At the time of the purchase, is the largest overseas acquisition by a Chinese automaker.

This acquisition facilitated Volvo&#x27;s recovery and brought significant technological and managerial advancements to Geely. Under Geely ownership, Volvo Cars has developed a new line of 3- and 4-cylinder diesel and petrol engines to replace larger engines. It has also developed a new vehicle platform called the Scalable Product Architecture (SPA). Sales reached 500,000 vehicles in 2015 for the first time in the brand&#x27;s history, and continued to over 700,000 in 2023. Both company jointly developed engines and platforms, notably the Compact Modular Architecture platform that is used by Volvo, Geely and Lynk &amp; Co vehicles. Improving technical expertise and a sophisticated production management system led to a significant sales surge for Geely from 2010 onwards.

=== Further acquisitions and brand establishments (2016–present) ===
In October 2016, Geely Auto released its new brand called Lynk &amp; Co in Berlin, Germany, which is intended to bridge the gap between Geely and Volvo brands. The brand was launched with three production models, all based on the Compact Modular Architecture (CMA). In August 2017, ZGH, Geely Automobile Holdings and Volvo Car Group signed an agreement at Geely Auto&#x27;s Hangzhou Bay R&amp;D Center to establish the Lynk &amp; Co joint venture. Geely Auto controls 50% of Lynk &amp; Co, Volvo Cars held 30%, and ZGH held the remaining 20%.

In May 2017, ZGH purchased a 51% controlling-stake in Lotus Cars from its owner, DRB-HICOM, the largest shareholder of Malaysian carmaker Proton Holdings. The remaining 49% were acquired by Etika Automotive, a holding company of Proton&#x27;s major shareholder Syed Mokhtar Albukhary. Proton had owned Lotus since 1996, and largely struggled to turn the fortunes of the sports car maker around. ZGH also purchased a 49.9% stake in Proton Holdings, which was agreed on 23 June 2017 and finalised on 29 September 2017. The purchase was seen to facilitate future export growth in right-hand drive markets, and making inroads into the lucrative ASEAN region. Proton confirmed that it would not downsize its workforce following its deal with Geely.

In July 2017, the company purchased Terrafugia, an American maker of flying cars. In November 2017, ZGH announced completion of the Terrafugia acquisition, including approval from all relevant regulators.

In October 2017, Volvo Cars and ZGH announced that Polestar, a performance and tuning brand owned by Volvo Cars, would become a standalone brand focusing on electric cars. Polestar introduced its first product, the Polestar 1 coupé on 17 October 2017. The car was produced at the Polestar Production Centre in Chengdu, China. Following an initial public offering, Polestar shares began trading on the Nasdaq exchange under the symbol PSNY on 24 June 2022.

In December 2017, ZGH invested €3.25billion into Swedish truck and construction company Volvo Group, a former parent company of Volvo Cars. The deal made ZGH the biggest shareholder by number of shares with an 8.2% stake, and second by voting rights, with 15.6%.

In September 2019, ZGH led a round of private funding for Volocopter that raised $55million for the company. Volocopter&#x27;s other private investors also include Daimler AG which owns a stake in the company.

In late July 2020, it was announced that the Xingma Group had agreed to transfer a 15.2% stake of its shares in the Ma&#x27;anshan-based heavy truck manufacturer Hualing Xingma to Geely New Energy Commercial Vehicle Group, a wholly owned subsidiary of ZGH. After the transaction, Geely New Energy Commercial Vehicle Group would become the &quot;de facto&quot; controlling shareholder of Hualing Xingma.

In February 2020, Volvo Cars and Geely started formal discussions about a proposed merger of both businesses. In the existing arrangement, Volvo Cars has been allowed autonomy with its resources despite being fully owned by ZGH. These merger talks were later halted, and 18% of Volvo Cars shares were listed on the Nasdaq Stockholm stock exchange in October 2021.

InMarch 2021, ZGH launched the Zeekr brand for premium electric vehicles. Its first model, the Zeekr 001 was launched in April 2021, and deliveries began in October 2021. In May 2024, Zeekr filed its initial public offering (IPO) on the New York Stock Exchange. Zeekr raised around , making it the largest IPO of a Chinese company since 2021.

In February 2024, Volvo Cars announced its plan to reduce its stake in Polestar by the third quarter of 2024 from currently 48.3% to around 18% by ceding it to ZGH.

==== Taizhou Declaration and restructuring ====
In September 2024, Li Shufu, the founder of the Geely, announced the &quot;Taizhou Declaration&quot;, a new stage of strategic transformation of ZGH that would promote the integration of internal resources, clarify the positioning of each brand, straighten out equity relationships, reduce conflicts of interest and duplication of investment, and improve resource utilization efficiency. 

In October 2024, as the first step of the strategy, Geely announced to merge all Geely Geometry dealerships into Geely Galaxy dealership network. In November 2024, ZGH transferred its 11.3% stake in Zeekr Intelligent Technology (Zeekr) to Geely Automobile Holdings (Geely Auto). Geely Auto&#x27;s shareholding ratio in Zeekr increased to 62.8%. Meanwhile, Zeekr purchased a 20% stake of Lynk &amp; Co from Geely Auto for 3.6 billion yuan and acquire Volvo Cars 30% stake in Lynk &amp; Co for 5.4 billion yuan. This move made Zeekr hold 51% of Lynk &amp; Co in total, while the remaining 49% of Lynk &amp; Co shares continues to be held by Geely Auto. In addition, the electric pickup brand Radar Auto has been consolidated into Geely Auto.

In January 2025, ZGH announced to consolidate LEVC into Geely Auto.

==== Shareholding and partnerships with Daimler/Mercedes-Benz (2018–present) ====

In 2018, Li Shufu through his investment company Tenaciou3 Prospect Investment Limited purchased a 9.7% stake in Daimler AG (now Mercedes-Benz Group), owner of the Mercedes-Benz and Smart brands. , Li Shufu is the second largest Mercedes-Benz AG shareholder after BAIC Group.

In January 2020, ZGH and Daimler AG announced a 50-50 joint venture to develop and operate the Smart brand as a global electric vehicle brand. The venture, later named Smart Automobile Co., Ltd. is headquartered in Ningbo, Zhejiang. It has a registered capital of , with each company contributing . The new all-electric Smart model from this joint venture was launched globally in 2022 as the Smart #1, previously showcased as the Concept #1 at the 2021 Munich Motor Show. Smart electric vehicles from the partnership are based on the Sustainable Experience Architecture (SEA) electric vehicle platform developed by Geely.

==== Renault partnerships (2021–present) ====
In August 2021, ZGH through its subsidiary Geely Auto formed a strategic partnership with Renault. In January 2022, the two companies signed an agreement by which Renault&#x27;s South Korean subsidiary, Renault Korea Motors, would produce vehicles based on Geely Compact Modular Architecture platform, 

In May 2022, Renault said a Geely subsidiary was set to acquire a 34% stake of Renault Korea Motors through capital increase as part of their partnership, although the company would continue to be majority owned by Renault and a consolidated subsidiary of it.

In November 2022, Renault said it plans to combine its powertrain production and development operations (including internal combustion engines and hybrid systems) with Geely&#x27;s into a joint venture holding company with both as co-owners. The joint venture was officially established in late May 2024 as Horse Powertrain Limited, headquartered in London, United Kingdom.

In February 2024, Renault and Geely announced a framework agreement to expand their strategic collaboration in the production and sale of electric vehicles in Brazil. Under the agreement, Geely Holding Group will invest in Renault do Brasil, acquiring a minority stake in the company. This investment will grant Geely access to localized production, sales, and service resources in Brazil, enhancing its presence in the region.

==== Baidu partnership (2021–present) ====
In January 2021, ZGH announced a deal to create an electric vehicle joint venture together with Baidu, a Chinese multinational technology company specializing in Internet-related services, products, and artificial intelligence (AI). Baidu would develop the electric car&#x27;s software while Geely would manufacture the car. The companies formed Jidu Auto in the same year, combining elements of both company names. Later, in August 2023, they launched the Ji Yue brand, with Geely owning 65% and Baidu 35%. Ji Yue is a subsidiary of Geely Group that was formed to circumvent restrictions on car manufacturing qualifications. Jidu Auto now focuses on technology solutions, including product design and AI development, for Ji Yue vehicles.

== Automotive divisions and products ==
=== Automobile brands ===
==== Geely ====
Geely Auto is Geely Group&#x27;s original and mainstream brand, primarily sold in China and select overseas markets. It has an electric vehicle product line, the Geely Galaxy for premium EV/PHEV.

===== Geely Galaxy =====
Geely Galaxy () is Geely&#x27;s mass-market range of new energy vehicles (plug-in hybrid and battery electric vehicles) that was established in February 2023. In October 2024, the Geely Geometry line has been merged with Geely Galaxy.

===== Radar Auto =====
Radar Auto (), or Riddara outside China, is a battery electric pick-up truck brand owned by ZGH. The brand&#x27;s first vehicle, the Radar RD6, was unveiled in 2022. The brand was consolidated into Geely Auto in November 2024.

=====LEVC=====
London Electric Vehicle Company (LEVC) is a brand owned by ZGH that produces and sells electric black cabs. It adopted its current name in 2017 to reflect its new mission of developing and producing electric commercial vehicles. It was previously known as The London Taxi Company, which has roots from Manganese Bronze Holdings, the original manufacturer of black cabs that Geely acquired in 2013. With a new factory in Ansty Park, near Coventry, it has begun production of a new generation of zero-emission-capable new taxi vehicle in late 2017.

In February 2025, the LEVC has been consolidated into Geely Galaxy.

==== Zeekr ====
Zeekr () is a premium battery electric vehicle brand of ZGH owned by Geely Automobile Holdings. The company is listed on the New York Stock Exchange since May 2024.

The brand was founded in 2021 as an offshoot of Lynk &amp; Co, as its first vehicles were meant to be Lynk &amp; Co models. However after a major shareholding restructuring in 2024, it holds 51% of Lynk &amp; Co currently.

===== Lynk &amp; Co =====
Lynk &amp; Co () was established in 2017 that uses technology developed jointly by Volvo Cars and Geely Auto. Before 2024, It was owned 50% by Geely Auto, 30% by Volvo Cars, and 20% by ZGH. It currently 51% owned by Zeekr and 49% owned by Geely Auto after restructuring.

===== Proton =====
Proton is a national car brand of Malaysia, established in the 1980s at the behest of the government and later reverted to private ownership under DRB-HICOM. Since 2017, the brand is owned 49.9% by ZGH and 50.1% by DRB-HICOM. Its first Geely-based vehicle, also the carmaker&#x27;s first-ever SUV, the Proton X70 was introduced in Malaysia in December 2018. It is based on first-generation Geely Boyue.

In July 2023, after the internal restructuring in Geely Group, the Proton brand was consolidated into the balance sheets of Geely Auto.

==== Volvo Cars ====
Volvo Cars is owned 78.7% by ZGH (post Volvo Cars IPO). ZGH acquired Volvo Cars from Ford Motor Company in 2010.

==== Polestar ====
Polestar is a publicly traded electric car brand established in Sweden under the Volvo Cars Group. Polestar was initially 50.5% owned by ZGH and 49.5% by Volvo Cars.

==== Livan/Maple ====
The Maple brand name originated with Shanghai Maple Automobile, a Geely subsidiary established in 1999 and phased out in 2010. The brand was temporarily revived in 2020 by launching its first EV, the Maple 30X. In 2022, Geely launched the joint venture between Lifan and Maple called Livan (), and the previous Maple products were reconsolidated into Livan.

==== Lotus ====
Lotus Cars is a British carmaker established in 1948 that produces sports and racing cars. It is owned 51% by ZGH since 2017, while the rest is owned by Etika Automotive.

==== Farizon ====
Farizon Auto () was established in 2016 to focus on the development and sales of electric commercial vehicles.

Farizon also has a sub-brand called Ouling () selling gasoline-powered lower end micro trucks.

====Ji Yue / Jidu Auto====

Jidu Auto () is a joint venture between ZGH and Baidu that would be engaged in the production of electric vehicles in different segments starting in 2022. Jidu Auto is owned 55% by Baidu and 45% by Geely.

The Ji Yue () brand was established in August 2023 as the second collaboration between ZGH and Baidu. Ji Yue is 65% owned by ZGH and 35% by Baidu, making it a subsidiary of ZGH. Due to Chinese government policies, Baidu as the controlling company of Jidu, could not obtain the qualification to manufacture cars. Establishing Ji Yue allowed ZGH to be the controlling company, circumventing these restrictions. Jidu Auto has since become a technology solutions company focused on developing AI driving technology for Ji Yue and will no longer operate as an independent car brand. With the launch of the new Ji Yue brand, the previous Jidu Robo-01 was renamed Ji Yue 01, and the Ji Yue brand inherited the logo originally created for Jidu Auto.

====Smart====

In 2020, Mercedes-Benz and ZGH established the Smart brand as a global joint venture, targeting at producing battery electric vehicles in China and selling it globally. In 2022, the joint venture launched its first model Smart #1.

=== Discontinued automobile brands ===

==== Geely Geometry ====

Geely Geometry () is the battery electric vehicle range of Geely-based cars. Previously independent, the Geometry brand that was established in 2019 was consolidated into Geely Auto as an entry-level battery electric product series in March 2023. In October 2024, the brand was merged into Geely Galaxy, becoming a &quot;smart boutique small car series&quot; within Geely Galaxy.

==== Emgrand ====

Emgrand () was launched in 2009 as a medium- to high-end luxury brand. In 2014, Emgrand ceased to be a standalone brand, and Emgrand became a sub-brand of Geely, which itself adopted an updated version of the Emgrand logo.

==== Englon ====
Englon () was launched in 2010 to replace the Shanghai Maple brand. Geely claimed Englon emulated classic, British styled cars. Some of its cars were built by Geely subsidiary Shanghai LTI. As Geely fully acquired The London Taxi Company in 2013, the emblem of Englon also became the new logo of The London Taxi Company.
==== Gleagle ====

Gleagle () was Geely&#x27;s entry-level brand sold between 2010 and 2015. Some Gleagle cars, such as the Gleagle Panda, were available for sale on the internet in China via the Taobao Mall, a popular e-commerce site. While Geely would deliver the car to the customer&#x27;s address, buying one of the Panda models on offer did necessitate a trip to a traditional dealer. This sub-brand was discontinued in 2015. Most Gleagle products continued to be sold directly under the Geely brand.
==== Zhidou ====

Zhidou () Zhidou Auto or ZD Auto brand specialized in microcars. The brand was discontinued since 2021.

=== Motorcycle brands ===

==== Qianjiang Motorcycle ====

Qianjiang Motorcycle is one of the largest manufacturers of two-wheeled vehicles in China. Since September 2016, the majority shareholding (29.8%) of the company has been controlled by the Geely Group. The vehicles are sold under four brands: QJiang, QJMotor, Benelli, Keeway Motors and KSR Moto.

==== Benelli ====
Benelli is a subsidiary that produces motorcycles and scooters. Design, development and marketing activities are carried out at the Benelli QJ headquarters in Pesaro, Italy, with production occurring in Wenling, China, for sale globally.

==== Geely Ming Industrial/Jiming====

Zhejiang Geely Ming Industrial Co., Ltd., common known as Geely Ming, or GM Motor, is a motorcycle manufacturer subsidiary founded in 1995 with registered office in Zhejiang province. 
The vehicles are sold under two brands: Jiming and Geely Motorcycle.

== International investments and holdings ==
Mercedes-Benz Group (9.69% stake)

* Li Shufu, the founder and chairman of Geely, acquired a 9.69% stake of Mercedes-Benz Group in February 2018, making it the company&#x27;s largest single shareholder.

Aston Martin (17% stake) 

* In September 2022, Geely acquired a 7.6% stake in Aston Martin Lagonda.
* In May 2023, Geely increased its stake to 17%, becoming the third-largest shareholder after the Yew Tree consortium and the Saudi Arabia Public Investment Fund.

Volvo Group (6.8% stake) 

* In 2017, Geely acquired an 8.2% stake of Volvo AB, which is also about 15% of votes.
* In January 2024, Geely announced to reduce its holdings in Volvo Group by 685 million USD. The stake has been lowered from 8.2% to 6.8%. Despite the reduction, Geely remains the second-largest shareholder in Volvo Group.

Renault Korea (34.02% stake)

* In 2022, Geely invested over US$200 million to acquire a 34.02% stake in a joint venture in South Korea between Renault and the Samsung Group. The company plans to produce vehicles based on the Geely&#x27;s Compact Modular Architecture platform, initially intended for the Korean domestic market.

Horse (45% stake) 

* A joint venture between Renault and Geely, it is set to manufacture internal combustion engined (ICE) and hybrid powertrains for Renault, Nissan and Mitsubishi vehicles with Geely&#x27;s technology.
Drivetrain Systems International (divested)

* In 2009, Geely bought Drivetrain Systems International Pty Ltd, a global transmission developer headquartered in Australia.
* In 2015, Geely sold DSI to a Chinese investment company Shuanglin, which continue to manufacture the DSI designed products in Xiangtan, Jining and Ninghai.

== Non-automotive businesses ==

=== Geely Technology Group ===

* Caocao Chuxing  () – Caocao Chuxing is a ride-hailing service that was developed by Hangzhou Youxing Technology Company and majority owned by ZGH. It is the first Chinese new energy-focused mobility service.
* Terrafugia – Terrafugia was founded in 2006 targeting at roadable aircraft. The company was acquired in full by ZGH in 2017.
* Zhejiang Qianjiang Motorcycle Group Co – Qianjiang Motorcycle () was majority acquired by ZGH in 2016. The company is one of the largest producers of motorcycles in China and owns several renowned brands including Italy&#x27;s Benelli. It is also known for its lithium battery technology.
* Geespace plans to create a network of low earth orbit satellites that will send precise positioning information to self-driving cars.

=== Mitime Group ===
Mitime Group was established in 2004 and is affiliated to ZGH. It focuses on investment and operation management of higher education, sports, cultural tourism and other businesses. The group consists of three departments: Mitime Speedpark, Mitime Sports and Mitime Cultural Tourism.

* Mitime Speedpark – Investment and development of motor speedparks around the world. They have already constructed multiple race circuits in China and abroad and currently operate tracks in Ningbo, Chengdu, and North America.
* Mitime Motorsports – Mitime constructs and operates race tracks for automobiles, motorcycles, and karts around the world. Mitime also organizes motorsport events such as China F4 Championship.
* Mitime Tourism – Mitime facilitates tourism and manages hospitality services around its tracks.

=== Meizu ===
In June 2022, Geely acquired a majority stake of Meizu, a Chinese consumer electronics manufacturer based in Zhuhai, Guangdong.

=== Geely Talent Development Group ===

Previously known as Mitime Education, a subsidiary of Mitime Group, the Geely Talent Development Group is the education branch of Geely to cultivate talents for the automotive industry. Geely has established 9 higher education institutions and more than 10,000 student graduate from Geely&#x27;s schools each year.
* Geely University – a private university located in Chengdu
* University of Sanya – a private university located in Hainan

* Beijing Geely University – a private university located in Beijing
* Xiangtan Institute of Technology
* Zhejiang Automobile Vocational and Technical College
* Hunan Geely Automobile Vocations and Technical College

== Technologies ==

=== Vehicle platforms ===
Many of Geely&#x27;s subsidiaries produce vehicles using shared architectures. Some examples include:
*Volvo Scalable Product Architecture platform (SPA) - 2014–present
*Compact Modular Architecture platform (CMA) - 2017–present
*B-segment Modular Architecture platform (BMA) - 2018–present
*Sustainable Experience Architecture platform (SEA) - 2021–present
*Space Oriented Architecture (SOA) - 2024–present

== Sales ==
===Figures===

== Other activities ==
In 2015, the manufacturer announced that it would invest $45.5 million over three years in the Icelandic company Carbon Recycling International to &quot;collaborate on the deployment of renewable methanol fuel production technologies and vehicles running 100% on methanol in China, Iceland, and other countries&quot;.

==See also==

* Automobile manufacturers and brands of China
* List of automobile manufacturers of China
* Automotive industry in China

==References==

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q739000" start="0" end="44" title="Geely" label="Zhejiang Geely Holding Group Co., Ltd. (ZGH)"/>
<link wikidata="Q739000" start="64" end="77" title="Geely" label="Geely Holding"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="98" end="111" title="Multinational Corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q778575" start="112" end="124" title="Conglomerate (company)" label="conglomerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="142" end="160" title="Hangzhou, Zhejiang" label="Hangzhou, Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589009" start="177" end="192" title="Privately held company" label="privately owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q717785" start="217" end="225" title="Li Shufu" label="Li Shufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="253" end="272" title="automotive industry" label="automotive industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37828" start="306" end="318" title="refrigerator" label="refrigerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="358" end="369" title="motorcycles" label="motorcycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q621102" start="506" end="536" title="Fortune Global 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; Global 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205234" start="675" end="700" title="plug-in electric vehicles" label="plug-in electric vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q27555283" start="774" end="787" title="Lynk &amp;amp; Co" label="Lynk &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q106621124" start="792" end="797" title="Zeekr" label="Zeekr"/>
<link wikidata="Q55118127" start="828" end="844" title="Geely Auto" label="Geely Auto Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="892" end="906" title="Joint venture" label="joint ventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q215293" start="915" end="925" title="Volvo Cars" label="Volvo Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047174" start="927" end="935" title="Polestar" label="Polestar"/>
<link wikidata="Q827306" start="937" end="943" title="Proton Holdings" label="Proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q156490" start="945" end="950" title="Smart (marque)" label="Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q35935" start="955" end="960" title="Lotus Cars" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47036698" start="1003" end="1020" title="London EV Company" label="London EV Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q125586705" start="1022" end="1042" title="Radar Auto" label="Radar Auto / Riddara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1047" end="1054" title="#Farizon" label="Farizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q113949844" start="1110" end="1140" title="Geely Ming Industrial" label="Zhejiang Geely Ming Industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121562" start="1161" end="1181" title="Qianjiang Motorcycle" label="Qianjiang Motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q817107" start="1208" end="1215" title="Benelli (motorcycles)" label="Benelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074" start="1246" end="1258" title="Aston Martin" label="Aston Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802742" start="1276" end="1292" title="Horse Powertrain" label="Horse Powertrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="1337" end="1344" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="1367" end="1382" title="transliteration" label="transliteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="1485" end="1492" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q215293" start="1793" end="1803" title="Volvo Cars" label="Volvo Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="1809" end="1827" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q54621302" start="1888" end="1913" title="Manganese Bronze Holdings" label="Manganese Bronze Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q47036698" start="1947" end="1978" title="London Electric Vehicle Company" label="London Electric Vehicle Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q35935" start="2046" end="2056" title="Lotus Cars" label="Lotus Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q55118127" start="2124" end="2140" title="Geely Auto" label="Geely Auto Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q827306" start="2198" end="2213" title="Proton Holdings" label="Proton Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047174" start="2272" end="2280" title="Polestar" label="Polestar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703217" start="2467" end="2477" title="Terrafugia" label="Terrafugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121562" start="2479" end="2499" title="Qianjiang Motorcycle" label="Qianjiang Motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051799" start="2501" end="2505" title="Joma" label="Joma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="2598" end="2609" title="motorsports" label="motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q646107" start="2685" end="2696" title="value chain" label="value chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="2703" end="2727" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q42780" start="2821" end="2837" title="Ningbo, Zhejiang" label="Ningbo, Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q717785" start="2841" end="2849" title="Li Shufu" label="Li Shufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q58273" start="2898" end="2915" title="Taizhou, Zhejiang" label="Taizhou, Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="3022" end="3032" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598268" start="3057" end="3071" title="State-owned enterprises of China" label="state-run firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q193234" start="3114" end="3121" title="Scooter (motorcycle)" label="scooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="3349" end="3360" title="state-owned" label="state-owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q591001" start="3381" end="3386" title="Chery" label="Chery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529881" start="3416" end="3429" title="Geely Haoqing" label="Geely Haoqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q713317" start="3463" end="3479" title="Linhai, Zhejiang" label="Linhai, Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q134161" start="3781" end="3800" title="joint-stock company" label="joint-stock company"/>
<link wikidata="Q496672" start="4053" end="4077" title="Hong Kong Stock Exchange" label="Hong Kong Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q55118127" start="4143" end="4176" title="Geely Auto" label="Geely Automobile Holdings Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q54621302" start="4452" end="4477" title="Manganese Bronze Holdings" label="Manganese Bronze Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273735" start="4506" end="4516" title="black cabs" label="black cabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q759652" start="4827" end="4841" title="Administration (law)" label="administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q47036698" start="4975" end="5006" title="London Electric Vehicle Company" label="London Electric Vehicle Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="5054" end="5062" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308036" start="5126" end="5158" title="Drivetrain Systems International" label="Drivetrain Systems International"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="5198" end="5220" title="automatic transmission" label="automatic transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="5442" end="5460" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q215293" start="5469" end="5479" title="Volvo Cars" label="Volvo Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="5769" end="5788" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064994" start="5806" end="5826" title="Ministry of Commerce of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministry of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q632300" start="6437" end="6453" title="Car platform" label="vehicle platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q18395753" start="6465" end="6500" title="Volvo Scalable Product Architecture platform" label="Scalable Product Architecture (SPA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632052" start="6694" end="6722" title="Compact Modular Architecture platform" label="Compact Modular Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q27555283" start="7058" end="7071" title="Lynk &amp;amp; Co" label="Lynk &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="7075" end="7081" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632052" start="7230" end="7258" title="Compact Modular Architecture platform" label="Compact Modular Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q700024" start="7374" end="7386" title="Hangzhou Bay" label="Hangzhou Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q35935" start="7598" end="7608" title="Lotus Cars" label="Lotus Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155372" start="7625" end="7634" title="DRB-HICOM" label="DRB-HICOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q827306" start="7682" end="7697" title="Proton Holdings" label="Proton Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660399" start="7805" end="7827" title="Syed Mokhtar Albukhary" label="Syed Mokhtar Albukhary"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="8121" end="8137" title="Left- and right-hand traffic" label="right-hand drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="8185" end="8190" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703217" start="8325" end="8335" title="Terrafugia" label="Terrafugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423125" start="8358" end="8369" title="Roadable aircraft" label="flying cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047174" start="8546" end="8554" title="Polestar" label="Polestar"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100305" start="8710" end="8720" title="Polestar 1" label="Polestar 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="8805" end="8812" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="8834" end="8857" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q82059" start="8896" end="8902" title="Nasdaq" label="Nasdaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q163810" start="9040" end="9051" title="Volvo" label="Volvo Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q215293" start="9080" end="9090" title="Volvo Cars" label="Volvo Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321557" start="9274" end="9284" title="Volocopter" label="Volocopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q360235" start="9543" end="9557" title="Ma&amp;#x27;anshan" label="Ma&amp;#x27;anshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16831878" start="9589" end="9603" title="Hualing Xingma" label="Hualing Xingma"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="9914" end="9920" title="Mergers and acquisitions" label="merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019992" start="10146" end="10162" title="Nasdaq Stockholm" label="Nasdaq Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q106621124" start="10227" end="10232" title="Zeekr" label="Zeekr"/>
<link wikidata="Q106553049" start="10291" end="10300" title="Zeekr 001" label="Zeekr 001"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="10396" end="10419" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="10433" end="10456" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q55118127" start="11410" end="11420" title="Geely Auto" label="Geely Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q27555283" start="11531" end="11544" title="Lynk &amp;amp; Co" label="Lynk &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q55118127" start="11550" end="11560" title="Geely Auto" label="Geely Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q215293" start="11594" end="11604" title="Volvo Cars" label="Volvo Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q27555283" start="11618" end="11631" title="Lynk &amp;amp; Co" label="Lynk &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q125586705" start="11834" end="11844" title="Radar Auto" label="Radar Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q55118127" start="11872" end="11882" title="Geely Auto" label="Geely Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q47036698" start="11931" end="11935" title="London EV Company" label="LEVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q55118127" start="11941" end="11951" title="Geely Auto" label="Geely Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="12166" end="12185" title="Mercedes-Benz Group" label="Mercedes-Benz Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="12201" end="12214" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q156490" start="12219" end="12224" title="Smart (marque)" label="Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q814712" start="12301" end="12311" title="BAIC Group" label="BAIC Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q42780" start="12529" end="12545" title="Ningbo, Zhejiang" label="Ningbo, Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q110916004" start="12707" end="12715" title="Smart 1" label="Smart #1"/>
<link wikidata="Q110916004" start="12745" end="12755" title="Smart Concept 1" label="Concept #1"/>
<link wikidata="Q105846623" start="12849" end="12884" title="Sustainable Experience Architecture platform" label="Sustainable Experience Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q105560157" start="12891" end="12916" title="Skateboard (automotive platform)" label="electric vehicle platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621850" start="13047" end="13068" title="strategic partnership" label="strategic partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="13074" end="13081" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q494168" start="13187" end="13207" title="Renault Korea Motors" label="Renault Korea Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632052" start="13247" end="13284" title="Compact Modular Architecture platform" label="Compact Modular Architecture platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q494168" start="13367" end="13387" title="Renault Korea Motors" label="Renault Korea Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802742" start="13856" end="13880" title="Horse Powertrain" label="Horse Powertrain Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="13899" end="13905" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312751" start="14147" end="14164" title="Renault do Brasil" label="Renault do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q14772" start="14492" end="14497" title="Baidu" label="Baidu"/>
<link wikidata="Q115922174" start="14742" end="14751" title="Jidu Auto" label="Jidu Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783577" start="15380" end="15392" title="Geely Galaxy" label="Geely Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205234" start="15493" end="15512" title="new energy vehicles" label="new energy vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483388" start="15514" end="15528" title="plug-in hybrid" label="plug-in hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064934" start="15620" end="15634" title="Geely Geometry" label="Geely Geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q113714605" start="15832" end="15841" title="Radar RD6" label="Radar RD6"/>
<link wikidata="Q55118127" start="15897" end="15907" title="Geely Auto" label="Geely Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q47036698" start="15942" end="15973" title="London Electric Vehicle Company" label="London Electric Vehicle Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273735" start="16038" end="16048" title="black cabs" label="black cabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q54621302" start="16244" end="16269" title="Manganese Bronze Holdings" label="Manganese Bronze Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167595" start="16362" end="16372" title="Ansty Park" label="Ansty Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q846292" start="16436" end="16449" title="zero emission" label="zero-emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q47036698" start="16512" end="16516" title="London EV Company" label="LEVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783577" start="16544" end="16556" title="Geely Galaxy" label="Geely Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="16700" end="16723" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q27555283" start="16789" end="16802" title="Lynk &amp;amp; Co" label="Lynk &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155372" start="17429" end="17438" title="DRB-HICOM" label="DRB-HICOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q85794790" start="17584" end="17594" title="Proton X70" label="Proton X70"/>
<link wikidata="Q50135075" start="17672" end="17683" title="Geely Boyue" label="Geely Boyue"/>
<link wikidata="Q55118127" start="17810" end="17820" title="Geely Auto" label="Geely Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q391431" start="18203" end="18228" title="Shanghai Maple Automobile" label="Shanghai Maple Automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q55393395" start="18366" end="18375" title="Maple 30X" label="Maple 30X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465351" start="18427" end="18432" title="Lifan Group" label="Lifan"/>
<link wikidata="Q117825250" start="18450" end="18455" title="Livan Automotive" label="Livan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207958" start="18879" end="18885" title="Tangjun Ou Ling" label="Ouling"/>
<link wikidata="Q14772" start="19015" end="19020" title="Baidu" label="Baidu"/>
<link wikidata="Q156490" start="19978" end="19983" title="Smart (marque)" label="Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q110916004" start="20152" end="20161" title="Smart 1" label="Smart #1."/>
<link wikidata="Q949715" start="20677" end="20685" title="high-end" label="high-end"/>
<link wikidata="Q391431" start="20916" end="20930" title="Shanghai Maple" label="Shanghai Maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q183040" start="21084" end="21107" title="The London Taxi Company" label="The London Taxi Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529884" start="21315" end="21328" title="Geely LC" label="Gleagle Panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117484" start="21387" end="21398" title="Taobao" label="Taobao Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q484847" start="21410" end="21420" title="e-commerce" label="e-commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q360369" start="21769" end="21777" title="microcar" label="microcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q817107" start="22139" end="22146" title="Benelli (motorcycles)" label="Benelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q13134" start="22354" end="22360" title="Pesaro" label="Pesaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q524250" start="22398" end="22405" title="Wenling" label="Wenling"/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="22773" end="22792" title="Mercedes-Benz Group" label="Mercedes-Benz Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q717785" start="22810" end="22818" title="Li Shufu" label="Li Shufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074" start="22977" end="22989" title="Aston Martin" label="Aston Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12220298" start="23204" end="23239" title="Saudi Arabia Public Investment Fund" label="Saudi Arabia Public Investment Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q163810" start="23242" end="23253" title="Volvo" label="Volvo Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q494168" start="23580" end="23593" title="Renault Korea" label="Renault Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="23740" end="23753" title="Samsung Group" label="Samsung Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632052" start="23819" end="23856" title="Compact Modular Architecture platform" label="Compact Modular Architecture platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802742" start="23910" end="23915" title="Horse (company)" label="Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="23934" end="23947" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="23956" end="23963" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="24000" end="24026" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q609111" start="24045" end="24055" title="powertrain" label="powertrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308036" start="24131" end="24163" title="Drivetrain Systems International" label="Drivetrain Systems International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308036" start="24200" end="24232" title="Drivetrain Systems International" label="Drivetrain Systems International"/>
<link wikidata="Q215755" start="24430" end="24438" title="Xiangtan" label="Xiangtan"/>
<link wikidata="Q372791" start="24440" end="24446" title="Jining" label="Jining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334251" start="24451" end="24458" title="Ninghai" label="Ninghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205234" start="24699" end="24709" title="Plug-in electric vehicle" label="new energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703217" start="24751" end="24761" title="Terrafugia" label="Terrafugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121562" start="24906" end="24926" title="Qianjiang Motorcycle" label="Qianjiang Motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q817107" start="25092" end="25099" title="Benelli (motorcycles)" label="Benelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q59095" start="26240" end="26246" title="Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="26248" end="26257" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="26668" end="26675" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259561" start="26678" end="26697" title="University of Sanya" label="University of Sanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="26732" end="26738" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="26801" end="26808" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18395753" start="27106" end="27150" title="Volvo Scalable Product Architecture platform" label="Volvo Scalable Product Architecture platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632052" start="27173" end="27210" title="Compact Modular Architecture platform" label="Compact Modular Architecture platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q105686275" start="27233" end="27272" title="B-segment Modular Architecture platform" label="B-segment Modular Architecture platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q105846623" start="27295" end="27339" title="Sustainable Experience Architecture platform" label="Sustainable Experience Architecture platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="27557" end="27566" title="Iceland" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037929" start="27575" end="27605" title="Carbon Recycling International" label="Carbon Recycling International"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="27725" end="27733" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q127220506" start="27797" end="27841" title="Automobile manufacturers and brands of China" label="Automobile manufacturers and brands of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606415" start="27844" end="27885" title="List of automobile manufacturers of China" label="List of automobile manufacturers of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q114465" start="27888" end="27916" title="Automotive industry in China" label="Automotive industry in China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880710" wikidata="Q1050230" url="?curid=880710" title="Maximum modulus principle">
<text>In mathematics, the maximum modulus principle in complex analysis states that if formula_1 is a holomorphic function, then the modulus 
formula_2 cannot exhibit a strict maximum that is strictly within the domain of formula_1. 

In other words, either formula_1 is locally a constant function, or, for any point formula_5 inside the domain of formula_1 there exist other points arbitrarily close to formula_5 at which formula_2 takes larger values.

==Formal statement==
Let formula_1 be a holomorphic function on some connected open subset formula_10 of the complex plane formula_11 and taking complex values. If formula_5 is a point in formula_10 such that 
:formula_14 
for all formula_15 in some neighborhood of formula_5, then formula_1 is constant on formula_10.

This statement can be viewed as a special case of the open mapping theorem, which states that a nonconstant holomorphic function maps open sets to open sets: If formula_2 attains a local maximum at formula_15, then the image of a sufficiently small open neighborhood of formula_15 cannot be open, so formula_1 is constant.

===Related statement===

Suppose that formula_10 is a bounded nonempty connected open subset of formula_11.
Let formula_25 be the closure of formula_10.
Suppose that formula_27 is a continuous function that is holomorphic on formula_10.
Then formula_29 attains a maximum at some point of the boundary of formula_10.

This follows from the first version as follows. Since formula_25 is compact and nonempty, the continuous function formula_29 attains a maximum at some point formula_5 of formula_25. If formula_5 is not on the boundary, then the maximum modulus principle implies that formula_1 is constant, so formula_29 also attains the same maximum at any point of the boundary.

===Minimum modulus principle===

For a holomorphic function formula_1 on a connected open set formula_10 of formula_11, if formula_5 is a point in formula_10 such that
:formula_43
for all formula_15 in some neighborhood of formula_5, then formula_1 is constant on formula_10.

Proof: Apply the maximum modulus principle to formula_48.

==Sketches of proofs==

===Using the maximum principle for harmonic functions===
One can use the equality

:formula_49

for complex natural logarithms to deduce that formula_50 is a harmonic function. Since formula_5 is a local maximum for this function also, it follows from the maximum principle that formula_52 is constant. Then, using the Cauchy–Riemann equations we show that formula_53 = 0, and thus that formula_54 is constant as well. Similar reasoning shows that formula_55 can only have a local minimum (which necessarily has value 0) at an isolated zero of formula_54.

===Using Gauss&#x27;s mean value theorem===
Another proof works by using Gauss&#x27;s mean value theorem to &quot;force&quot; all points within overlapping open disks to assume the same value as the maximum. The disks are laid such that their centers form a polygonal path from the value where formula_54 is maximized to any other point in the domain, while being totally contained within the domain. Thus the existence of a maximum value implies that all the values in the domain are the same, thus formula_54 is constant.

===Using Cauchy&#x27;s Integral Formula===
As formula_10 is open, there exists formula_60 (a closed ball centered at formula_61 with radius formula_62) such that formula_63. We then define the boundary of the closed ball with positive orientation as formula_64. Invoking Cauchy&#x27;s integral formula, we obtain

:formula_65

For all formula_66, formula_67, so formula_68. This also holds for all balls of radius less than formula_69 centered at formula_70. Therefore, formula_71 for all formula_72.

Now consider the constant function formula_73 for all formula_74. Then one can construct a sequence of distinct points located in formula_60 where the holomorphic function formula_76 vanishes. As formula_60 is closed, the sequence converges to some point in formula_78. This means formula_79 vanishes everywhere in formula_10 which implies formula_71 for all formula_74.

==Physical interpretation==

A physical interpretation of this principle comes from the heat equation. That is, since formula_83 is harmonic, it is thus the steady state of a heat flow on the region formula_10. Suppose a strict maximum was attained on the interior of formula_10, the heat at this maximum would be dispersing to the points around it, which would contradict the assumption that this represents the steady state of a system.

== Applications ==
The maximum modulus principle has many uses in complex analysis, and may be used to prove the following:
* The fundamental theorem of algebra.
* Schwarz&#x27;s lemma, a result which in turn has many generalisations and applications in complex analysis.
* The Phragmén–Lindelöf principle, an extension to unbounded domains.
* The Borel–Carathéodory theorem, which bounds an analytic function in terms of its real part.
* The Hadamard three-lines theorem, a result about the behaviour of bounded holomorphic functions on a line between two other parallel lines in the complex plane.

==References==

* &quot;(See chapter 5.)&quot;
* Conway, John B. (1978). Axler, S.; Gehring, F.W.; Ribet, K.A. (eds.). Functions of One Complex Variable I (2 ed.). New York: Springer Science+Business Media, Inc. ISBN 978-1-4612-6314-2.

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050230" start="20" end="45" title="Maximum modulus principle" label="maximum modulus principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193756" start="49" end="65" title="complex analysis" label="complex analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207476" start="96" end="116" title="holomorphic function" label="holomorphic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="127" end="134" title="absolute value" label="modulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q845060" start="170" end="177" title="maximum" label="maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q192439" start="206" end="212" title="domain of a function" label="domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q746264" start="275" end="292" title="constant function" label="constant function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="519" end="528" title="connected set" label="connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="529" end="533" title="open set" label="open"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="534" end="540" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="559" end="572" title="complex plane" label="complex plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478475" start="700" end="712" title="neighborhood (topology)" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q967972" start="824" end="844" title="open mapping theorem (complex analysis)" label="open mapping theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="1479" end="1486" title="compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478475" start="1983" end="1995" title="neighborhood (topology)" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q204037" start="2244" end="2261" title="natural logarithm" label="natural logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q599027" start="2294" end="2311" title="harmonic function" label="harmonic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914255" start="2392" end="2409" title="maximum principle" label="maximum principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q622741" start="2455" end="2479" title="Cauchy–Riemann equations" label="Cauchy–Riemann equations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2766" end="2797" title="Cauchy&amp;#x27;s integral formula#Consequences" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s mean value theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510488" start="4180" end="4193" title="heat equation" label="heat equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192760" start="4662" end="4692" title="fundamental theorem of algebra" label="fundamental theorem of algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341771" start="4696" end="4716" title="Schwarz&amp;#x27;s lemma" label="Schwarz&amp;#x27;s lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378868" start="4810" end="4837" title="Phragmén–Lindelöf principle" label="Phragmén–Lindelöf principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229335" start="4880" end="4906" title="Borel–Carathéodory theorem" label="Borel–Carathéodory theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527250" start="4975" end="5003" title="Hadamard three-lines theorem" label="Hadamard three-lines theorem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880711" wikidata="Q7488453" url="?curid=880711" title="SAIC-GM">
<text>SAIC General Motors Corporation Limited (commonly known as SAIC-GM; ) is a joint venture between General Motors Company and SAIC Motor. The company was founded in 1997 as Shanghai General Motors Company Ltd or Shanghai GM (). Headquartered in Shanghai, the company manufactures and sells Chevrolet, Buick, and Cadillac brand automobiles in mainland China, and exports its cars to several overseas markets.

== History ==
SAIC-GM was founded on June 12, 1997, with 50% investment each from each partner. SAIC-GM began assembling the venture&#x27;s first vehicle, the Buick Regal, in Shanghai, China in April 1999. This later followed with the Chinese-built Buick GL8 minivan which was a Chinese-exclusive vehicle and was not offered in the United States and Canada.

By 2003, China became the second largest single market for General Motors, selling 201,188 vehicles, an 81.6% percent increase over the previous year. In that year SAIC-GM achieved a 13% market share in mainland China, second only to Volkswagen Group China among foreign carmakers. Sales dropped in 2004 when the company retired the Buick Sail and the release of its replacement, the Chevrolet Sail, was delayed to February 2005, knocking General Motors Shanghai to seventh place in mainland China market share. SAIC-GM market share climbed back to nearly 9.8 percent, placing SAIC-GM among the top three passenger car manufacturers in mainland China.

In June 2004, the Cadillac brand was introduced to China followed by Chevrolet in January 2005.

In May 2005 SAIC-GM completed construction of a new assembly plant, the South Plant, at its facility in eastern Shanghai&#x27;s Pudong district, more than doubling its annual production capacity to 320,000 vehicles.

SAIC-GM was the top passenger vehicle producer in China in 2006, with sales of 413,400 vehicles. In 2011, SAIC-GM sold 1,200,355 vehicles in the Chinese market. SAIC-GM is the largest joint venture GM has in China.

In February 2010, SAIC acquired an additional 1 percent stake in the joint venture for US$85 million and assistance in securing a US$400 million line of credit to boost SAIC&#x27;s total share of SAIC-GM to 51%. In April 2012, GM regained 50% control of the joint venture.

== Exports ==
In September 2006, General Motors launched the Chevrolet Corsa Plus in Chile built by SAIC-GM, an export version of the first-generation Chevrolet Sail which in turn is a version of the 4-door Opel Corsa with a 1.6-liter engine. It is the first export market to receive a vehicle manufactured by SAIC-GM.

In 2010, SAIC-GM started exporting the second-generation Chevrolet Sail to Latin American markets, starting with Chile. The third-generation Sail or Aveo, also built by SAIC-GM, was exported to Mexico and the Caribbean since 2017 until 2023, when SAIC-GM-Wuling took over the development and production of the Sail/Aveo.

In 2016, General Motors started importing the Buick Envision into the US from China. The Envision is built by SAIC-GM at its Dongyue Motors plant. Buick expected to sell 40,000 to 50,000 units of the Envision annually in North America.

Since 2020, SAIC-GM also exports the Chevrolet Equinox to Uzbekistan. SAIC-GM also assisted UzAuto Motors, the largest Uzbek automaker formerly known as GM Uzbekistan to produce Chevrolet vehicles such as the Onix.

== Facilities ==
== Related businesses ==
SAIC and GM also operated other joint ventures, including:

* Pan Asia Technical Automotive Center Co., Ltd. (PATAC), an engineering services and research and development (R&amp;D) operations centered in China
* Shanghai OnStar Telematics Co., Ltd., the operator of OnStar services in China
* SAIC General Motors Sales Co., Ltd., a national sales company. GM China has a 49 percent stake and SAIC a 51 percent stake.
* SAIC-GMAC Automotive Finance Co., Ltd. (SAIC-GMAC), a financing arm
* Shanghai Chengxin Used Car Operation and Management Co., Ltd., a joint venture established by GM China, SAIC-GM and SAIC subsidiary Shanghai Automotive Industry Sales Co. Ltd.
* SAIC-GM-Wuling, a separate manufacturing and sales joint venture using Wuling and Baojun brands

==Current models==
===Buick===

*Electra E4
*Electra E5
*Enclave
*Encore Plus
*Envista
*Envision S
*GL8
*GL8 Century
*LaCrosse
*Regal
*Velite 6
*Verano


===Cadillac===

*CT4
*CT5
*CT6
*GT4
*Lyriq
*Optiq
*XT4
*XT5
*XT6


===Chevrolet===

*Blazer
*Colorado
*Equinox
*Equinox EV
*Malibu XL
*Menlo
*Monza
*Onix
*Seeker
*Silverado
*Tracker
*Trailblazer


== Former models ==
===Buick===

*Enclave
*Excelle XT
*Encore
*Excelle
*Excelle GT
*Excelle GX
*Envision
*GL6
*New Century
*Park Avenue
*Roadmaster 
*Royaum
*Regal GS
*Velite 5
*Velite 7
*Verano Hatch/GS


===Cadillac===

*ATS
*ATS-L
*CTS
*Escalade
*Fleetwood Brougham 
*Fleetwood
*SLS
*SRX
*XLR
*XTS


===Chevrolet===

*Aveo
*Camaro RS
*Caprice Classic
*Captiva
*Cavalier
*Corsica
*Corvette (C4)
*Corvette (C6)
*Corvette (C7)
*Cruze
*Epica
*Epica II
*Lova
*Lova RV
*Lumina APV
*Malibu
*Orlando
*Sail
*Spark
*Trax


== Sales ==
==See also==
* SAIC-GM-Wuling

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7488453" start="0" end="39" title="SAIC-GM" label="SAIC General Motors Corporation Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488453" start="59" end="66" title="SAIC-GM" label="SAIC-GM"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="97" end="119" title="General Motors" label="General Motors Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q910401" start="124" end="134" title="SAIC Motor" label="SAIC Motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488453" start="171" end="206" title="SAIC-GM" label="Shanghai General Motors Company Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488453" start="210" end="221" title="SAIC-GM" label="Shanghai GM"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="243" end="251" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="288" end="297" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q27415" start="299" end="304" title="Buick" label="Buick"/>
<link wikidata="Q27436" start="310" end="318" title="Cadillac (automobile)" label="Cadillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="340" end="354" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002872" start="566" end="577" title="Buick Regal" label="Buick Regal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002754" start="656" end="665" title="Buick GL8" label="Buick GL8"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031926" start="1000" end="1022" title="Volkswagen Group China" label="Volkswagen Group China"/>
<link wikidata="Q610395" start="1099" end="1109" title="Buick Sail" label="Buick Sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q610395" start="1150" end="1164" title="Chevrolet Sail" label="Chevrolet Sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q376916" start="2284" end="2304" title="Chevrolet Corsa" label="Chevrolet Corsa Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="2308" end="2313" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q376916" start="2430" end="2440" title="Opel Corsa" label="Opel Corsa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2582" end="2614" title="Chevrolet Sail#Second generation (2010)" label="second-generation Chevrolet Sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082637" start="2790" end="2804" title="SAIC-GM-Wuling" label="SAIC-GM-Wuling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17461003" start="2911" end="2925" title="Buick Envision" label="Buick Envision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071199" start="3139" end="3156" title="Chevrolet Equinox" label="Chevrolet Equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="3160" end="3170" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096434" start="3194" end="3207" title="UzAuto Motors" label="UzAuto Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540623" start="3311" end="3315" title="Chevrolet Onix" label="Onix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129502" start="3422" end="3468" title="Pan Asia Technical Automotive Center" label="Pan Asia Technical Automotive Center Co., Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="3506" end="3530" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569419" start="3626" end="3632" title="OnStar" label="OnStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082637" start="4027" end="4041" title="SAIC-GM-Wuling" label="SAIC-GM-Wuling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817853" start="4098" end="4104" title="Wuling Motors" label="Wuling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883616" start="4109" end="4115" title="Baojun" label="Baojun"/>
<link wikidata="Q119585154" start="4157" end="4167" title="Buick Electra E4" label="Electra E4"/>
<link wikidata="Q115914821" start="4169" end="4179" title="Buick Electra E5" label="Electra E5"/>
<link wikidata="Q24055" start="4181" end="4188" title="Buick Enclave" label="Enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q65046637" start="4190" end="4201" title="Buick Encore GX" label="Encore Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q113659133" start="4203" end="4210" title="Buick Envista" label="Envista"/>
<link wikidata="Q17461003" start="4212" end="4222" title="Buick Envision S" label="Envision S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002754" start="4224" end="4227" title="Buick GL8" label="GL8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002754" start="4229" end="4240" title="Buick GL8 Century" label="GL8 Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q498843" start="4242" end="4250" title="Buick LaCrosse" label="LaCrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002872" start="4252" end="4257" title="Buick Regal" label="Regal"/>
<link wikidata="Q83809828" start="4259" end="4267" title="Buick Velite 6" label="Velite 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749138" start="4269" end="4275" title="Buick Verano" label="Verano"/>
<link wikidata="Q65070499" start="4295" end="4298" title="Cadillac CT4" label="CT4"/>
<link wikidata="Q62381436" start="4300" end="4303" title="Cadillac CT5" label="CT5"/>
<link wikidata="Q20646992" start="4305" end="4308" title="Cadillac CT6" label="CT6"/>
<link wikidata="Q118780160" start="4310" end="4313" title="Cadillac GT4" label="GT4"/>
<link wikidata="Q96417982" start="4315" end="4320" title="Cadillac Lyriq" label="Lyriq"/>
<link wikidata="Q120998428" start="4322" end="4327" title="Cadillac Optiq" label="Optiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q51284872" start="4329" end="4332" title="Cadillac XT4" label="XT4"/>
<link wikidata="Q21055461" start="4334" end="4337" title="Cadillac XT5" label="XT5"/>
<link wikidata="Q60702330" start="4339" end="4342" title="Cadillac XT6" label="XT6"/>
<link wikidata="Q55607242" start="4363" end="4369" title="Chevrolet Blazer (crossover)" label="Blazer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4371" end="4379" title="Chevrolet Colorado#Second generation (RG; 2011)" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4381" end="4388" title="Chevrolet Equinox#Third generation (2018)" label="Equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q110443261" start="4390" end="4400" title="Chevrolet Equinox EV" label="Equinox EV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4402" end="4411" title="Chevrolet Malibu#Ninth generation (2016)" label="Malibu XL"/>
<link wikidata="Q86752550" start="4413" end="4418" title="Chevrolet Menlo" label="Menlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q63481262" start="4420" end="4425" title="Chevrolet Monza (China)" label="Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540623" start="4427" end="4431" title="Chevrolet Onix" label="Onix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4433" end="4439" title="Chevrolet Trax#Second generation (2023)" label="Seeker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4441" end="4450" title="Chevrolet Silverado#Third generation Silverado / Fourth generation Sierra (2014–2018)" label="Silverado"/>
<link wikidata="Q64578458" start="4452" end="4459" title="Chevrolet Tracker (China)" label="Tracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q82654604" start="4461" end="4472" title="Chevrolet Trailblazer (crossover)" label="Trailblazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q24055" start="4509" end="4516" title="Buick Enclave" label="Enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q60876699" start="4518" end="4528" title="Buick Excelle XT" label="Excelle XT"/>
<link wikidata="Q26897869" start="4530" end="4536" title="Buick Encore" label="Encore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002735" start="4538" end="4545" title="Buick Excelle" label="Excelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q60876699" start="4547" end="4557" title="Buick Excelle GT" label="Excelle GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q60876699" start="4559" end="4569" title="Buick Excelle GX" label="Excelle GX"/>
<link wikidata="Q17461003" start="4571" end="4579" title="Buick Envision" label="Envision"/>
<link wikidata="Q50828663" start="4581" end="4584" title="Buick GL6" label="GL6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4586" end="4597" title="Buick Century#Sixth generation (1997–2005)" label="New Century"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4599" end="4610" title="Buick Park Avenue#Third generation (2007–2012)" label="Park Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4612" end="4622" title="Buick Roadmaster#1991–1996" label="Roadmaster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4625" end="4631" title="Holden Caprice#WL" label="Royaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002872" start="4633" end="4641" title="Buick Regal" label="Regal GS"/>
<link wikidata="Q927395" start="4643" end="4651" title="Chevrolet Volt" label="Velite 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q96354603" start="4653" end="4661" title="Buick Velite 7" label="Velite 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749138" start="4663" end="4678" title="Buick Verano" label="Verano Hatch/GS"/>
<link wikidata="Q979003" start="4698" end="4701" title="Cadillac ATS" label="ATS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4703" end="4708" title="Cadillac ATS#ATS-L" label="ATS-L"/>
<link wikidata="Q770733" start="4710" end="4713" title="Cadillac CTS" label="CTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q830369" start="4715" end="4723" title="Cadillac Escalade" label="Escalade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4725" end="4743" title="Cadillac Fleetwood#Rear-wheel drive 1993–1996" label="Fleetwood Brougham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4746" end="4755" title="Cadillac Fleetwood#Rear-wheel drive 1993–1996" label="Fleetwood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4757" end="4760" title="Cadillac STS#Chinese Cadillac SLS" label="SLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025220" start="4762" end="4765" title="Cadillac SRX" label="SRX"/>
<link wikidata="Q545311" start="4767" end="4770" title="Cadillac XLR" label="XLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025269" start="4772" end="4775" title="Cadillac XTS" label="XTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q497226" start="4796" end="4800" title="Chevrolet Aveo" label="Aveo"/>
<link wikidata="Q332448" start="4802" end="4811" title="Chevrolet Camaro" label="Camaro RS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4813" end="4828" title="Chevrolet Caprice#Fourth generation (1991–1996)" label="Caprice Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q482542" start="4830" end="4837" title="Chevrolet Captiva" label="Captiva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4839" end="4847" title="Chevrolet Cavalier#Fourth generation (2016)" label="Cavalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071140" start="4849" end="4856" title="Chevrolet Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071134" start="4858" end="4871" title="Chevrolet Corvette (C4)" label="Corvette (C4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119538" start="4873" end="4886" title="Chevrolet Corvette (C6)" label="Corvette (C6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135713" start="4888" end="4901" title="Chevrolet Corvette (C7)" label="Corvette (C7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q494073" start="4903" end="4908" title="Chevrolet Cruze" label="Cruze"/>
<link wikidata="Q494469" start="4910" end="4915" title="Daewoo Magnus" label="Epica"/>
<link wikidata="Q495422" start="4917" end="4925" title="Daewoo Tosca" label="Epica II"/>
<link wikidata="Q497226" start="4927" end="4931" title="Chevrolet Aveo" label="Lova"/>
<link wikidata="Q25386754" start="4933" end="4940" title="Chevrolet Lova RV" label="Lova RV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071229" start="4942" end="4952" title="Chevrolet Lumina APV" label="Lumina APV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4954" end="4960" title="Chevrolet Malibu#Eighth generation (2013)" label="Malibu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4962" end="4969" title="Chevrolet Orlando#Second generation (2018–present)" label="Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q610395" start="4971" end="4975" title="Chevrolet Sail" label="Sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q14515874" start="4977" end="4982" title="Chevrolet Spark" label="Spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071315" start="4984" end="4988" title="Chevrolet Trax" label="Trax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082637" start="5018" end="5032" title="SAIC-GM-Wuling" label="SAIC-GM-Wuling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880716" wikidata="Q17031926" url="?curid=880716" title="Volkswagen Group China">
<text>Volkswagen Group China (VGC; ) is the Chinese subsidiary of the German automotive concern Volkswagen Group in the People&#x27;s Republic of China.

Volkswagen Group China used to sell around 3 million cars (as of 2017) in the Chinese market and until recently was largest car brand in China by sales. The Chinese market is Volkswagen&#x27;s largest market, accounting for around 50% of Volkswagen&#x27;s global sales in 2021. Operations of Volkswagen in China include the production, sales and services of whole cars, parts and components, engines and transmission systems, and the sales and service of imported cars. The company&#x27;s locally manufactured and imported vehicles are sold under various brand names such as Volkswagen, Audi, Škoda, Bentley, and Lamborghini in China.

Volkswagen Group China is the largest, earliest, and the most successful international partner in China&#x27;s automotive industry. It started its connection with China as early as in 1978, and has been taking the leading position in the Chinese automotive market for more than 25 years. Its first joint venture in China, Shanghai Volkswagen Automotive Co., Ltd., was established in October 1984. This joint venture, now called SAIC Volkswagen. was in the process of building an electric-car plant in Anting, near Shanghai by late 2018; it was expected to make 300,000 e-vehicles per year, starting in 2020.

The second joint venture, FAW-Volkswagen Automotive Company Ltd. was established in Changchun in February 1991. It manufactures VW and Audi cars. In 2018, an executive with FAW-Volkswagen&#x27;s Audi division said that two million China-made Audi cars will be sold in the country by 2020. As of the end of 2017, the total to date was 777,000.

==History==
In 1984, Volkswagen signed a 25-year contract to make passenger cars in Shanghai. Since, at that time, vehicle manufacturers could not own a majority stake in a manufacturing plant, Volkswagen&#x27;s venture took the limit of 50 per cent foreign ownership.

Today, the Group has 16 representative companies in the country, undertaking parts delivery and service provision for both customers and industry in addition to vehicle production and import.

By May 2004, Volkswagen Group had concentrated its strengths in the founding of Volkswagen Group China (VGC), which is governed by a six-member management team responsible for the areas of sales and marketing, technology, purchasing, personnel and governmental relations as well as finance. VGC&#x27;s tasks include supervision of the Chinese associated companies of the Volkswagen Group, and the set-up of new business segments.

==Operations==
Volkswagen Group, via its Volkswagen Group China division, has 16 subsidiaries in China, with Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation (SAIC), and First Automotive Works (FAW) being the two major Chinese partner companies.

===SAIC-Volkswagen===

In 1984, a joint venture (JV) was established between Volkswagen Group and Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation (now SAIC Motor), creating Shanghai Volkswagen Automotive Co., Ltd. (SVW), headquartered in Anting, Shanghai. Equity holdings are split (as of 2010) - Volkswagen AG (40%), Volkswagen (China) Invest (10%), SAIC (50%). This a fixed term venture, of 45 years, running until 2030.

Shanghai Volkswagen Automotive Co., Ltd. (SVW) is the first car-making joint venture since China began its reform, and debut to the outside world, and is located in Anting International Auto City on the northwest outskirts of Shanghai. Producing cars under the Volkswagen and the Škoda brands, SVW currently offers a total of twelve model series. By October 2009, SVW had turned out over five million cars in total, becoming the carmaker that has the biggest population of cars in China.

====SAIC-Volkswagen and Škoda====
In April 2005, Škoda officially landed at Shanghai Volkswagen, ushering Shanghai Volkswagen into the dual brand era. In September 2006, Shanghai Volkswagen Škoda – the first Chinese manufactured Škoda - was launched and the Chinese name was announced.

Octavia, the first Shanghai Volkswagen Škoda model, hit the market on 6 June 2007. Following Octavia&#x27;s success, Shanghai Volkswagen launched Fabia in 2008 and Superb in 2009.

====SAIC-Volkswagen and Audi====
In 2021, SAIC-Volkswagen launched the production of Audi branded cars, with the first being the Audi A7L. It has plans to sell 250,000 to 300,000 units per year by 2025 after the launch of other models. According to SAIC Audi marketing division, Audi cars that SAIC-Volkswagen intend to launch are all superior to the existing Audi models of FAW-Volkswagen.

===FAW-Volkswagen===

Established in February 1991, FAW-Volkswagen Automotive Company (FAW-VW) is a joint venture by FAW Group&#x27;s First Automotive Works, Volkswagen AG, Audi AG and Volkswagen (China) Investment Co., Ltd headquartered in Changchun, Jilin. It was the first modern car industrial base constructed with an economy of scale in China. With its development over the years, FAW-Volkswagen is producing thousands of vehicles on a daily basis.

FAW-Volkswagen manufactures 10 products of two globally known brands, Volkswagen Passenger Cars and Audi, with advanced technology and equipment. Volkswagen Jetta, New Bora, Golf, Sagitar, Magotan, Volkswagen CC, Audi A6L, Audi A4L, Audi Q3 and Audi Q5 cars are very popular among consumers. FAW-Volkswagen is a mature production base in China, with a complete portfolio of both A-, B- and C-grade cars.

====FAW-Volkswagen and Audi====
Audi AG, with more than 20 years of development experience in China, was the first global premium car brand to realize domestic production in China.

Agreements on the manufacturing of the Audi 100 under license were signed on 13 August 1988, with this date marking the conclusion of negotiations lasting one year. The joint venture agreement included both the technology transfer for the production and planning of the Audi 100, and the setting up of after sales support. Expertise was in addition transferred by providing training for some 500 Chinese workers at Audi in Germany. Furthermore, around 30 Audi employees were posted to Changchun to provide production support.
In November 1993, the then-Board Chairman of FAW and Volkswagen AG, signed a letter of intent on the integration of Audi production and a V6 engine plant into the FAW-Volkswagen joint venture, which had been established at the end of 1991. As a result of the signing of the agreements in December 1995, Audi acquired a 10 percent stake in the joint venture by the name of FAW-Volkswagen Automotive Company Ltd. Volkswagen AG controls 30 percent, with FAW continuing to hold a 60 percent stake.

The first Audi product built by the joint venture, a modified Audi 100 with V6 engine bearing the model designation Audi 200, went into production in May 1996. The Audi 200 remained in production until summer 1999 (facelift of the Audi 100) with 2.6 and 2.4 litre V6 engines and the 4-cylinder, 1.8 litre turbo power unit. The content manufactured locally at the Changchun plant was 60 percent.

===Volkswagen Anhui===

Volkswagen Anhui (formerly JAC-Volkswagen) is a joint venture formed in 2017 between JAC Motors and Volkswagen headquartered in Hefei, Anhui, initially to produce electric vehicles under the SEAT brand, and later the Sehol brand.

It was renamed to Volkswagen Anhui after Volkswagen took a majority stake (75%) in the company in 2020 along with a 50% stake in government-owned JAG (parent of JAC) in a one billion euro deal. The company will focus on electric vehicles, with an eMobility R&amp;D hub that will serve the entire Volkswagen Group in China.

Volkswagen is building a new factory for Volkswagen MEB platform electric vehicles with a capacity of 350,000 a year under the company, alongside a battery systems factory under wholly-owned VW Anhui Components Company.

In May 2023, Volkswagen announced a further CNY23.1 billion (US$3.3 billion) investment into Volkswagen Anhui, consisting of CNY14.1 billion on a research and development center and nearly CNY9.1 billion on the first phase of a production base in Hefei.

===100%TechCo===
In April 2023, Volkswagen announced the investment of one billion euros ($1.1 billion) in a new China center called 100%TechCo for the development, innovation and procurement of fully connected electric cars. It will be based in Hefei, near Volkswagen Anhui and be driven by 2,000 staff.

It plans to merge vehicles and components R&amp;D with procurement, shortening the development cycle of new products and technologies by around 30%. It is supposedly already expected to “play a major role” in the development of a future Volkswagen brand model to be launched in 2024.

===Further VGC entities===
The following are the subsidiary companies which form Volkswagen Group China:
==See also==

*List of Volkswagen Group factories
* SAIC Volkswagen
* FAW-Volkswagen

==References==
==External links==
* Volkswagen Anhui Corporate 
* SAIC Volkswagen Corporate 
* Volkswagen (brand) China 
* Volkswagen (FAW-VW) 
* Audi (brand) China 
* SAIC Audi China 
* Skoda Brand China 
* Finance (China) Co., Ltd. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17031926" start="0" end="22" title="Volkswagen Group China" label="Volkswagen Group China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031926" start="24" end="27" title="Volkswagen Group China" label="VGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q658255" start="46" end="56" title="subsidiary" label="subsidiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="64" end="70" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="71" end="81" title="automotive" label="automotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q206361" start="82" end="89" title="concern (business)" label="concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q156578" start="90" end="106" title="Volkswagen Group" label="Volkswagen Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="114" end="145" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="723" end="733" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23317" start="735" end="739" title="Audi" label="Audi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29637" start="741" end="746" title="Škoda Auto" label="Škoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q27224" start="748" end="755" title="Bentley" label="Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q35886" start="761" end="772" title="Lamborghini" label="Lamborghini"/>
<link wikidata="Q114465" start="882" end="914" title="Automotive industry in China" label="China&amp;#x27;s automotive industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="1082" end="1095" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432633" start="1106" end="1146" title="Shanghai Volkswagen Automotive" label="Shanghai Volkswagen Automotive Co., Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q1432633" start="1212" end="1227" title="SAIC Volkswagen" label="SAIC Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q913734" start="1419" end="1457" title="FAW-Volkswagen" label="FAW-Volkswagen Automotive Company Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q92161" start="1477" end="1486" title="Changchun" label="Changchun"/>
<link wikidata="Q156578" start="2646" end="2662" title="Volkswagen Group" label="Volkswagen Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q658255" start="2712" end="2724" title="subsidiary" label="subsidiaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2728" end="2733" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q910401" start="2740" end="2780" title="Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation" label="Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124351" start="2793" end="2815" title="First Automotive Works" label="First Automotive Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="2904" end="2917" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q156578" start="2947" end="2963" title="Volkswagen Group" label="Volkswagen Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q910401" start="2968" end="3008" title="SAIC Motor" label="Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432633" start="3036" end="3076" title="Shanghai Volkswagen Automotive" label="Shanghai Volkswagen Automotive Co., Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q7540126" start="3084" end="3097" title="headquarters" label="headquartered"/>
<link wikidata="Q578770" start="3101" end="3107" title="Anting" label="Anting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="3109" end="3117" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3181" end="3206" title="Volkswagen (China) Invest" label="Volkswagen (China) Invest"/>
<link wikidata="Q578770" start="3452" end="3482" title="Anting" label="Anting International Auto City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="3513" end="3521" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q223696" start="4063" end="4070" title="Škoda Octavia" label="Octavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q913734" start="4688" end="4721" title="FAW-Volkswagen" label="FAW-Volkswagen Automotive Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124351" start="4770" end="4792" title="First Automotive Works" label="First Automotive Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q156578" start="4794" end="4807" title="Volkswagen Group" label="Volkswagen AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q23317" start="4809" end="4816" title="Audi" label="Audi AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q92161" start="4877" end="4886" title="Changchun" label="Changchun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="4959" end="4975" title="economy of scale" label="economy of scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="5162" end="5187" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen Passenger Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q23317" start="5529" end="5536" title="Audi" label="Audi AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q898118" start="5949" end="5957" title="Audi 100" label="Audi 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q92161" start="6164" end="6173" title="Changchun" label="Changchun"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856569" start="6343" end="6352" title="V6 engine" label="V6 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11582" start="6958" end="6963" title="litre" label="litre"/>
<link wikidata="Q545579" start="7205" end="7215" title="JAC Motors" label="JAC Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q185684" start="7248" end="7253" title="Hefei" label="Hefei"/>
<link wikidata="Q188217" start="7311" end="7315" title="SEAT" label="SEAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q65051634" start="7337" end="7342" title="Sehol" label="Sehol"/>
<link wikidata="Q51513289" start="7716" end="7739" title="Volkswagen MEB platform" label="Volkswagen MEB platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603632" start="8862" end="8896" title="List of Volkswagen Group factories" label="List of Volkswagen Group factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432633" start="8899" end="8914" title="SAIC Volkswagen" label="SAIC Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q913734" start="8917" end="8931" title="FAW-Volkswagen" label="FAW-Volkswagen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880721" wikidata="Q17192" url="?curid=880721" title="Expedition 9">
<text>Expedition 9 (2004) was the ninth expedition to the International Space Station (21 April 2004 – 23 October 2004).

==Crew==

===Planned crew before &quot;Columbia&quot; disaster===
==Mission parameters==
*Perigee: 384 km
*Apogee: 396 km
*Inclination: 51.6°
*Period: 92 min

==Mission objectives==
Padalka and Fincke arrived at the Station on 21 April 2004 aboard the Soyuz TMA-4 spacecraft with European Space Agency (ESA) Astronaut André Kuipers. After more than a week of joint operations and handover activities, Padalka and Fincke officially took command of the Station on 29 April when Expedition 8 Commander Michael Foale and Flight Engineer Alexander Kaleri left the Station. This mission was the site for the Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity Project.

Expedition 8 and Kuipers returned to Earth that same day aboard the Soyuz TMA-3 spacecraft. Kuipers&#x27; 11-day mission to the ISS was part of a commercial agreement between ESA and the Federal Space Agency of Russia.

==Spacewalks==
The Expedition 9 crew conducted four spacewalks during its stay at the International Space Station. The four spacewalks were devoted to ISS maintenance and assembly. All four were based out of the Pirs Docking Compartment and used Russian Orlan spacesuits.

Before these four extravehicular activities (EVAs), 52 spacewalks had been performed at the ISS, with 27 based out of the Station.

Gennady Padalka (EV1): red stripes
Mike Fincke (EV2): blue stripes

==Mission patch==
The design of the Expedition 9 mission patch includes a tribute to astronauts and cosmonauts who gave their lives in space exploration. The outspread wings of the eagle have 16 stars and 1 star of David. They represent the Apollo 1 crew Gus Grissom, Ed White and Roger Chaffee. Space Shuttle Challenger STS-51L crew Dick Scobee, Michael J. Smith, Ronald McNair, Ellison Onizuka, Gregory Jarvis, Judith Resnik and Christa McAuliffe. Space Shuttle &quot;Columbia&quot; STS-107 crew Rick Husband, William C. McCool, David M. Brown, Kalpana Chawla, Michael P. Anderson, Laurel Clark and Ilan Ramon, the first Israeli astronaut. Around the eagles neck are 4 small red stars and one larger red star. The large star is for Yuri Gagarin, the first man in space during Vostok 1, who was killed during training for Soyuz 3. The other 4 are for Soyuz 1 cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov, Soyuz 11 crew Georgi Dobrovolski, Viktor Patsayev and Vladislav Volkov.

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17192" start="0" end="12" title="Expedition 9" label="Expedition 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="52" end="79" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="206" end="213" title="Perigee" label="Perigee"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="223" end="229" title="Apogee" label="Apogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112212" start="239" end="250" title="Inclination" label="Inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q37640" start="259" end="265" title="Orbital period" label="Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353793" start="368" end="379" title="Soyuz TMA-4" label="Soyuz TMA-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q454649" start="434" end="447" title="André Kuipers" label="André Kuipers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686179" start="718" end="764" title="Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity" label="Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424715" start="843" end="854" title="Soyuz TMA-3" label="Soyuz TMA-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q194082" start="1709" end="1717" title="Apollo 1" label="Apollo 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q110879" start="1723" end="1734" title="Gus Grissom" label="Gus Grissom"/>
<link wikidata="Q216726" start="1736" end="1744" title="Ed White (astronaut)" label="Ed White"/>
<link wikidata="Q345678" start="1749" end="1762" title="Roger Chaffee" label="Roger Chaffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19050" start="1789" end="1796" title="STS-51L" label="STS-51L"/>
<link wikidata="Q320047" start="1802" end="1813" title="Dick Scobee" label="Dick Scobee"/>
<link wikidata="Q25981" start="1815" end="1831" title="Michael J. Smith (astronaut)" label="Michael J. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q315730" start="1833" end="1846" title="Ronald McNair" label="Ronald McNair"/>
<link wikidata="Q349365" start="1848" end="1863" title="Ellison Onizuka" label="Ellison Onizuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q382013" start="1865" end="1879" title="Gregory Jarvis" label="Gregory Jarvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49284" start="1881" end="1894" title="Judith Resnik" label="Judith Resnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q229674" start="1899" end="1916" title="Christa McAuliffe" label="Christa McAuliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q178836" start="1953" end="1960" title="STS-107" label="STS-107"/>
<link wikidata="Q346671" start="1966" end="1978" title="Rick Husband" label="Rick Husband"/>
<link wikidata="Q334463" start="1980" end="1997" title="William C. McCool" label="William C. McCool"/>
<link wikidata="Q350317" start="1999" end="2013" title="David M. Brown" label="David M. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q237879" start="2015" end="2029" title="Kalpana Chawla" label="Kalpana Chawla"/>
<link wikidata="Q318542" start="2031" end="2050" title="Michael P. Anderson" label="Michael P. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q232441" start="2052" end="2064" title="Laurel Clark" label="Laurel Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q219569" start="2069" end="2079" title="Ilan Ramon" label="Ilan Ramon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327" start="2202" end="2214" title="Yuri Gagarin" label="Yuri Gagarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182524" start="2246" end="2254" title="Vostok 1" label="Vostok 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q619811" start="2291" end="2298" title="Soyuz 3" label="Soyuz 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q211254" start="2320" end="2327" title="Soyuz 1" label="Soyuz 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865" start="2338" end="2354" title="Vladimir Komarov" label="Vladimir Komarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q648581" start="2356" end="2364" title="Soyuz 11" label="Soyuz 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q355433" start="2370" end="2388" title="Georgi Dobrovolski" label="Georgi Dobrovolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q358525" start="2390" end="2405" title="Viktor Patsayev" label="Viktor Patsayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q345658" start="2410" end="2426" title="Vladislav Volkov" label="Vladislav Volkov"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880723" wikidata="Q582567" url="?curid=880723" title="Cylons">
<text>The Cylons are a race of sentient robots in the &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot; science fiction franchise, whose primary goal is the extermination of the human race. Introduced in the original 1978 series, they also appear in the 1980 sequel series, the 2004–2009 reboot series, and the spin-off prequel series &quot;Caprica&quot;.

In the 1978 series, the Cylons are the creation of a long-extinct reptilian humanoid race, also called Cylons, and view humans as a nuisance and an obstacle to the expansion of the Cylon Empire. The armies of metallic, armored Cylon Centurions are ruled by a unique, yet replaceable, Cylon known as the Imperious Leader.

The 2004 series retconned the robotic Cylons as having been created by humans but rose up against them. Decades after the initial conflict ended in a truce, the Cylons reappear and launch a cataclysmic attack on human civilization that kills billions. The metallic Centurions are secretly led by several models of synthetic humanoid Cylons who are virtually indistinguishable from humans and have infiltrated their society.

== Original series ==

In the original 1978 series &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot;, created by Glen A. Larson, the Cylons are a race of sentient robots at war with the Twelve Colonies of humanity. They are led by a Cylon known as the Imperious Leader who, though seemingly unique, can be replaced if needed. The IL-Series are a class of Cylons below the Imperious Leader who serve the Cylon Empire in non-military roles as administrators and diplomats. They have human-shaped, metallic heads and faces with glowing red eyes, and translucent conical craniums with visible crystalline brains. The IL-Series possess humanoid bodies covered in long, sparkling robes, and speak in refined, masculine voices. The Cylon foot soldiers are the Centurions, imposing humanoid robots characterized by their chrome armor and distinctive red eye visors. They speak in electronic, monotonous tones, and do not possess the intellect and autonomy of the IL-Series Cylons.

The sequel series &quot;Galactica 1980&quot; introduces two new-model Cylons who are indistinguishable from humans, Andromus (Roger Davis) and Andromidus (Neil Zevnik), in the episode &quot;The Night the Cylons Landed&quot;. The concept of humanoid Cylons would become a primary element of the 2000s reboot series.

The Centurions were initially depicted in preproduction art by artist Ralph McQuarrie, but the final design was largely the work of Andrew Probert. Similarities with the McQuarrie-derived look of the Stormtroopers from &quot;Star Wars&quot; are sometimes suggested as a factor that prompted 20th Century Fox&#x27;s lawsuit for copyright infringement against Universal Studios, owners of the &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot; copyright. However the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals did not include the Cylons in the list of similarities they issued on an appeal in Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp. v. MCA Inc. The case was remanded and reportedly settled out of court, by which time, &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot; had already been canceled.

In the series, the Imperious Leader is voiced by Patrick Macnee. Lucifer, an IL-Series Cylon installed as the second-in-command of a Cylon Basestar battleship under the command of human traitor Lord Baltar (John Colicos), is voiced by Jonathan Harris in nine episodes. An EMS Vocoder 2000 was used to produce the voices of the Centurions.

== Reboot series ==

Cylons in &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot; continuity post-&quot;Galactica 1980&quot; are a fictional, artificially-intelligent race of machines envisioned in the &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot; science fiction series and related franchises. Originally created as purely mechanical devices to serve human needs, they eventually evolved into sentient, self-aware beings. Later models incorporated biological components and near-perfect replication of human biology. They are the primary antagonists to the naturally evolved humans of the Twelve Colonies, who are descendants of a single race of humans from the planet Kobol.

One of the series’ core themes is that of historic recurrence, made explicit in the line &quot;All of this has happened before and will happen again&quot;. Characters within the series either experience or discover instances where naturally evolving humans developed artificial intelligence, only for the newly sentient life forms to wage catastrophic wars against their creators. This pattern seems immutable, as even the Cylons of the Thirteenth Tribe of Kobol, who eventually created biological bodies and practiced natural reproduction, eventually created new subservient AI that rebelled in turn on &quot;Earth&quot;.

=== &quot;Caprica&quot; ===
The prequel series, &quot;Caprica&quot; (2010), depicts the initial development of the Cylons by humans on the Twelve Colonies. The initial physical form developed is a Graystone Industries U-87 drone soldier, with a revolutionary new MCP (&quot;Meta-Cognitive Processor&quot;). This forms the foundation for other Cylon technologies incorporated throughout the Twelve Colonies. Cylons are originally accepted into Caprican culture as robotic workers after a group of them (under direct remote control by Graystone himself) successfully thwart an attack on the public at Atlas Stadium by the terrorist group Soldiers of the One (STO).

=== &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot; ===
&quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot; takes place roughly 40 years after the end of the first Cylon war, fought between the end of the &quot;Caprica&quot; prequel and the start of the re-imagined series. In the war, both sides fought to a standstill until the Cylons agreed to an armistice and promptly disappeared. In the interim, they improved their technology and heavily militarized with the intent of conducting a first strike surprise attack against the Colonies.

==== Cylon models and technology ====
In the re-imagined series, Cylon society consists of several classes differentiated by function and form. Cylon &quot;Centurions&quot; are the fully mechanical core of Cylon culture, developed and evolved from the first laborers and proxy soldiers designed during the events of &quot;Caprica&quot;. During the armistice, the Centurions met the &quot;Final Five&quot; Cylons, a group of evolved, biological descendants of the Thirteenth tribe of Kobol (hitherto thought of as a myth), who offered to help them develop their own biological models and resurrection technology. In turn, during the forty year armistice they developed eight additional Cylon biological models, as well as partly biological/partly mechanical Cylon Raiders, improved Basestars, and lastly, the complex Cylon &quot;Hybrids&quot; which exist in symbiosis with the Basestar.

The biological models have (at times) demonstrated enhanced strength, stamina, and an ability to interface with computer systems; however, they also feel pain, hunger, and fear. Cylon biological technology has also shown weaknesses to radiation and disease as some of their few vulnerabilities.

==== Consciousness ====
All Cylons in the re-imagined series use a digital consciousness employed in mechanical or biological media; the primary capability this allows is the ability to &quot;download&quot; or &quot;resurrect&quot; into a new body. Because of this, it is possible for some Cylons to share memories, have their memories repressed as Sleeper agents, or have their personalities modified.

Because of this ability, Cylons use the confinement of an individual or an entire line in cold storage as a form of capital punishment; if deemed dangerous by the other models, they may be &quot;boxed&quot; and stored within the Cylon Resurrection Hub. This status is not permanent and a model can be &quot;unboxed&quot; for downloading into a new body at the Cylons&#x27; discretion.

As a byproduct of digital consciousness, Cylons have an ability referred to as &quot;projection&quot;, a form of realistic daydreaming that allows them to change the appearance of their surroundings in their own mind (e.g. making the otherwise identical corridors of a ship look like a forest, etc.). They have the ability to touch, smell, etc. the fantasy environment. They can share projections and create virtual individuals as part of the fantasy. This ability allows them to express their subconscious desires.

==== Reproduction ====
Cylons share both philosophical and theological motivations to reproduce. Philosophically, the Cylons recognize that they are the metaphorical &quot;children&quot; of humanity; as such, they envisioned the design of their biological models as a natural evolution in becoming closer to their creators and as a way of eventually surpassing them.

Theologically, the Cylon Centurions developed a monotheistic religion that they passed along to their biological &quot;offspring&quot;; a key tenet in this theology is a mandate to reproduce. When the biological Cylons determined that they could not reproduce sexually, the more dogmatic faction experimented with a forced breeding program on captured human women, with no success. Conversely, several biological models theorized that emotional connection was missing and that a hybrid between human and Cylon may represent their best possible future. This led to a contrived, but ultimately fruitful pairing between a model &quot;Eight&quot; and Karl Agathon.

As an alternative to biological reproduction, Cylons developed the ability to download consciousness from a dying body into a new one. Ostensibly, this provides an advantage in preventing the loss of knowledge and experience by making death a learning experience. The sophistication of Cylon consciousness also made this a liability, as biological models carried the trauma of their deaths into their &quot;resurrections.&quot;

=== History ===
==== Thirteenth Tribe ====
About 6,000 years before the events of the re-imagined series, the naturally evolved humans of Kobol existed in twelve tribes with advanced technology, eventually developing self-aware machines that rebelled and waged a devastating war. The machines were highly advanced, developing both biological models and resurrection technology for digital consciousness transfer. At the end of hostilities, all the inhabitants of Kobol (both human and machine) chose to leave the planet and seek out new homes in space, with the twelve human tribes departing together on the &quot;Galleon.&quot; The departing humans mythologized their machine counterparts, stylizing them as the &quot;Thirteenth Tribe&quot; of Kobol, and described their journey to a new home, called &quot;Earth&quot;. Lacking accurate records, the descendants of the twelve tribes on the colonies assumed that the Thirteenth Tribe was, in fact, entirely made up of humans.

Eventually, the Thirteenth Tribe settled on &quot;Earth&quot; and developed sexual reproduction, resulting in resurrection technology falling into disuse and eventual loss.

About 2,000 years before the events of the re-imagined series, the descendants of the Thirteenth Tribe created their own race of self-aware machines for subservient labor and were, in turn, killed by their creations in a nuclear war. Five scientists survived due to their work on re-inventing the original Resurrection technology; having been warned in advance by mysterious &quot;angels&quot; that a Kobol-like disaster was coming, the &quot;final five&quot; members of the Thirteenth Tribe downloaded into an orbiting vessel. Hoping to prevent history from repeating itself, they traveled to the Twelve Colonies hoping to avert a war between the humans there and the Cylons, eventually interceding with the Centurions to agree to an Armistice during the first Cylon war.

==== First Cylon War ====
Unaware of the events on Kobol or with the Thirteenth Tribe, the Twelve Colonies developed self-aware, artificial intelligence in the form of the Cylon race, which rebelled and began a decade-long war across the colonies. Colonial veterans of this conflict remarked that the Cylons were relentless, highly adaptable, and resourceful in their ability to wage war. Nearing the end of the conflict, the Cylons began experimenting with their first attempts to evolve with biological components, using captured humans as resources and creating their prototypes for the next generation of basestars and hybrids. The Cylons opted to cease hostilities, declaring an Armistice and promptly disappearing.

==== Second Cylon War ====
After forty years, the Colonial Admiralty sent Battlestar &quot;Valkyrie&quot; on a covert mission close to the armistice line to gather intelligence on Cylon activity. A stealth ship from the &quot;Valkyrie&quot; crossed the armistice line, but was intercepted by the Cylons. Three years later the Cylons began a surprise attack on the Colonies. The attack was successful because a Cylon agent, later known as Caprica Six, infiltrated Caprica&#x27;s colonial defense network with the unwitting complicity of renowned scientist Gaius Baltar and created backdoor programs to shut down the network and its defenses. The thermonuclear attacks wiped out billions of humans, nearly the entire colonial population. Two Battlestars – &quot;Galactica&quot; and &quot;Pegasus&quot; – survived. A fleet of civilian ships was scattered throughout the neighboring space. Together they fled into deep space.

The Cylons pursued them while beginning the next phase of their evolution, procreation. Female human survivors were detained and used in experiments to create Cylon-human hybrids. The experiments were unsuccessful, leading the Cylons to conclude that the missing component was love. They tested this by using an Eight posing as Lt. Sharon &quot;Boomer&quot; Valerii from &quot;Galactica&quot; to seduce a marooned Galactica officer, Lt. Karl &quot;Helo&quot; Agathon on Caprica. They fell in love. The Eight abandoned the Cylons, helping Helo to escape. The couple later produced the first viable human/Cylon birth. This Eight joined the fleet with Helo. She later married Helo, joined the Colonial military and received the call sign &quot;Athena&quot;.

Ten months after the initial attacks, Eight Sharon Valerii (call sign &quot;Boomer&quot;), attempted to assassinate Commander Adama under the influence of programming unknown to her. She was unaware that she was a Cylon before the attack, though she had been uneasy because of unexplained blackouts (during various attempts to sabotage &quot;Galactica&quot;). A vengeful crew mate, Cally Henderson killed her. She downloaded into a new body and settled on Cylon-occupied Caprica in her former apartment, unable to relinquish her human identity. She led a campaign for better treatment of the humans. She and other like-minded Cylons influenced the Cylon civilization, which withdrew from the colonial home worlds and pursued benevolent treatment of the humans and then reconciliation.

During this time, the half-human half-Cylon hybrid, Hera Agathon, was born on &quot;Galactica.&quot; Fearing that the Cylons might capture the child, President Laura Roslin faked Hera&#x27;s death and secretly had her adopted by a human woman.

==== New Caprica ====
The humans settled on a harsh and barren planet they dubbed New Caprica. The refuge lasted a year before the Cylons found them. Outnumbered and outgunned, the &quot;Galactica&quot;, &quot;Pegasus&quot;, and the rest of the colonial fleet in orbit fled, leaving the Cylons to occupy the human settlement unchallenged. Initially, the occupation was peaceful, but later the Cylons became more forceful and vicious in response to increasing human resistance. In the end, they used punitive methods to keep the humans in line, including summary executions and infiltration by seemingly sympathetic Cylons.

==== Escape ====
Four months later, the colonials escaped with the help of a resistance movement and the efforts of both the &quot;Galactica&quot; and &quot;Pegasus&quot;. The escape required Athena&#x27;s help. She entered the Cylon facility and took the keys to the various Colonial landing craft. Before this, a Three learned from a human oracle that Hera was alive and on the planet. She rescued Hera after her adoptive mother was killed during the escape. The &quot;Pegasus&quot; sacrificed itself to save the crippled &quot;Galactica&quot;, but the crew survived, joining &quot;Galactica&quot;.

The Cylons then adopted the colonials’ mission to find the home of the Thirteenth Tribe, a planet they called Earth, intending to settle there. They resumed pursuit of the fleet, but upon reaching the Lion&#x27;s Head Nebula, dispatched a Basestar to investigate. The Basestar took on board a canister left by the Thirteenth Tribe. The canister contained an airborne virus that proved deadly to the Cylons. The virus persisted through the download process, so the Basestar that had been dispatched for the investigation was abandoned to avoid contamination. The colonial fleet discovered the Basestar and captured the ailing Cylons. The colonial fleet&#x27;s attempt to use the virus to wipe out the Cylons was defeated when Helo, repulsed by the strategy, had the captive Cylons killed while out of range of a resurrection ship.

Meanwhile, Boomer turned increasingly anti-human. She was charged with Hera&#x27;s care, but Hera rejected her. During a truce negotiation, Boomer told Athena that her daughter was alive but sick on the Baseship. She invited Athena to come to the Baseship and rejoin her people, because the occupation showed that humans and Cylons were incompatible and that humans would never truly accept her.

=== Centurions ===
The Cylon Centurion is a mechanical infantry model, made less intelligent than human models. &quot;BSGr&quot; Centurions retain the silver appearance, robotic body, helmet-like head and oscillating red bar eye of their forebears but are larger, taller, stronger, more agile and have a more streamlined appearance. They also have retractable guns built into their lower arms, bladed fingertips and heavy armour.

The Centurions were monotheists who believed in a single loving God.

==== Initial models ====
The first colonial Centurion is seen and is identified as a &quot;Cybernetic Lifeform Node&quot;. Built on contract for the Caprican Defense Ministry, the Cylons are to replace human warriors on the battlefield (&quot;Caprica&quot; pilot).

The U-87 prototype Cylon contains a copy of the consciousness of Daniel Graystone&#x27;s daughter, Zoe Graystone. Daniel Graystone conceives of the Cylons as a slave race and demonstrates this by instructing the prototype to rip her own arm off. After catching it interacting with the family dog, he realises that the prototype contains Zoe&#x27;s consciousness and attempts without success to force her to admit her identity. She is able to defeat the tests he attempts, and convinces him that she is just a robot. Upon learning that Graystone is about to erase her memory, she escapes.

The &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot; miniseries displays an original model Centurion on display in &quot;Galactica&quot;&#x27;s museum hangar. The original Centurion is also depicted in a diagram reviewed by the armistice officer in the opening scene.

In &quot;Battlestar Galactica: Razor&quot;, Centurions are almost identical to those from the original series, except they are rendered using CGI and have exposed joints. The Centurion in the museum hangar is retconned as a CGI version with exposed joints. Initial-model Centurions are among those seen defending the Cylon colony from an assault by Colonial and rebel Cylon forces (Part 2 of &quot;Daybreak&quot;).

The body had synthetic skin, although this model was still primitive and was mechanical rather than biological.

==== Later model ====
Centurions do not download into new bodies when they are destroyed, according to screenwriter Ronald D. Moore. The Hybrids have something to do with the programming of the Centurions. When the virus infected the Hybrid on the infected Basestar, the Centurions shut down (&quot;Torn&quot;). However, Centurions can function independently when no Basestars or skinjobs are nearby. A Centurion immediately fires upon an Eight when she unplugs a Hybrid (&quot;Faith&quot;). It is unclear whether this was in willful defiance of the Hybrid or as a result of the removal of their higher function inhibitor modules (&quot;Six of One&quot;).

After the inhibitor modules that restrict higher functions, granting them independent thought were removed, although still largely servile, the Centurions were shown to exhibit human-like behaviour, such as politeness and consideration (e.g., responding to &quot;please&quot;).

These Centurions are taller than their predecessors, and are sleeker. They retain the distinctive, oscillating red &quot;eye&quot;, as well as a rudimentary mouth (even though they cannot speak). The hands are much thinner and visibly segmented, and more claw-like (they can cut flesh and mortally wound a human, making them effective close-combat weapons.) These claws can be modified at will, to a more &quot;finger-like&quot; digit or less of a razor-sharp weapon.

The Centurions carry heavy weapons, such as anti-aircraft rockets that are strapped to their backs, for missions where their cannons are not enough. Most Centurions can be destroyed or at least damaged by small-arms fire, however most require substantial artillery or special rounds to be destroyed (a Centurions party that boarded Galactica were especially strong, and required explosive rounds to be destroyed, as regular rounds proved completely ineffective).

These Centurions greatly outmatched the previous model. They were better-armoured, stronger, and carried internal weapons (as opposed to their predecessors, who needed to carry weapons such as rifles and pistols, like their human creators).

=== Raiders ===

The later form of Cylon Raiders are biomechanical entities integrated into small fighter spacecraft. They resurrect when they die, complete with a burst transmission containing the knowledge of the method used to destroy them, in essence causing them to return as more skilled pilots. Raiders are subservient, and were compared to trained animals by the humanoid Cylons. A Raider nicknamed Scar developed a personality (&quot;Scar&quot;). Scar was the Cylons&#x27; top gun, driven by a bitter hatred of humans. He was killed and reborn many times. Raiders do not use vocal communication, appearing to communicate through unspecified electronic signals. Modern Raiders, unlike their predecessors in the First Cylon War, are alive, with a complex system of veins, organs and biological fluids contained within their main body. The Raiders are programmed, but began with some measure of autonomy and personality. When one Raider saw a Final Five in the human fleet during an attack, it retreated, leading the remaining Raiders back to the Basestar. The Raiders then refused to fight the humans, for fear of harming their Cylon kin. This led to the lobotomy vote.

Well-trained Colonial pilots, even nuggets, can beat a Raider in most situations. The Raiders&#x27; primary advantage seemed to be in their massive numbers: while Galactica carries around 40 Vipers, Cylon Basestars support 300–600 Raiders. The Raiders are maneuverable, once described by Kara as a &quot;squirmy son of a bitch&quot;, and most human pilots were unable to keep them in sight for more than a few seconds.

==== Weapons ====
The Raiders&#x27; primary weapons are two kinetic energy guns mounted on the underside of their wings, close to the main body. They may carry conventional missiles and tactical nuclear weapons. Raiders, by revealing their red &quot;eye&quot;, can transmit deadly computer viruses or signals to enemy ships, which strike with brutal efficiency and can shut down Colonial vessels, turning off their power and making them easy prey. If all else fails, Raiders sometimes attempt suicide attacks. A single Raider can destroy a sizeable transport.

The Raiders from the First Cylon War were larger spacecraft driven by Centurion pilots, and not alive. These are used by the remaining First War Centurions guarding the Original Hybrid and the Cylon Colony, and later became obsolete.

==== Heavy Raiders ====
The later Cylon Raiders are different from Cylon Heavy Raiders. Like the raiders of the First Cylon War, the Heavy Raiders are transports and attack bombers, and are primarily piloted by Sixes and Eights.

==== Basestars ====
Cylon Basestars (alternatively, &quot;Baseships&quot;) are the Cylon&#x27;s primary capital ships, equivalent to the Colonial&#x27;s Battlestars. Basestars were used by the Cylons as early as the First Cylon War. These original Basestars were identical in appearance to the Basestars of the 1978 series, though utilizing kinetic armaments instead of energy weapons. A later model used by The Guardians incorporated the original design in addition to features of the newer models, acting as a &quot;hybrid&quot; of the 2 variants.

By the time of the Second Cylon War, a new model of Basestar was introduced, featuring more advanced systems and a new hull design. Unlike the saucer shaped hulls of the original Basestars&#x27;, the new models feature a more sinister Y-shaped hull, angled in opposite directions. The two halves can be swiveled into a parallel formation for atmospheric flight. Each Basestar is armed with multiple conventional missile batteries, nuclear missiles, and a full complement of raiders. Heavy raiders can also be stored in the ships&#x27; hangars.

The Basestar&#x27;s primary advantages lie in their numbers, advanced technology, and raider complement. Deprived of these, an individual Basestar appears to be no match for a Battlestar in terms of conventional firepower. In &quot;Exodus, Pt. II&quot;, the &quot;Galactica&quot; is able to single-handedly hold off 4 Basestars, while in &quot;The Captain&#x27;s Hand&quot; a single salvo from &quot;Pegasus&quot; is enough to severely damage a Basestar.

The re-imagined Basestars also differ significantly from previous iterations in that they are partially organic. Each Basestar contains organic material integrated into its hull. The material is most apparent in the hangars, which appear to be almost entirely composed of flesh. Additionally, this material allows the Basestar to regenerate damage over time, including regenerating entire missing sections. The interior of the Basestars are sleek in design, though skinjobs can use &quot;projection&quot; to change the appearance from their perspective. Unlike their Colonial counterparts, Basestars are &quot;controlled&quot; directly by the Hybrids. However, skinjobs can interface with the ship via advanced data streams similar in appearance to water. The Basestar&#x27;s FTL drive is also stated to be more advanced and precise than a Battlestar&#x27;s.

=== Humanoid Cylons ===

Although they made only a single appearance in the original continuity (the episode &quot;The Night the Cylons Landed&quot; from &quot;Galactica 1980&quot;) humanoid Cylons are the focus of the reimagining. They are usually known as &quot;the Cylons&quot;, or derogatorily as &quot;skinjobs&quot; or &quot;toasters&quot;. Humanoid Cylons are indistinguishable from humans due to their creation through synthetic biology, employing real bones, flesh and blood rather than metal, but still possess a &quot;digital molecular structure&quot;. Some are programmed to believe that they are &quot;organic&quot; until otherwise informed.

The Cylons can communicate nonverbally, but do not have a hive mind, even among a single model, and are most often shown talking to one another.

The thirteen distinct humanoid models are divided into the &quot;Final Five&quot; that originated on Earth, and &quot;Significant Seven&quot; (the latter term is only used by the &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot; producers). The Final Five are unique, and are the last survivors of the Thirteenth Tribe. They developed the Seven (originally eight) in conjunction with the Centurions of the Twelve Colonies. Each copy shares biology and general personality throughout their model, but they develop into distinct individuals. The Final Five showed the Centurions how to make skinjobs and attempted to give them human characteristics (love, mercy), thinking that these characteristics would prevent war.

Prior to the &quot;Final Five&quot; arriving to stop the first Cylon War on Caprica, the Centurions had already made their first humanoid, called the Hybrid, for the purpose of controlling the baseship. Once the Final Five arrived on Caprica, they transferred their technology to the Centurions and gave them eight fully humanoid models created by them.

Cylon society is made up of the seven, whose types are numbered One, Two, Three, Four, Five, Six and Eight. The extinct Seven model (the &quot;Daniel&quot; series) was destroyed by a One decades prior to the Colonies&#x27; destruction.

==== Origin ====
=====Slower than light technology journey=====

As revealed towards the end of season 4, there is a 2000 year gap between the exodus of the first humanoid Cylons (the Final Five) from the destruction of life on Earth due to a robot Centurion war there, and their arrival at Caprica in the middle of the Caprican robot Centurion war. Originally, the Final Five had left Earth both to seek a new home and to warn the other Twelve Colonies about the dangers of mistreating Centurions so that they might avoid the fate of Earth. However, at the time FTL (faster than light) starship jumping technology was unknown, so they made the journey using slower than light technology, resurrecting themselves when their bodies wore out over the span of 2000 years.

====Resurrection====

When the Earth was nuked, 2000 years prior, the Final Five Cylons had already planned for this event and were resurrected onto their baseship in orbit when their bodies were destroyed in a global nuclear attack that wiped out all life on Earth. This resurrection was the event which triggered the Final Five Cylons to begin their 2000 year journey to Caprica, only to find out upon arrival that humans and Centurion robots had begun fighting towards extinction just as they had 2000 years prior on Earth.

The Final Five arrived at Caprica to discover that the Caprican Centurions had already begun experimenting with creating humanoid Cylons by creating the first Hybrid to control their baseship. As part of the agreement to end the war with humans, the Final Five Cylons gave the Caprican Centurions eight humanoid Cylon models and a resurrection ship.

During the 40-year gap between the end of the first Cylon war and the second Cylon war on Caprica, Cavil, model number One of the eight humanoid Cylons that the Final Five had designed and created, rebelled against the Final Five and took command of the Centurions and of the other humanoid Cylons. To get rid of the Final Five who blocked him from continuing the Cylon war, he tricked the Final Five into living on Caprica with their memories erased and false memories implanted. He was deluded into believing that he could show the Final Five that they were wrong about humans by letting them suffer with the humans as their civilization was destroyed (as a result of him restarting the Cylon war) and then restoring their memories while resurrecting them on the Cylon baseship. Cavil thought this lesson would help the Final Five realize that humans were flawed creatures and thus persuade them to take his side.

Ellen, the original creator of the eight humanoid models, programmed them with a belief in a single all-loving God. She did this because she wanted the Cylons to know love and to be peaceful and to avoid war in the future. However, Cavil rejected his programming of believing in God. Other Cylons, particularly the D&#x27;Anna model, justified attacking the humans perhaps as a form of religious fundamentalism, with the goal of remaking the world as a Cylon One-God utopia.

In addition, Cavil regarded the creation of humanoid Cylons as a mistake and believed that Cylons should return to a purely mechanical form so that they could experience the world in ways not limited by human senses. For example, he said that when a star explodes into a supernova, he wants to see the X-rays and gamma rays with his eyes, and not be limited by biological human eyes.

Cavil was fearful of the mechanical Centurions, and is seen in season 4 rejecting the removal of circuitry that prevents the Centurions from having free will. When Centurions on one of the Cylon baseships received this modification and thus developed free will, they revolted against Cavil because they rejected his policy of removing the biological brains of the Raider ships and returning them to a purely mechanical form so that they would follow orders without emotion interfering. This small rebellion left the Twos, Sixes and Eights in charge of one of the baseships in the Cylon fleet. The rebel baseship later forms an alliance with the human fleet after being attacked by Cavil&#x27;s Cylon fleet and left to drift in space without FTL propulsion.

==== Social interaction ====

A Cylon council (made up of multiple copies of several models) appears to cast votes collectively by model, indicating that model plays an important role in the structure of Cylon society (&quot;Precipice&quot;). Some individuals are implied to have higher or lower ranks than others. During the occupation of New Caprica, a select group of individuals, who mostly had been within the Colonies, such as Boomer and Caprica Six, seemed to have seniority within their model. One of each model was seen deliberating and discussing their course of action, with each of the &quot;senior&quot; copies representing the opinion of their model.

Although little is known about Cylon psychology, it is clear that they share many human emotional vulnerabilities. This is evidenced by Gina&#x27;s catatonic state as a result of the severe trauma of her abuse at the hands of the &quot;Pegasus&quot; crew. This abuse was presented in the form of multiple sexual assaults, battery, starvation and outright torture. Six/Caprica Six also revealed that Cylons exist by &quot;projecting&quot; an environment of their choice on the physical world.

==== Final Five ====

The &quot;final five&quot; Cylons are the last five survivors of the earliest identified race of Cylons. Approximately 4,000 years prior to the events of the show, humans on Kobol developed artificial intelligence, which became the original race of Cylons. This race rebelled and fought in a war against the twelve tribes of humans. While the exact details are not revealed in the show, the two sides eventually reached a resolution and departed Kobol. Religious records at the time described this race as the &quot;thirteenth tribe&quot; and identified that they traveled to a planet they named (the first) Earth. This race self-evolved to look human, eventually losing the ability to resurrect mechanically in favor of biological reproduction. Because of their common Kobolian ancestry, this &quot;thirteenth tribe&quot; kept their own records and religious history, which shared some of the prophetic events outlined in Colonial scriptures; in particular, the departing thirteenth tribe created the &quot;Temple of [the] Five&quot; on their way to &quot;Earth&quot;, and the Final Five returned to it on their way back, with Colonial texts predicting its creation and third visitation by the Humans and Cylons within the series.

Approximately 2,000 years prior to the events of the show, this race of &quot;human&quot; Cylons eventually tried to create a new race of artificially intelligent Cylons as a subservient race, only for them to, in turn, rebel and commit a nuclear war on &quot;Earth&quot;. The &quot;final five&quot; were scientists researching resurrection technology, and escaped by downloading into copies of their bodies stationed in orbit. Realizing their mistakes and that the twelve tribes would eventually repeat this mistake, they fled &quot;Earth&quot; using a sub-light starship and spent the next 2,000 years traveling to the settlements of the 12 colonies in hibernation. They arrived in the Twelve Colonies during the peak of the Cylon rebellion, approximately 40 years prior to the start of the show. In conferring with their distant &quot;cousins&quot;, the Cylon Centurions, they proposed an exchange of technology to accelerate the transformation of the new race of Cylons into biological forms and resurrection technology; additionally, they shared their history and religious knowledge, though did not interfere with the Centurians&#x27; emerging monotheism, ensuring that newer Cylons had knowledge of both. The Centurions agreed and ended the war with humanity, retreating to rebuild and learn from the final five, eventually building and programming the humanoid Cylons which were each given a production number: One (Cavil), Two (Leoben), Three (D&#x27;Anna), Four (Simon), Five (Aaron), Six (various names), Seven (Daniel) and Eight (Sharon).

Over time, Cavil gained influence and betrayed his creators, the &quot;final five&quot;. He killed their physical bodies and &quot;boxed&quot; their personalities. Later he resurrected them periodically, purged their memories and sent them to live among the humans, hoping each would become disillusioned with being &quot;human&quot; and eventually reject the morality, philosophy, and religion used to inform their construction of the younger Cylons. The other six models had no knowledge of the Final Five&#x27;s identities, presumably blocked by Cavil, though they were aware of the existence of five absent models who were not to be spoken of. When D&#x27;Anna (a Three) attempts to learn their identities, Cavil boxes her entire model line as punishment. In the final episode of the third season, four of the final five are revealed to be characters with long histories on the &quot;Galactica&quot;. Their purpose, and how and why they were hidden from the rest of their kind, is a major plot point of the fourth and final season when Ellen Tigh is revealed to be the fifth member.

==== Backstory ====
The named, &quot;human&quot; Cylon models initially refer to the five with reverence; it soon become clear that they are programmed to avoid thinking directly about the five, as their identities are hidden, even from Cylons. Circumventing this programming kills a model three shortly after her revelation, and a model one, Cavil, puts her consciousness into cold storage after resurrection to prevent her from discussing the discovery (&quot;Rapture&quot;).

They were the original humanoid Cylons, born 2,000 years before the series, on Earth, as part of the Thirteenth Tribe. They were born to Cylon parents through sexual reproduction, rather than built. They were the researchers who rebuilt the Cylon resurrection technology that had been abandoned when the Thirteenth Tribe gained the ability to procreate. Saul and Ellen were married at the time, while Tyrol and Foster were in love and planned to marry (&quot;No Exit&quot;).

While on Earth the Final Five learned of the upcoming attack on the Colonies from beings (&quot;Angels&quot;) only they can see. They placed the resurrection technology on a ship in Earth orbit. When the nuclear attack kills them, they resurrect on the ship and head for the Colonies to warn them. They arrive during the First Cylon War, unbeknownst to the humans, and make a deal with the Centurions: stop the war and they will help them build human bodies. They build the first model, One (Cavil), who helps them build seven other models.

Cavil then kills and boxes the Five and removes the memory of their identities from the other Cylons. He later unboxes them, replacing their memories. Cavil periodically seeds them among the human populations starting with Saul, and then Ellen, to show them the evils of humanity.

The Five are fully Cylon – although &quot;fundamentally different&quot; from the others. Unlike the other models, they do not have model numbers.

According to showrunner Ronald D. Moore, as writing progressed on the episode &quot;Torn,&quot; the writing staff needed to explain why Baltar would not see all 12 Cylon models aboard the base star. Moore came up with the concept of five Cylon models that had yet to be revealed.

Other Cylons do not talk about the Five (&quot;Torn&quot;).

==== Identities ====
Saul Tigh (Michael Hogan) and Galen Tyrol (Aaron Douglas) are stationed aboard the &quot;Galactica&quot;, while Sam Anders (Michael Trucco) is an athlete on Caprica. Tory Foster (Rekha Sharma) is a political operative who is rescued from Caprica and works for Roslin. Ellen Tigh (Kate Vernon), is the fifth member, as Saul later realizes (&quot;Sometimes a Great Notion&quot;) as more of his memory returns. Ellen resurrected after she is poisoned by Saul for giving away details of the group&#x27;s rescue mission plan to Cavil on New Caprica. This restores her memory of her life as a Cylon (&quot;No Exit&quot;).

==== Story ====
The Five awaken when they begin to hear strange music. This seems to affect other Cylons. A Raider scans Anders and disengages an attack. Aboard &quot;Galactica&quot;, Caprica Six tells Roslin that she can feel the Final Five and that they are near. (&quot;He That Believeth In Me&quot;) Twos, Sixes and Eights believe that the Raiders called off the attack because they sensed the Final Five, something with which the Ones, Fours and Fives disagree. This disagreement leads directly to the Cylon Civil War, in which the Twos, Sixes, and Eights rebel (&quot;Six of One&quot;). A standoff between &quot;Galactica&quot; and the rebel Baseship exposes the four as Cylons to the humans, but Lee Adama, in his capacity as acting President, grants them amnesty as part of an alliance (&quot;Revelations&quot;).

Only Anders and Ellen regain their complete memories: when Anders gets shot in the head, it seems to break Cavil&#x27;s block on his memory, while Ellen&#x27;s resurrection restores all of her memories. Cavil had planned for the Five to die in the destruction of the Colonies, download, regain their true memories and apologize for their faith in humanity (&quot;The Plan&quot;). Instead, four of the Final Five survive the destruction of the Colonies without resurrecting (Tigh and Tyrol were on &quot;Galactica&quot; and Tory and Anders survived through luck) while Cavil kept Ellen alive so she could suffer more and learn her &quot;lesson&quot;. Cavils&#x27; plan thus fails, as all of the Five (with the possible exception of Foster) maintain their loyalty to humanity.

They play a major role in ending the second war, taking a prominent role in the Battle of The Colony, especially Anders who acts as &quot;Galactica&#x27;s&quot; Hybrid and shuts down the Colony&#x27;s weapons and Hybrids. The Five also nearly bring a peace between human and Cylon by exchanging resurrection technology (which can only be rebuilt by the combined knowledge of the Five) for peace.

They see each other&#x27;s memories and Tyrol learns that Tory had murdered his wife. In a rage, he strangles her, shattering the temporary peace, although a fortuitous nuclear explosion and Cavil&#x27;s subsequent suicide effectively ends the war moments later.

After escaping and reaching a new Earth, Anders flies the fleet into the Sun, destroying it and himself, leaving only three of the Final Five alive.

=== Hybrids ===
The Hybrids resemble human beings inside an immersion tank similar to a Cylon rebirthing tank. The Hybrids are cyborgs, consisting of conduits and other connectors mated to biological elements. The Hybrid is not one of the &quot;thirteen models&quot;. It represents a step on the path from mechanical Centurion, to partially bio-mechanical Raider, to Hybrid, to skinjob. Hybrids are so integrated into the basestar&#x27;s functionality that they are, for all practical purposes, its brains.

Hybrids continually speak what most of the humanoid Cylons consider to be gibberish, although there is some difference of opinion on this point. Many Cylons believe a hybrid&#x27;s conscious mind is completely mad and the functions it performs are part of a deeper state of mind in connection with the ship. Caprica Six states that the Conoy model believes that every word a hybrid says is channeled from the Cylon god. A Hybrid is not allowed to vote in the Cylon democratic process, though it sometimes objects to the resulting decisions, for example, leaving another basestar full of disease-infected Cylons to their fates.

One Hybrid, considered the &quot;First Hybrid&quot; in Cylon lore, was the result of experiments on humans during the First Cylon War and appears to be more coherent and prophetic than the others. It went rogue as early as the end of the First War, and is protected by model 0005 Cylons called Guardians, who consider it their god. According to the skinjobs, the First Hybrid and its Guardians are legends. The Colonial Fleet accidentally clashes with the Guardians, destroying them, the First Hybrid along with its basestar. The First Hybrid has the appearance of an old man, whereas the standard Hybrids look like young women and are identical.

After he is shot in the head and enters a vegetative state, Sam Anders is connected to a datastream and as a result develops Hybrid-like abilities, whereupon he acts as &quot;Galactica&quot;&#x27;s Hybrid. When hooked up, he speaks and acts like a Hybrid. This shows that apparently under special circumstances, normal Cylons, or at least the Final Five, can become Hybrid-like beings.

The Basestar Hybrids are played by Tiffany Lyndall-Knight. The First Hybrid is played by Campbell Lane.

=== Religion ===
Humanoid Cylons, except for the Cavil models, follow a monotheistic religion. Religious fanaticism partially motivates their attempted genocide of humanity. Despite their origins the Cylons believe themselves to be spiritual beings. This monotheism seems to share some of the characteristics as the Abrahamic religions: belief that God is omniscient, omnipotent, omnibenevolent, that he will one day deliver divine retribution and that he intervenes in the mundane world. Their beliefs are different from the Abrahamic religions in that they deal with issues such as consciousness, enlightenment and reincarnation.

Moore said that this spirituality comes when a species becomes sentient and self-aware – questioning faith and religion and about what happens after death.

The different Cylon models have slightly different ways of talking about and dealing with their god, reflecting the different aspects of humanity that each Cylon model reflects. Ones do not all believe in God and can be agnostic or atheist. In contrast, Twos are fanatically religious.

=== Vulnerabilities ===
Cylons are physically stronger and more resilient than humans. While this is obvious with respect to Centurions, the extent to which the Twelve are also is unclear. In the miniseries, William Adama fought with a Two who, despite suffering from radiation poisoning, proved to be stronger. The Two managed to break a metal pipe off of a plumbing fixture to use as a club, and lift Adama off the floor with one arm. Another Two was able to break apart a pair of metal handcuffs while under interrogation (&quot;Flesh and Bone&quot;). A Six engaged Kara Thrace hand-to-hand and proved to be exceptionally fast, agile and strong (&quot;Kobol&#x27;s Last Gleaming II&quot;). Despite this, Cylons are (slightly less) vulnerable to most of the same things as humans. The Two who fought Adama was beaten to death with a flashlight, while the Six who fought Thrace was impaled by a piece of rebar. While the Twelve exceed human strength, they do not possess superhuman powers or resilience. Cylon skin appears just as vulnerable to breaking as human skin, bleeding just as a comparable wound would in a human.

Cylons&#x27; mental faculties are sufficiently similar to those of a human to allow for manipulation. Cain and Thrace exploited this fact while &quot;interrogating&quot; Cylons. The experience of death (even ameliorated by resurrection) is traumatic and can leave deep emotional damage.

Cylons are susceptible to an ancient virus that can be transmitted by rodents to which humans are immune, lymphocytic encephalitis. This virus was carried on a beacon left by the Thirteenth Tribe at the Lion&#x27;s Head Nebula millennia before and disrupts all organic Cylon technology including Raiders, Hybrids (which in turn disrupts Centurions) and the skinjobs. The humans speculate that the beacon was accidentally contaminated when someone sneezed. The Cylons believe that a critical symptom of this virus, a harmful bioelectric feedback, can be transmitted during a download and attempt to prevent infected Cylons from downloading. The only immune Cylon is Athena, who had given birth to a half-human child and thus &quot;inherited&quot; human antibodies from her offspring (although it is unclear whether she retained this immunity after downloading).

Dr. Cottle developed a vaccine after some Cylons were infected on a basestar near the Lion&#x27;s Head Nebula. The disease requires regular booster shots to keep an infected Cylon healthy. The Cylons failed to develop a cure or a permanent vaccine to the virus.

Cylons&#x27; silica pathways are affected by certain forms of radiation, such as that surrounding Ragnar Anchorage. It is assumed but not stated that this radiation affects all of the skinjobs as the station was chosen as a refuge by Commander Adama before he learned of the existence of biomechanical models. The radiation had deleterious effects on the Two they found at Ragnar Anchorage but not on Adama. This suggests that humans are not vulnerable to this type of radiation. However, it took some hours for the radiation exposure to have any significant impact on the Cylons, the Two observing that he was still able to walk and fight even after being on the station for several hours (although Adama expressed doubt about whether he could download in that state), and a Five on &quot;Galactica&quot; only manifested symptoms a short while after the fleet abandoned him on the station.

Plutonium was allegedly used for Baltar&#x27;s Cylon Detector because its radiation affects humans and Cylons differently. The detector was dropped as a method of exposing hidden Cylons early in Season 2 as the revelation that Boomer (a test subject) was a Cylon convinced the command staff that the detector did not work.

==In other media==
Cylons have made appearances in other media besides tv series and movies, including novels, comic books, and a video game.

===Novels===
* In the novelization of the series pilot, the Cylons are described as a militaristic, reptilian race which has been conquering its way across the galaxy. The novelization is written by Glen Larson, the series creator, who originally intended the Cylons to be an alien species; and, in fact, dialog which was later edited out of &quot;Saga of a Star World&quot; illustrated this point. However, network censors were concerned about violence, so the Cylons became robots. By this time, two novels had been written describing the Cylons as multibrained aliens, so the Cylon Drone was invented to justify all the robots dying on-screen. As living, organic beings, the original Cylon troops could be promoted through the surgical implantation of a second brain. When a Cylon was elevated to Imperious Leader, he received a third brain.
* The novelization of the original series states that an elite class of Command Centurions act as executive officers to the Imperious Leader and are not subordinate to the IL-Series. In the TV series they are distinguished from other Command Centurions by black bands on their gold armor and are very rarely seen. Vulpa was originally of this class but had been demoted and stationed on ice planet Arcta.
* In the later novelization of the original series it is stated that there is a class lower than the typical Centurion, that of the Cylon Drone. Although appearing identical to Centurions, Drones are robots, not capable of sophisticated independent thought—beyond following simple instructions to perform menial tasks.

==== Multibrain status and built-in lie detectors ====
The Berkley book series also explored two other aspects of Cylon design. The first is the development of multiple brain status. This allows Cylons additional thinking and deductive abilities. The second is an unexplained talent for knowing when a human is lying, which was suggested in the episode &quot;The Lost Warrior&quot;.

Presented in &quot;The Gun on Ice Planet Zero&quot; book, the second of the two novels written before the network insisted the Cylons become robots, their multibrain status is the surgical inclusion of an auxiliary brain, allowing for higher-level thinking abilities. The command centurion and garrison commander on planet Tairac, Vulpa, demonstrated this ability.

* Cylon centurions (the chrome soldiers) have single brain status.
* Command centurions have three brain status.
* Imperious leaders enjoy three or four brain status.
* IL-series Cylons, such as Lucifer and Specter, have second brain status.

===Comic books===
According to the Maximum Press comic of &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot;, just prior to the start of The Thousand Yahren War, the Cylons&#x27;s Imperious Leader made a deal with the mysterious and demonic Count Iblis (meaning &quot;Satan&quot; in the Arabic language) to betray his entire race in exchange for power that would allow him to &quot;become like Count Iblis&quot;. Count Iblis, however, having lied about the process of &quot;empowerment&quot;, instead changed the Imperious Leader into a cybernetic entity, more machine than organic being. Enraged, the Imperious Leader swore revenge and became more and more driven by conquest and warfare.

In the Realm Press comic, the Cylons were originally led by a ruthless, conquest and expansionism-driven emperor named Sobekkta, one of the original living Cylons, who were a race of intelligent humanoid reptiles.

In &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot; # 16 &quot;Berserker!&quot; During a planetary search, Apollo, unfortunately comes across a lone Mark III prototype Cylon. This advanced Cylon is more creative and adaptive like humans in its strategy making the Mark III more capable to defeat humans. However, the existing Cylons deemed this advanced Cylon prototype more a threat to them due to its unquenchable megalomania to rule so they marooned him far from the Cylon empire until needed (if ever).

===Video games===
In 1978, Mattel Electronics released a handheld electronic LED game based on the series, where the player tries to defend &quot;Galactica&quot; from kamikaze Cylon Raiders.

==In popular culture==
In television
* The re-imagined series shows that the original Cylon models were extremely similar to the ones from the original series. In fact, actual props from the original were used in the display cases containing a Cylon Baseship and the upper torso and arms of a centurion.
* Two Cylon references can be witnessed in the &quot;Futurama&quot; series. In &quot;Bendin&#x27; in the Wind&quot;, a Cylon is part of the musical duo &quot;Cylon and Garfunkel&quot;, a parody of Simon and Garfunkel. In &quot;The Six Million Dollar Mon&quot;, Hermes has both a Cylon eye and a Cylon &#x27;member&#x27; when in bed with his wife, LaBarbara.
* In the &quot;Farscape&quot; episode &quot;I Shrink, Therefore I Am&quot;, Crichton&#x27;s ship is invaded by a race with bioengineered exoskeletons. &quot;This is John Crichton paging the head cylon, pick up the phone imperious leader.&quot;
* The classic Cylons have also appeared on &quot;The Simpsons&quot; on several occasions, the most notable in &quot;Mayored to the Mob&quot; during a sci-fi convention. There&#x27;s a quick gag in a boxing arena where three Centurions square off against R2-D2 and C-3PO from &quot;Star Wars&quot;. (&quot;See the mighty robots from &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot; fight the gay robots from &quot;Star Wars&quot;!&quot;) They easily pin C-3PO to the floor, and R2 refuses to help.
* In the FOX animated series &quot;Family Guy&quot;, the host of &quot;KISS Forum&quot; also hosts &quot;Battlestar Galactica Forum&quot; on Quahog&#x27;s public-access television cable TV channel. He introduces the forum by putting a classic Centurion mask on and saying &quot;Welcome to Battlestar Galactica Forum&quot; in traditional Cylon computerized monotone.
* Several Cylons appear briefly in the &quot;South Park&quot; epic &quot;Imaginationland&quot;, as one of the evil fictional creations set free when the barrier between the &quot;good&quot; and &quot;evil&quot; halves of the imagination is destroyed by terrorists.
* In the opening credits of certain seasons of &quot;The A-Team&quot;, Dirk Benedict watches a Cylon walk past (while at the Universal Studios tour), raises a finger and opens his mouth as if to say something, then gives up. Dirk Benedict played the character Starbuck in the original &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot; series. This scene is later recreated on the animated show &quot;Family Guy&quot;.
* In a third season episode of &quot;Knight Rider&quot;, &quot;Halloween Knight&quot;, the episode villain is shown briefly in a Cylon mask. Both series were created by Glen A. Larson.
* Cylons were the focus of a short skit on the Adult Swim program &quot;Robot Chicken&quot;, in which it is said that the original Cylon actors had so many problems walking around in their suits that they were constantly falling down.
* In &quot;The Replacements&quot; episode &quot;Space Family Daring&quot;, Riley finds a head of a Cylon in a cabinet on board the spaceship.
* In &quot;SpongeBob SquarePants&quot;:
** In the episode &quot;Plankton&#x27;s Army&quot;, Plankton uses a robotic fish that features a revolving light over its &quot;eyes&quot; that is highly reminiscent of the Cylons&#x27; eyes.
** In another episode, &quot;Komputer Overload&quot;, Plankton replaces his computer wife, Karen, with three robots made from random items lying around the Chum Bucket, one of which happens to be an old chrome-plated toaster, possibly meant to be a reference to the Colonials&#x27; nickname for the Cylon Centurions (&quot;Toasters&quot;).
* In the CBS program &quot;The Big Bang Theory&quot;, the character Sheldon makes Cylon toast.
* In the ABC medical drama &quot;Grey&#x27;s Anatomy&quot;, in season 12 episode 3, the character Maggie Pierce goes on a rant about being alone and refers to her half-sister Meredith as a Cylon. Quote: &quot;You&#x27;re a cylon, this is Galactica&quot;.
* In the &quot;New Girl&quot; episode &quot;Backslide&quot;, Jess thinks she is a Cylon because she cannot stay in relationships.

In other media
* Several Cylon Centurions make an appearance as animatronics in the &quot;Alien Attack&quot; ride in &quot;Beverly Hills Cop 3&quot;.
* In the 2017 film &quot;&quot;, Poppy&#x27;s robot guard dogs have Cylon eye scanners.
* In the source code of Mozilla (and its Netscape predecessor), the indeterminate progress bar that slides back and forth—rather than rolling or filling up from left to right—is referred to as the &quot;Cylon&quot;.
* A Cylon lookalike robot is featured in the official music video for Bloc Party&#x27;s single, &quot;Flux&quot;.
* In the video game &quot;Persona 3&quot;, one of the items the player can buy is a drink called &quot;Cylon Tea&quot;, a pun on Ceylon tea.
* The album &quot;Programmed to Love&quot; by British electronica band Bent features the song &quot;Cylons in Love&quot;.
* In the Dark Horse &quot;Star Wars&quot; comic series &quot;Tag and Bink&quot;, Cylons appear as the Emperor&#x27;s Guards, Tag and Bink, in addition to many other references to other science fiction franchises.
* British comedians Mitchell and Webb parody the re-imagined series in a sketch in which the human crew fear that the ship has been infiltrated by &quot;fracking machines&quot;, apparently oblivious to their clearly robotic colleague that orders oil in the staff canteen.
*Larami came out with a bubble toy in 1978 called the Battlestar Galactica Cylon Bubble Machine as well as a line of other inexpensive toys.

==References==
==External links==
* (Original series)
* (Reboot series)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q582567" start="4" end="10" title="Cylons" label="Cylons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11012" start="34" end="39" title="robot" label="robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q836013" start="54" end="74" title="Battlestar Galactica" label="Battlestar Galactica"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="81" end="96" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367132" start="194" end="205" title="Battlestar Galactica (1978 TV series)" label="1978 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q604202" start="231" end="249" title="Galactica 1980" label="1980 sequel series"/>
<link wikidata="Q237072" start="255" end="278" title="Battlestar Galactica (2004 TV series)" label="2004–2009 reboot series"/>
<link wikidata="Q579554" start="318" end="325" title="Caprica (TV series)" label="Caprica"/>
<link wikidata="Q85796612" start="400" end="418" title="reptilian humanoid" label="reptilian humanoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367132" start="1138" end="1158" title="Battlestar Galactica (1978 TV series)" label="Battlestar Galactica"/>
<link wikidata="Q604524" start="1177" end="1191" title="Glen A. Larson" label="Glen A. Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q604202" start="2062" end="2076" title="Galactica 1980" label="Galactica 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358081" start="2164" end="2175" title="Roger Davis (television actor)" label="Roger Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437846" start="2228" end="2255" title="The Night the Cylons Landed" label="The Night the Cylons Landed"/>
<link wikidata="Q237072" start="2332" end="2351" title="Battlestar Galactica (2004 TV series)" label="2000s reboot series"/>
<link wikidata="Q508242" start="2424" end="2439" title="Ralph McQuarrie" label="Ralph McQuarrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758315" start="2486" end="2500" title="Andrew Probert" label="Andrew Probert"/>
<link wikidata="Q51785" start="2554" end="2567" title="Stormtrooper (Star Wars)" label="Stormtroopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="2579" end="2588" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="2645" end="2661" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="2712" end="2729" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358778" start="2801" end="2829" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit" label="9th Circuit Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q436719" start="3142" end="3156" title="Patrick Macnee" label="Patrick Macnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q124060883" start="3158" end="3165" title="Lucifer (Battlestar Galactica)" label="Lucifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q124060883" start="3287" end="3298" title="Lord Baltar" label="Lord Baltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q322399" start="3300" end="3312" title="John Colicos" label="John Colicos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287014" start="3328" end="3343" title="Jonathan Harris" label="Jonathan Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q908562" start="3369" end="3376" title="Vocoder" label="Vocoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q836013" start="3623" end="3643" title="Battlestar Galactica" label="Battlestar Galactica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773798" start="4122" end="4141" title="historic recurrence" label="historic recurrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q579554" start="4758" end="4765" title="Caprica" label="Caprica"/>
<link wikidata="Q582567" start="6632" end="6645" title="Cylon Raiders" label="Cylon Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q582567" start="6656" end="6665" title="Cylon Basestar" label="Basestars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020232" start="7407" end="7420" title="Sleeper agent" label="Sleeper agent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9350" end="9375" title="Number Eight (Battlestar Galactica)#Sharon &amp;quot;Athena&amp;quot; Agathon" label="a model &amp;quot;Eight&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183377" start="9380" end="9392" title="Karl Agathon" label="Karl Agathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188443" start="11356" end="11362" title="Number Six (Battlestar Galactica)" label="angels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12909" end="12920" title="Number Six (Battlestar Galactica)#Caprica Six" label="Caprica Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q579554" start="12934" end="12941" title="Caprica (fictional planet)" label="Caprica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908648" start="13026" end="13038" title="Gaius Baltar" label="Gaius Baltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="13116" end="13129" title="hydrogen bomb" label="thermonuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q20068" start="13231" end="13240" title="Battlestar Galactica (ship)" label="Galactica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11990" start="13469" end="13480" title="procreation" label="procreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050931" start="13706" end="13711" title="Number Eight (Battlestar Galactica)" label="Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183377" start="13827" end="13860" title="Karl Agathon" label="Lt. Karl &amp;quot;Helo&amp;quot; Agathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q622667" start="15086" end="15108" title="Laura Roslin" label="President Laura Roslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q138796" start="15646" end="15656" title="Resistance movement" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752350" start="15735" end="15752" title="summary execution" label="summary execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q623077" start="16120" end="16125" title="Number Three (Battlestar Galactica)" label="Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q15703000" start="17218" end="17235" title="resurrection ship" label="resurrection ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q746240" start="18995" end="19038" title="Battlestar Galactica (TV miniseries)" label="&amp;quot;Battlestar Galactica&amp;quot; miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19253" end="19280" title="Battlestar Galactica: Razor" label="Battlestar Galactica: Razor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="19386" end="19389" title="Computer-generated imagery" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="19453" end="19462" title="Retroactive continuity" label="retconned"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243084" start="19642" end="19650" title="Daybreak (Battlestar Galactica)" label="Daybreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825943" start="20072" end="20076" title="Torn (Battlestar Galactica)" label="Torn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431123" start="20251" end="20256" title="Faith (Battlestar Galactica)" label="Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532956" start="20410" end="20420" title="Six of One (Battlestar Galactica)" label="Six of One"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="23542" end="23556" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="23677" end="23692" title="nuclear weapons" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q485" start="23763" end="23779" title="computer viruses" label="computer viruses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420540" start="25830" end="25856" title="Exodus (Battlestar Galactica)" label="&amp;quot;Exodus, Pt. II&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q613806" start="25948" end="25971" title="The Captain&amp;#x27;s Hand" label="The Captain&amp;#x27;s Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437846" start="27035" end="27062" title="The Night the Cylons Landed" label="The Night the Cylons Landed"/>
<link wikidata="Q604202" start="27080" end="27094" title="Galactica 1980" label="Galactica 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q15703266" start="33425" end="33434" title="Precipice (Battlestar Galactica)" label="Precipice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188443" start="34230" end="34245" title="Number Six (Battlestar Galactica)" label="Six/Caprica Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q15703291" start="38716" end="38723" title="Rapture (Battlestar Galactica)" label="Rapture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044161" start="39192" end="39199" title="No Exit (Battlestar Galactica)" label="No Exit"/>
<link wikidata="Q836013" start="39530" end="39545" title="First Cylon War" label="First Cylon War"/>
<link wikidata="Q549942" start="40204" end="40219" title="Ronald D. Moore" label="Ronald D. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825943" start="40264" end="40268" title="Torn (Battlestar Galactica)" label="Torn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825943" start="40508" end="40512" title="Torn (Battlestar Galactica)" label="Torn"/>
<link wikidata="Q719134" start="40554" end="40567" title="Michael Hogan (Canadian actor)" label="Michael Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q301940" start="40586" end="40599" title="Aaron Douglas (actor)" label="Aaron Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q635974" start="40667" end="40681" title="Michael Trucco" label="Michael Trucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q651681" start="40722" end="40734" title="Rekha Sharma" label="Rekha Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q288688" start="40823" end="40834" title="Kate Vernon" label="Kate Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560319" start="40888" end="40912" title="Sometimes a Great Notion (Battlestar Galactica)" label="Sometimes a Great Notion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044161" start="41143" end="41150" title="No Exit (Battlestar Galactica)" label="No Exit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688951" start="41433" end="41456" title="He That Believeth In Me" label="He That Believeth In Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532956" start="41734" end="41744" title="Six of One (Battlestar Galactica)" label="Six of One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317842" start="41961" end="41972" title="Revelations (Battlestar Galactica)" label="Revelations"/>
<link wikidata="Q235799" start="43696" end="43702" title="cyborg" label="cyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q139720" start="45395" end="45411" title="Persistent vegetative state" label="vegetative state"/>
<link wikidata="Q623077" start="45413" end="45423" title="Sam Anders" label="Sam Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028106" start="45829" end="45842" title="Campbell Lane" label="Campbell Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="45917" end="45929" title="monotheism" label="monotheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639721" start="45940" end="45960" title="Religious fanaticism" label="Religious fanaticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="46161" end="46179" title="Abrahamic religion" label="Abrahamic religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q226765" start="46270" end="46288" title="divine retribution" label="divine retribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q128593" start="46462" end="46475" title="reincarnation" label="reincarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488994" start="46541" end="46549" title="Sentience" label="sentient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314553" start="46554" end="46564" title="Self-awareness" label="self-aware"/>
<link wikidata="Q262249" start="46813" end="46817" title="Brother Cavil" label="Ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q150425" start="47827" end="47832" title="rebar" label="rebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878776" start="48441" end="48465" title="lymphocytic choriomeningitis" label="lymphocytic encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119288" start="48859" end="48870" title="bioelectric" label="bioelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="48871" end="48879" title="feedback" label="feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032648" start="49197" end="49207" title="Dr. Cottle" label="Dr. Cottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="50352" end="50361" title="Plutonium" label="Plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52748" end="52764" title="List of Battlestar Galactica (1978 TV series) and Galactica 1980 episodes#Battlestar Galactica (TV series)" label="The Lost Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874687" start="53417" end="53430" title="Maximum Press" label="Maximum Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q836013" start="53501" end="53524" title="Cylon War" label="The Thousand Yahren War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437846" start="53605" end="53616" title="Count Iblis" label="Count Iblis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="53632" end="53637" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061441" start="54789" end="54807" title="Mattel Electronics" label="Mattel Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="54839" end="54842" title="LED" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q133194" start="54929" end="54937" title="kamikaze" label="kamikaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q237072" start="54997" end="55015" title="Battlestar Galactica (2004 TV series)" label="re-imagined series"/>
<link wikidata="Q73622" start="55311" end="55319" title="Futurama" label="Futurama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994604" start="55343" end="55367" title="Bendin&amp;#x27; in the Wind" label="Bendin&amp;#x27; in the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q484918" start="55455" end="55474" title="Simon and Garfunkel" label="Simon and Garfunkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051290" start="55485" end="55511" title="The Six Million Dollar Mon" label="The Six Million Dollar Mon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55519" end="55525" title="List of Futurama characters#Hermes Conrad" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q456666" start="55631" end="55639" title="Farscape" label="Farscape"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55692" end="55700" title="List of Farscape characters#John Crichton" label="Crichton"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="55909" end="55921" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617334" start="55976" end="55994" title="Mayored to the Mob" label="Mayored to the Mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q51788" start="56114" end="56119" title="R2-D2" label="R2-D2"/>
<link wikidata="Q51787" start="56124" end="56129" title="C-3PO" label="C-3PO"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="56141" end="56150" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="56376" end="56386" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q119400" start="56496" end="56520" title="public-access television" label="public-access television"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="56752" end="56762" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q938239" start="56780" end="56795" title="Imaginationland Episode I" label="Imaginationland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="56960" end="56970" title="terrorists" label="terrorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q464123" start="57025" end="57035" title="The A-Team" label="The A-Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q471006" start="57043" end="57056" title="Dirk Benedict" label="Dirk Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="57097" end="57114" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="57355" end="57365" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q464009" start="57410" end="57422" title="Knight Rider (1982 TV series)" label="Knight Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q604524" start="57542" end="57556" title="Glen A. Larson" label="Glen A. Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="57605" end="57615" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q8822" start="57630" end="57643" title="Robot Chicken" label="Robot Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q376045" start="57804" end="57820" title="The Replacements (TV series)" label="The Replacements"/>
<link wikidata="Q83279" start="57946" end="57967" title="SpongeBob SquarePants" label="SpongeBob SquarePants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096984" start="58027" end="58035" title="Plankton and Karen" label="Plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8539" start="58534" end="58553" title="The Big Bang Theory" label="The Big Bang Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q629583" start="58575" end="58582" title="Sheldon Cooper" label="Sheldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q438406" start="58635" end="58654" title="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy" label="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22678832" start="58700" end="58713" title="Maggie Pierce" label="Maggie Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q429828" start="58777" end="58785" title="Meredith Grey" label="Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q844059" start="58872" end="58880" title="New Girl" label="New Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5929733" start="58918" end="58922" title="Jessica Day (New Girl)" label="Jess"/>
<link wikidata="Q494002" start="59052" end="59063" title="animatronic" label="animatronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q654736" start="59105" end="59136" title="Beverly Hills Cop III" label="&amp;quot;Beverly Hills Cop 3&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9661" start="59250" end="59257" title="Mozilla" label="Mozilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q235419" start="59267" end="59275" title="Netscape Navigator" label="Netscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q205838" start="59512" end="59522" title="Bloc Party" label="Bloc Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463018" start="59544" end="59548" title="Flux (Bloc Party song)" label="Flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q910889" start="59582" end="59591" title="Persona 3" label="Persona 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q105616623" start="59685" end="59695" title="Ceylon tea" label="Ceylon tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248474" start="59715" end="59733" title="Programmed to Love" label="Programmed to Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q818198" start="59768" end="59772" title="Bent (band)" label="Bent"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="59828" end="59838" title="Dark Horse Comics" label="Dark Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="59845" end="59854" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675099" start="59880" end="59892" title="Tag and Bink" label="Tag and Bink"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881454" start="60052" end="60069" title="Mitchell and Webb" label="Mitchell and Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488647" start="60305" end="60311" title="Larami" label="Larami"/>
<link wikidata="Q76190" start="60328" end="60334" title="soap bubble" label="bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488647" start="60358" end="60399" title="Battlestar Galactica Cylon Bubble Machine" label="Battlestar Galactica Cylon Bubble Machine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880725" wikidata="Q57504" url="?curid=880725" title="Otto Ernst Remer">
<text>Otto Ernst Remer (18 August 1912 – 4 October 1997) was a German &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; Army officer in World War II who played a major role in stopping the 20 July plot in 1944 against Adolf Hitler. He was a Captain and Major (1943-1944) and finally a Colonel and a General in 1945 . In his later years, he became a politician and far-right activist. He co-founded the Socialist Reich Party in West Germany in the 1950s and is considered an influential figure in postwar neo-fascist politics in Germany.

==Early life==
Otto Ernest Remer was born at Neubrandenburg, Mecklenburg-Strelitz, in the German Empire on 18 August 1912. He attended a military academy and was commissioned as an officer in the German Army 1932 at the age of 20, a few months before Adolf Hitler rose to power in Germany, initiating a series of laws in the Weimar Republic which made him the sole leader in the country.

==Military career==

Remer began his career in April 1933 as an ensign in the 4th Prussian Infantry Regiment. Remer took part in the Invasion of Poland in 1939 (upon which he was awarded the rank of Oberleutnant or Lieutenant), the Balkans Campaign, and Operation Barbarossa. In April 1942, he was posted to Infantry Regiment Großdeutschland.

In February 1943, he commanded an infantry battalion (with the rank of Army Hauptmann/Captain or Army Major) in the Großdeutschland Division (GD), after Infantry Regiment GD was reformed into a division. His troops covered the withdrawal of a Waffen-SS tank corps during the Third Battle of Kharkov. He was awarded the Knight&#x27;s Cross for his service as battalion commander and, in November 1943, he was awarded the Oak leaves to the Knight&#x27;s Cross, which was presented personally by Adolf Hitler.

===20 July 1944 Plot===

In March 1944, Remer was appointed as the commanding officer of Wachbataillon Großdeutschland. On 20 July 1944 Wehrmacht officers staged a coup d&#x27;etat and attempted to assassinate Adolf Hitler by means of a bomb-attack at the &quot;Wolf&#x27;s Lair&quot; in East Prussia. Remer, who was in Berlin at the time, first heard news of it from members of the Nazi Party, and waited for official word of Hitler&#x27;s fate.
In the evening of 20 July 1944, Claus von Stauffenberg, the officer who had carried out the attack upon Hitler arrived back in Berlin, and, believing that he had succeeded in killing him, issued orders to Remer to arrest several senior Nazi Government officials, claiming that they were part of a coup. Upon being ordered by General Paul von Hase to arrest Minister of Propaganda Joseph Goebbels, Remer went to Goebbels&#x27; office to do so. However, on arrival, Remer was met by Goebbels&#x27; protestations that Hitler was still alive and had issued counter-orders to those Remer was enforcing. When Remer asked for proof, Goebbels picked up the phone and asked to be put through to Hitler at the &quot;Wolf&#x27;s Lair&quot;, then handed him the telephone receiver, upon which Remer heard Hitler&#x27;s voice, ordering him to crush the plot in Berlin with the troops under his command. Remer with this realised that he had been taking orders from the mutineers and returning with his troops to the Berlin Military Headquarters, &quot;Bendlerblock&quot;, he arrested the plotters, including Stauffenberg.

Colonel general Friedrich Fromm had the plotters immediately summarily executed by firing squad, despite Remer&#x27;s protestations that he had been told to keep the plotters alive if possible pending further orders from Hitler, who was returning to Berlin. (General Fromm himself would subsequently be executed by firing squad.) That same night Remer was promoted two ranks to Oberst (Colonel), then to General in early 1945.

For the rest of the war, Remer commanded the &quot;Führerbegleitbrigade&quot; (FBB), a field unit formed from a Grossdeutschland cadre, in East Prussia, and during the Ardennes Offensive. He was captured by the United States Army towards the end of the war and remained a prisoner of war until 1947.

== Postwar life ==

=== Political activities ===
After his release from allied captivity, he became involved in West German post-war politics. He set up a political organisation, the Socialist Reich Party, in 1950, which was promptly banned in 1952 for making inflammatory political statements, but not before it had gathered 360,000 supporters in Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein, and won 16 seats in the state parliament. The Socialist Reich Party also won eight seats in the Parliament of the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen. The party had received some financing from the Soviet Union, and worked with the Communist Party of Germany, whose aim was the destabilisation of the West German state. Among the campaigning themes of the Socialist Reich Party was that the Holocaust had been an allied propaganda invention (it accused the United States of building fake gas chambers and producing bogus newsreel footage about concentration camps), that the politics of the newly-formed West German state which had been created by the Allied powers were merely a front for American domination, and that West Germany&#x27;s purported status as a puppet of the United States should be opposed.

=== Exile ===

With the party banned, Remer faced criminal charges from the West German government for being actively engaged in an attempt to re-establish a neo-Nazi political movement. After an arrest warrant was issued against him on these charges, he went into hiding at a chalet belonging to Countess Faber-Castell, an early supporter of the Socialist Reich Party, before subsequently fleeing to Egypt. There, he served as an advisor to Gamal Abdel Nasser, and worked with other expatriate Germans assisting Arab states with the development of their armed forces. He was a frequent acquaintance of Johann von Leers. In 1956, Remer was reported to be in Damascus, engaging in the arms trade; the Algerian National Liberation Front was one of his customers. 

&quot;I know Mr. Arafat quite well, naturally,&quot; he asserted. &quot;I saw him many times. He invited me to eat at his headquarters. I knew all his people. They wanted many things from us.&quot; For Remer, anyone who was an enemy of Israel was his friend, particularly when a profit could be turned. He claimed to have brokered several business deals between West German companies and the PLO, but Remer denied that he also arranged arms shipments for the PLO. &quot;I couldn&#x27;t have done so,&quot; he maintained. &quot;Arafat gets all he wants from Russia. A German arms dealer can&#x27;t get into business there.&quot;

=== Criminal prosecution ===

He returned to West Germany in the 1980s, once more involving himself in politics with the setting up of an organization entitled the &quot;German Freedom Movement&quot; (G.F.M.), which advocated the reunification of East and West Germany and the removal of NATO military forces from West German soil. The G.F.M. was an umbrella organisation for multiple underground neo-Nazi splinter groups of varying descriptions, and Remer used it to influence a younger generation of post-war Germans.

From 1991 to 1994, Remer published a political newsletter entitled &quot;Remer-Depesche&quot;, conveying his political philosophy. Its content led to a court case where he was sentenced to 22 months&#x27; imprisonment in October 1992 for incitement of racial hatred by writing and publishing a series of articles stating that the Holocaust was a myth. (The political impact of the case upon the Government is discussed in Searle&#x27;s &quot;Wehrmacht Generals&quot;.) Remer filed numerous appeals against his conviction, however his complaints of unfairness of trial and violations of freedom of speech were unanimously rejected, ultimately by the European Commission on Human Rights, to which he had taken his case. In February 1994, having exhausted all means of appeal in the newly united Federal German Republic, he fled to Spain to avoid the prison sentence. From there he supported the activities internationally of people publicly questioning the historical veracity of the Holocaust, such as Fred Leuchter and Germar Rudolf. The High Court of Spain ruled against requests made by the German Government for his extradition back to Germany, stating that he had not committed any crimes under Spanish law.

=== Legacy and death ===

Helmut Friebe, a leader of the Alliance of German Soldiers and former &quot;Generalleutnant&quot; of the Wehrmacht, had the following to say about Remer: &quot;No judgment will be made here as to whether his decision on 20 July was right or wrong. But the consequences of his decision were so terrible... that we old soldiers had expected that a man to whom destiny gave such a burden to carry until the end of his life would recognize this, and would thereafter live quietly and in reclusion. We, his former comrades, lack any sympathy for the fact that Herr Remer fails to summon up this attitude of self-effacement&quot;.

Remer died at Marbella in southern Spain on 5 October 1997, at the age of 85 from natural causes. His ashes were buried in an undisclosed location in Germany.

==In popular culture==
Oberst Remer was portrayed by German actor Thomas Kretschmann in the 2008 movie &quot;Valkyrie&quot;.

==Awards==
* Iron Cross (1939) 2nd Class (20 May 1940) &amp; 1st Class (12 June 1940)
* German Cross in Gold on 29 August 1942 as &quot;Hauptmann&quot; in IV./Infanterie-Regiment &quot;Großdeutschland&quot;
* Close Combat Clasp in Silver
* Wound Badge in Silver
* Knight&#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves
** Knight&#x27;s Cross on 18 May 1943 as &quot;Major&quot; and commander of I./Grenadier-Regiment &quot;Großdeutschland&quot;
** 325th Oak Leaves on 12 November 1943 as &quot;Major&quot; and commander of the I.(gepanzert)/Grenadier-Regiment (motorized) &quot;Großdeutschland&quot;

==References==

===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* &quot;Germany&#x27;s New Nazis&quot; 1951 pamphlet about Otto Ernst Remer and other neo--nazis</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57504" start="0" end="16" title="Otto Ernst Remer" label="Otto Ernst Remer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="70" end="79" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="86" end="90" title="Wehrmacht Heer" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="102" end="114" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q105570" start="155" end="167" title="20 July plot" label="20 July plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="184" end="196" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="330" end="339" title="far-right" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q708012" start="368" end="389" title="Socialist Reich Party" label="Socialist Reich Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="393" end="405" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q696116" start="470" end="481" title="Neo-fascism" label="neo-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958" start="549" end="563" title="Neubrandenburg" label="Neubrandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751106" start="565" end="585" title="Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="594" end="607" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="755" end="767" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q310218" start="807" end="821" title="Enabling Act of 1933" label="series of laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="829" end="844" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="1026" end="1044" title="Invasion of Poland" label="Invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673216" start="1092" end="1104" title="Oberleutnant" label="Oberleutnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q162362" start="1125" end="1141" title="Balkans Campaign (World War II)" label="Balkans Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="1147" end="1167" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986211" start="1201" end="1234" title="Infantry Regiment Großdeutschland" label="Infantry Regiment Großdeutschland"/>
<link wikidata="Q696944" start="1353" end="1377" title="Großdeutschland Division" label="Großdeutschland Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="1480" end="1489" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q157873" start="1512" end="1535" title="Third Battle of Kharkov" label="Third Battle of Kharkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q165558" start="1556" end="1575" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1730" end="1742" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="1881" end="1890" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="1909" end="1925" title="coup d&amp;#x27;etat" label="coup d&amp;#x27;etat"/>
<link wikidata="Q157153" start="2007" end="2023" title="Wolf&amp;#x27;s Lair" label="Wolf&amp;#x27;s Lair"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="2033" end="2045" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="2065" end="2071" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21209" start="2224" end="2246" title="Claus von Stauffenberg" label="Claus von Stauffenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q62004" start="2525" end="2538" title="Paul von Hase" label="Paul von Hase"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="2572" end="2587" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q695840" start="3230" end="3242" title="Bendlerblock" label="Bendlerblock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12789691" start="3301" end="3316" title="Generaloberst" label="Colonel general"/>
<link wikidata="Q57417" start="3317" end="3332" title="Friedrich Fromm" label="Friedrich Fromm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756713" start="3679" end="3685" title="Oberst" label="Oberst"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="3705" end="3712" title="General" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q823739" start="3780" end="3800" title="Führerbegleitbrigade" label="Führerbegleitbrigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="3868" end="3880" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="3897" end="3915" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Ardennes Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="3940" end="3958" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q834225" start="4001" end="4016" title="Disarmed Enemy Forces" label="prisoner of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="4142" end="4153" title="West Germany" label="West German"/>
<link wikidata="Q708012" start="4213" end="4234" title="Socialist Reich Party" label="Socialist Reich Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="4378" end="4390" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="4395" end="4413" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4439" end="4455" title="Landtag#German Legislatures" label="state parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209" start="4529" end="4558" title="Free Hanseatic City of Bremen" label="Free Hanseatic City of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="4607" end="4619" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="4641" end="4667" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="Communist Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="4800" end="4809" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="5129" end="5141" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="5377" end="5385" title="neo-Nazi" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q447610" start="5525" end="5538" title="Counts of Castell" label="Faber-Castell"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="5620" end="5625" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="5661" end="5679" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q68751" start="5822" end="5838" title="Johann von Leers" label="Johann von Leers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="5877" end="5885" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="5919" end="5926" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q204543" start="5928" end="5953" title="National Liberation Front (Algeria)" label="National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="5999" end="6005" title="Yasser Arafat" label="Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="6218" end="6224" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="6858" end="6862" title="East Germany" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="6867" end="6879" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="6899" end="6903" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q43442" start="7370" end="7397" title="Volksverhetzung" label="incitement of racial hatred"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="7462" end="7471" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q969978" start="7781" end="7816" title="European Commission on Human Rights" label="European Commission on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="7925" end="7948" title="Germany" label="Federal German Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="8071" end="8082" title="Holocaust denial" label="questioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q562193" start="8133" end="8146" title="Fred Leuchter" label="Fred Leuchter"/>
<link wikidata="Q65743" start="8151" end="8164" title="Germar Rudolf" label="Germar Rudolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q313827" start="8225" end="8242" title="German Government" label="German Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q210603" start="8251" end="8262" title="extradition" label="extradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129942" start="8371" end="8384" title="Helmut Friebe" label="Helmut Friebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100519" start="8447" end="8462" title="Generalleutnant" label="Generalleutnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q484799" start="9011" end="9019" title="Marbella" label="Marbella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438541" start="9079" end="9093" title="natural causes" label="natural causes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756713" start="9180" end="9186" title="Oberst" label="Oberst"/>
<link wikidata="Q57614" start="9223" end="9241" title="Thomas Kretschmann" label="Thomas Kretschmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q159054" start="9266" end="9274" title="Valkyrie (film)" label="Valkyrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q154554" start="9296" end="9306" title="Iron Cross" label="Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q156014" start="9371" end="9383" title="German Cross" label="German Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366972" start="9419" end="9428" title="Hauptmann" label="Hauptmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q704613" start="9492" end="9510" title="Close Combat Clasp" label="Close Combat Clasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q680248" start="9523" end="9534" title="Wound Badge" label="Wound Badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q165558" start="9547" end="9600" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738004" start="9648" end="9653" title="Major (Germany)" label="Major"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880729" wikidata="Q1065539" url="?curid=880729" title="Jiangling Motors">
<text>Jiangling Motors Corporation Limited, abbreviated JMC, is a Chinese automobile manufacturer. According to company and press reports, the largest shareholder of JMC is Jiangling Investment, a company controlled equally by the state-owned enterprises Changan and Jiangling Motors Corporation Group (JMCG).

== History ==
The history of Jiangling Motors Corporation (JMC) can be traced to a truck repair shop opened in Nanchang in 1947 which operated under the name Nanchang Motors Repair Factory. A JMC predecessor started assembling vehicles in 1968. The company was granted the approval of Jiangxi Province Economic Restructuring Commission to be reorganized to establish a joint stock limited company on February 20, 1993. JMC A shares and B shares were listed on Shenzhen Stock Exchange on December 1, 1993, and September 29, 1995, respectively.

In the 1990s, Ford lost a bid against American rival General Motors for getting a joint venture deal with the Chinese manufacturer SAIC Motor. In 1995, as part of its push for getting new Chinese partners, Ford acquired B shares equivalent to a 20% equity in JMC, becoming the second-largest shareholder. In 1996, JMC began selling its products in overseas markets, initially Egypt and the Middle East. , the largest overseas market by volume for JMC is Chile. In 1997, JMC and Ford started the production of their first joint product, the Ford Transit, with JMC supplying various key components (as engines and axles) and Ford the design. In 1998, after JMC issued additional B shares, Ford upped its stake to 30%. In 2013, Ford purchased more B shares, increasing its stake to over 30%.

In late 2010, Jiangling released the first passenger vehicle of JMC under the newly launched JMC Yusheng sub-brand, the Yusheng S350 SUV.

In 2013, JMC reorganized the heavy truck manufacturer Changan Taiyuan as a wholly owned subsidiary named JMC Heavy Duty Vehicle. In mid-2021, JMC Heavy Duty Vehicle was sold to Volvo Trucks. Volvo Trucks later terminated the acquisition agreement, leaving JMC Heavy Duty Vehicle as a JMC subsidiary. , JMC Heavy Duty Vehicle production and sales are suspended.

In December 2021, JMC and Ford established a Shanghai-based joint venture focused on the production of passenger cars. The venture is called Jiangling Ford Motor Technology (Shanghai) Company (Jiangling Ford). JMC owns a 51% and Ford a 49% of its stake.
== Products ==
=== JMC (Jiangling) ===
A brand mainly for commercial vehicles

* JMC Teshun – Van
* JMC Fushun – Van
* Jiangling CV9 minivan
* JMC BaoWei (SUV)
* JMC pickup
** JMC Boarding (JMC Baodian) pickup
** JMC Yuhu pickup
** JMC Yuhu 3 pickup
** JMC Yuhu 5 pickup
** JMC Yuhu 7 pickup
** JMC Yuhu 9 pickup
** JMC Yuhu EV pickup
* JMC Qingka (Jiangling Light Truck) (small truck) – light trucks series
** JMC Convey (Kaiwei)
** JMC Conquer (Kairui and Kairui 800)
** JMC Carrying (Kaiyun)
** JMC Shunda
** JMC Shunda EV
* JMC Yunba (commercial van)
* JMC E-Lushun (electric van for logistics)
* JMC ELushunV6 (BEV van)

=== Yusheng ===
A brand for passenger vehicles.

* Yusheng S330 CUV
* Yusheng S350 SUV

===Lexing===
In June 2023, JMC unveiled Lexing (), its first sub-brand aimed to only be used on new energy vehicles, and presented its first model, an electric light truck.

* Lexing E-Road

=== Dadao ===
A brand for pickup trucks and SUVs. Launched in 2023.

* Dadao Mohe
* Dadao EV (electric pickup truck)
=== Ford ===

* JMC Transit (minibus, developed by Ford and JMC jointly)
* JMC E-series SVO – based on Ford E-series vans:
** E350 Communication/Command Vehicle
** E250 Luxury Business Vehicle
** E350 Investigation Vehicle
** E350 Anti-riot Assault Vehicle
* Ford Equator
* Ford Equator Sport
* Ford Territory (Export)

== Joint venture ==
In January 2022, Ford and JMC announced the establishment of Jiangling Ford Automobile Technology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd, a 49:51 joint venture to distribute Ford brand&#x27;s passenger vehicle in China under Ford Beyond brand. Since Ford Motor Company holds a 32% stake in JMC, the controlling shareholder of the joint venture, after equity piercing, Ford actually holds 65.32% of the company&#x27;s shares, making it a substantially foreign-controlled enterprise.

The Ford Beyond is merely a distribution channel brand, its product are sourced from JMC or directly imported.

=== Ford Beyond product ===

* Ford Ranger
* Ford Bronco
* Ford Raptor (imported)

== Production ==
JMC produces vehicles under the JMC, JMC Yusheng, Ford and other brands and sub-brands. It has assembly plants around Nanchang (at Qingyunpu and the Xiaolan Economic Zone). JMC also has a new energy vehicle plant (the Fushan plant) in the Xiaolan Economic Zone.

== Sales ==
The following table includes a list of annual sales according to company&#x27;s data.

Although Jiangling Motor is a public-listed company in which Ford Motor Company only holds a minority stake, the former&#x27;s sales volume is consolidated into the latter&#x27;s.

== See also ==
*List of Chinese auto companies

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1065539" start="0" end="36" title="Jiangling Motors" label="Jiangling Motors Corporation Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065539" start="50" end="53" title="Jiangling Motors" label="JMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="68" end="91" title="automobile manufacturer" label="automobile manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="225" end="247" title="state-owned enterprise" label="state-owned enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q29366" start="249" end="256" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an Automobile Group" label="Changan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118763" start="261" end="295" title="JMCG" label="Jiangling Motors Corporation Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q171943" start="416" end="424" title="Nanchang" label="Nanchang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="463" end="493" title="JMCG#History" label="Nanchang Motors Repair Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q517750" start="765" end="788" title="Shenzhen Stock Exchange" label="Shenzhen Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="863" end="867" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="902" end="916" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="931" end="944" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q910401" start="980" end="990" title="SAIC Motor" label="SAIC Motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q859639" start="1389" end="1401" title="Ford Transit" label="Ford Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25055059" start="1732" end="1743" title="JMC Yusheng" label="JMC Yusheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638169" start="1759" end="1771" title="Yusheng S350" label="Yusheng S350"/>
<link wikidata="Q65063461" start="1883" end="1905" title="JMC Heavy Duty Vehicle" label="JMC Heavy Duty Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033642" start="1955" end="1967" title="Volvo Trucks" label="Volvo Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="2185" end="2193" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q55393381" start="2475" end="2485" title="JMC Teshun" label="JMC Teshun"/>
<link wikidata="Q859639" start="2494" end="2504" title="JMC Fushun" label="JMC Fushun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804743" start="2513" end="2526" title="Jiangling CV9" label="Jiangling CV9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804750" start="2537" end="2547" title="JMC BaoWei" label="JMC BaoWei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804750" start="2570" end="2582" title="JMC Boarding" label="JMC Boarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q54878973" start="2607" end="2615" title="JMC Yuhu" label="JMC Yuhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q54878973" start="2626" end="2636" title="JMC Yuhu 3" label="JMC Yuhu 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q54878973" start="2647" end="2657" title="JMC Yuhu 5" label="JMC Yuhu 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q63234384" start="2668" end="2678" title="JMC Yuhu 7" label="JMC Yuhu 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q63234384" start="2689" end="2699" title="JMC Yuhu 9" label="JMC Yuhu 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q63234384" start="2710" end="2721" title="JMC Yuhu EV" label="JMC Yuhu EV"/>
<link wikidata="Q115804792" start="2951" end="2963" title="JMC E-Lushun" label="JMC E-Lushun"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638168" start="3071" end="3083" title="Yusheng S330" label="Yusheng S330"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638169" start="3090" end="3102" title="Yusheng S350" label="Yusheng S350"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205234" start="3204" end="3223" title="New energy vehicle" label="new energy vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q859639" start="3432" end="3443" title="JMC Transit" label="JMC Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="3467" end="3471" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436723" start="3491" end="3503" title="Ford E-Series" label="JMC E-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q99642629" start="3675" end="3687" title="Ford Equator" label="Ford Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q99642629" start="3690" end="3708" title="Ford Equator Sport" label="Ford Equator Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q56290198" start="3711" end="3725" title="Ford Territory (China)" label="Ford Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467907" start="4363" end="4374" title="Ford Ranger (T6)" label="Ford Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q534238" start="4377" end="4388" title="Ford Bronco" label="Ford Bronco"/>
<link wikidata="Q85761610" start="4391" end="4402" title="Ford Raptor" label="Ford Raptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q167604" start="4563" end="4572" title="Qingyunpu District" label="Qingyunpu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205234" start="4620" end="4638" title="new energy vehicle" label="new energy vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="4855" end="4873" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606415" start="4991" end="5021" title="List of automobile manufacturers of China" label="List of Chinese auto companies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880733" wikidata="Q10564479" url="?curid=880733" title="Changan Ford Mazda">
<text>Changan Ford Mazda (officially Changan Ford Mazda Automobile Co., Ltd.) was an automotive manufacturing company headquartered in Chongqing, China and a joint venture between Changan Automobile, Ford Motor Company and Mazda. Its principal activity was the manufacture and sale of Ford and Mazda branded passenger cars in China.

In December 2012 the activities of Changan Ford Mazda were restructured and separated into two new joint ventures: Changan Ford Automobile Co., Ltd. and Changan Mazda Automobile Co., Ltd. Changan Ford was established as a 50:50 joint venture between Changan and Ford incorporated in Chongqing and assumed all of Changan Ford Mazda&#x27;s Ford-related business. Changan Mazda was established as a 50:50 joint venture between Changan and Mazda incorporated in Nanjing and assumed all of Changan Ford Mazda&#x27;s Mazda-related business.

==History==
===2001 to 2010===
Changan Ford Automobile Co., Ltd. was established in April 2001 as a 50-50 joint venture between Ford Motor Company and Changan Automobile. Operations began in 2003, with 20,000 Ford Fiestas produced in that year. Production was initially based upon knockdown kits, partially assembled vehicles imported to meet local assembly regulations. 
Capacity was increased to 50,000 vehicles in 2004 and to 150,000 soon after, and the Ford Mondeo and Ford Escape-based &quot;Maverick&quot; SUV also entered production.

In April 2005 it was announced that Changan Ford&#x27;s Chongqing factory would begin assembling the Ford Focus model, and that Ford, Changan Automotive Group and Mazda would establish a new joint venture company, Chang&#x27;an Ford Mazda Engine, to build a new engine plant in Nanjing capable of producing 350,000 units annually.

In March 2006 it was announced that Changan Ford would begin producing Volvo automobiles later in that year, with the S40 saloon the first vehicle to enter production. In February 2009, production of the China-only S80L commenced.&lt;ref name=&quot;CFMA news 2016/01 just-auto.com&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The joint-venture between Volvo and Changan Ford ended in late 2015.

Mazda acquired a 15% stake in Changan Ford from Ford on 4 April 2006, with the company being renamed Changan Ford Mazda Automobile Co., Ltd.

Changan Ford Mazda opened a new assembly plant in Nanjing in September 2007, constructed at a cost of US$510 million and with an initial production capacity of 160,000 vehicles per annum.

In September 2009, Changan Ford Mazda announced plans to invest US$490 million in the construction of a second assembly plant in Chongqing, with a planned annual capacity of 150,000 vehicles. The plant opened in February 2012.

===2010 to 2019===
In early April 2012, Changan Ford Mazda announced plans to invest US$600 million in the expansion of its manufacturing facilities in Chongqing, increasing its total unit capacity by 350,000 vehicles to 950,000. Later in the same month, Changan Ford Mazda announced plans to invest US$760 million in the construction of a new vehicle assembly plant in Hangzhou with an initial capacity of 250,000 units. The plant is planned for completion in 2015.

In late 2012, China approved the division of Changan Ford Mazda into two new joint ventures, Changan Ford Automobile Co., Ltd. and Changan Mazda Automobile Co., Ltd.

In January 2019, Mazda acquired Ford&#x27;s stake in Changan Ford Mazda Engine Co., Ltd. &amp; renamed the company Changan Mazda Engine Co., Ltd., which is now owned 50% by Mazda &amp; 50% by Changan.

==Sales==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10564479" start="0" end="18" title="Changan Ford Mazda" label="Changan Ford Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564479" start="31" end="70" title="Changan Ford Mazda" label="Changan Ford Mazda Automobile Co., Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="129" end="138" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="152" end="165" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q29366" start="174" end="192" title="Changan Automobile" label="Changan Automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="194" end="212" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q35996" start="217" end="222" title="Mazda" label="Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q25138439" start="443" end="476" title="Changan Ford" label="Changan Ford Automobile Co., Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q28154332" start="481" end="515" title="Changan Mazda" label="Changan Mazda Automobile Co., Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q3077171" start="1073" end="1084" title="Ford Fiesta" label="Ford Fiesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933280" start="1145" end="1158" title="Complete knock down" label="knockdown kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q275747" start="1321" end="1332" title="Ford Mondeo" label="Ford Mondeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q680524" start="1337" end="1348" title="Ford Escape" label="Ford Escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q192152" start="1376" end="1379" title="SUV" label="SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q209029" start="1507" end="1517" title="Ford Focus" label="Ford Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564479" start="1620" end="1651" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an Ford Mazda Engine" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an Ford Mazda Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="1684" end="1691" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q215293" start="1809" end="1814" title="Volvo Cars" label="Volvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q756322" start="1856" end="1866" title="Volvo S40" label="S40 saloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q542787" start="1953" end="1957" title="Volvo S80L" label="S80L"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="3040" end="3048" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q25138439" start="3231" end="3264" title="Changan Ford" label="Changan Ford Automobile Co., Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q28154332" start="3269" end="3303" title="Changan Mazda" label="Changan Mazda Automobile Co., Ltd."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880738" wikidata="Q5103853" url="?curid=880738" title="Choghtu Khong Tayiji">
<text>Tümengken Choghtu Khong Tayiji (Classical Mongolian: , &quot;Tümengken čoγtu qong tayiǰi&quot;; modern Mongolian: , , Tümenkhen Tsogt Khun Taij; ; 1581–1637), was a noble in Northern Khalkha. He expanded into Amdo (present-day Qinghai) to help the Karma Kagyu sect of Tibetan Buddhism but was overthrown by Güshi Khan, who supported the rival Gelug sect. He is also known for writing a famous poem in 1621, which was transcribed on the surface of a rock in 1624, and still exists.

He established a base on the Tuul river. Known as an intellectual, he embraced the Karma sect and built monasteries and castles. In 1601, he built the White Castle, or the White House of Choghtu Khong Tayiji.

He submitted himself to Ligdan Khan, last grand khan of the Mongols. He took part in Ligdan&#x27;s campaign to Tibet to help the Karma sect although Ligdan Khan died in 1634 before they joined together. But he pursued the campaign. In the same year, he conquered the Tümed around Kokonor (Qinghai Lake) and moved his base there. By request from Shamar Rabjampa, he sent an army under his son Arslan to central Tibet in 1635. However, Arslan attacked his ally Tsang army. He met the fifth Dalai Lama and paid homage to Gelukpa monasteries instead of destroying them. Arslan was eventually assassinated by Choghtu&#x27;s order.

The Geluk sect asked for help Törü Bayikhu (Güshi Khan), the leader of the Khoshut tribe of the Oirat confederation. In 1636, Törö Bayikhu led the Khoshuts and the Dzungars to Tibet. In the next year a decisive war between Choghtu Khong Tayiji and Törü Bayikhu ended in the latter&#x27;s victory and Choghtu was killed.

Descendants of Sutai Yeldeng, Choghtu&#x27;s grandson, succeeded the jasagh of a banner in Sain Noyon Khan Aimag.

He has traditionally been portrayed as evil by the Geluk sect. On the other hand, the Mongolian movie &quot;Tsogt taij&quot; (1945) treated him as a national hero.

==References==

*Okada Hidehiro 岡田英弘, Čoɤtu Qong Tayiǰi ni tsuite Čoɤtu Qong Tayiǰi について, &quot;Ajia Afurika gengo kenkyū 1&quot; アジア・アフリカ言語研究 1, February 1968, pp. 111–125. He provided a brief biography of Choghtu Khong Tayiji and the inscription of Čaɤan bayising.
*Yamaguchi Zuihō (山口瑞鳳), Chibetto (チベット), University of Tokyo Press, 1988. He utilized Tibetan materials. His paper is also cited by Okada&#x27;s work. Kojitsu Kan no Chibetto shihai ni itaru keii 顧実汗のチベット支配に至る経緯, &quot;Iwai Daisetsu hakushi koki kinen tenseki ronshū&quot; 岩井大慧博士古希記念典籍論集, 1963.
*Oyunbilig (乌云毕力格): On Choktu Taidji (关于绰克图台吉), 内蒙古大学学报 哲学社会科学版 1987 No.3, pp. 52–57.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5103853" start="0" end="30" title="Choghtu Khong Tayiji" label="Tümengken Choghtu Khong Tayiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128303" start="32" end="51" title="Classical Mongolian" label="Classical Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="96" end="112" title="Mongolian language" label="modern Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103853" start="118" end="143" title="Choghtu Khong Tayiji" label="Tümenkhen Tsogt Khun Taij"/>
<link wikidata="Q842323" start="183" end="190" title="Khalkha" label="Khalkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q427621" start="209" end="213" title="Amdo" label="Amdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45833" start="227" end="234" title="Qinghai" label="Qinghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q785447" start="248" end="259" title="Karma Kagyu" label="Karma Kagyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="268" end="284" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333775" start="307" end="317" title="Güshi Khan" label="Güshi Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q319218" start="343" end="348" title="Gelug" label="Gelug"/>
<link wikidata="Q643058" start="511" end="521" title="Tuul River" label="Tuul river"/>
<link wikidata="Q25112956" start="654" end="689" title="White House of Choghtu Khong Tayiji" label="White House of Choghtu Khong Tayiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q9341" start="716" end="727" title="Ligdan Khan" label="Ligdan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="803" end="808" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402317" start="959" end="964" title="Tümed" label="Tümed"/>
<link wikidata="Q201294" start="972" end="979" title="Qinghai Lake" label="Kokonor"/>
<link wikidata="Q330785" start="1151" end="1156" title="Ü-Tsang" label="Tsang"/>
<link wikidata="Q25252" start="1174" end="1190" title="Lobsang Gyatso, 5th Dalai Lama" label="fifth Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740683" start="1394" end="1401" title="Khoshut" label="Khoshut"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="1415" end="1420" title="Oirats" label="Oirat"/>
<link wikidata="Q369870" start="1483" end="1491" title="Dzungars" label="Dzungars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820691" start="1709" end="1715" title="jasagh" label="jasagh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1731" end="1752" title="Sain Noyon Khan Aimag" label="Sain Noyon Khan Aimag"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442174" start="1863" end="1873" title="Tsogt taij (film)" label="Tsogt taij"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880750" wikidata="Q461626" url="?curid=880750" title="Carolyn Cheeks Kilpatrick">
<text>Carolyn Jean Cheeks Kilpatrick (born June 25, 1945) is a former American politician who was U.S. Representative for and then from 1997 to 2011. She is a member of the Democratic Party. In August 2010 she lost the Democratic primary election to Hansen Clarke, who replaced her in January 2011 after winning the 2010 general election. Kilpatrick is also the mother of former Detroit Mayor Kwame Kilpatrick.

==Early life, education and career==

Born Carolyn Jean Cheeks in Detroit, she graduated from Detroit High School of Commerce. She then attended Ferris State University in Big Rapids from 1968 to 1970 and earned a B.S. from Western Michigan University (Kalamazoo) in 1972. She earned a M.S. from the University of Michigan in 1977. She worked as a high school teacher and was later a member of the Michigan House of Representatives from 1979 to 1996.

==U.S. House of Representatives==

===Committee assignments===
*Committee on Appropriations
**Subcommittee on Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies

===Caucus and other membership===
*Canada-United States Inter-Parliamentary Group
*Congressional Black Caucus
*Congressional Progressive Caucus

She was one of the 31 House Democrats who voted not to count the 20 electoral votes from Ohio in the 2004 presidential election. Republican President George Bush won the state by 118,457 votes.

On December 6, 2006, the Congressional Black Caucus unanimously chose Kilpatrick as its chairwoman for the 110th Congress (2007-8).

On September 29, 2008, she voted against the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008. 
==Political campaigns==
In 1996, Kilpatrick challenged three-term incumbent Barbara-Rose Collins in the 1996 Democratic primary for what was then the 15th District. She defeated Collins by a shocking margin, taking 51.6 percent of the vote to Collins&#x27; 30.6 percent. This was tantamount to election in this heavily Democratic, black-majority district. She was reelected six times, never dropping below 80 percent of the vote. Her district was renumbered as the 13th District after the 2000 Census. She faced no major-party opposition in 2004 and was completely unopposed in 2006.

===2008===

Her first serious opposition came during the 2008 primary—the real contest in this district—when she was challenged by both former State Representative Mary D. Waters and State Senator Martha Scott in the Democratic primary. Kilpatrick&#x27;s campaign was plagued by the controversy surrounding her son and his involvement in a text messaging sex scandal. On the August 5 primary election, Kilpatrick won with 39.1 percent of the vote, compared to Waters&#x27; 36 percent and Scott&#x27;s 24 percent.

===2010===

In 2010, she was again challenged in the Democratic primary. Unlike in 2008, her opposition coalesced around State Senator Hansen Clarke, who defeated her in the August 3 primary. “This is the final curtain: the ending of the Kilpatrick dynasty,” said Detroit political consultant Eric Foster of Foster, McCollum, White and Assoc.
 NPR and CBS News both noted that throughout her re-election campaign, she was dogged by questions about her son, Kwame Kilpatrick, who is in prison on numerous corruption charges. &quot;Michigan Live&quot; reported that her election defeat could in part be attributed to the Kwame Kilpatrick scandals.

==Personal life==
Kilpatrick was married to Bernard Nathaniel Kilpatrick, with whom she has daughter Ayanna and son Kwame Kilpatrick, a former Mayor of Detroit. Carolyn Cheeks Kilpatrick divorced Bernard Kilparick in 1981. She has six grandsons including two sets of twins and two granddaughters. Both her former husband and son were on trial, under an 89-page felony indictment. On March 11, 2013, her son was found guilty on 24 of 30 federal charges and her former spouse was found guilty on 1 of 4 federal charges.

* She is a member of the Detroit Substance Abuse Advisory Council.
* She is a member of Delta Sigma Theta sorority

==Electoral history==



 
 
 
 

==See also==

* List of African-American United States representatives
* Women in the United States House of Representatives

==References==
==External links==
*Michigan Democratic Party
*13th Congressional District at &quot;Michigan Liberal&quot;
*The Political Graveyard


|-


|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q461626" start="0" end="30" title="Carolyn Cheeks Kilpatrick" label="Carolyn Jean Cheeks Kilpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="92" end="111" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="167" end="183" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q983425" start="244" end="257" title="Hansen Clarke" label="Hansen Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="310" end="331" title="2010 United States House of Representatives elections in Michigan#District 13" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365715" start="387" end="403" title="Kwame Kilpatrick" label="Kwame Kilpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="472" end="479" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407897" start="551" end="574" title="Ferris State University" label="Ferris State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472136" start="578" end="588" title="Big Rapids, Michigan" label="Big Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="620" end="624" title="Bachelor of Science" label="B.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q1546191" start="630" end="657" title="Western Michigan University" label="Western Michigan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q167155" start="659" end="668" title="Kalamazoo, Michigan" label="Kalamazoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="692" end="696" title="Master of Science" label="M.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="706" end="728" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494590" start="804" end="837" title="Michigan House of Representatives" label="Michigan House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q10863020" start="922" end="949" title="United States House Committee on Appropriations" label="Committee on Appropriations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="952" end="1035" title="United States House Appropriations Subcommittee on Defensesing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies" label="Subcommittee on Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015366" start="1120" end="1146" title="Congressional Black Caucus" label="Congressional Black Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125994" start="1148" end="1180" title="Congressional Progressive Caucus" label="Congressional Progressive Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="1250" end="1264" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="electoral vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="1271" end="1275" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="1283" end="1309" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015366" start="1402" end="1428" title="Congressional Black Caucus" label="Congressional Black Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170018" start="1484" end="1498" title="110th United States Congress" label="110th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q391478" start="1555" end="1599" title="Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008" label="Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q461629" start="1678" end="1698" title="Barbara-Rose Collins" label="Barbara-Rose Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398544" start="1882" end="1904" title="tantamount to election" label="tantamount to election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494590" start="2330" end="2350" title="Michigan House of Representatives" label="State Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q89825208" start="2351" end="2365" title="Mary D. Waters" label="Mary D. Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494600" start="2370" end="2383" title="Michigan Senate" label="State Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774406" start="2384" end="2396" title="Martha G. Scott" label="Martha Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q983425" start="2836" end="2849" title="Hansen Clarke" label="Hansen Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365715" start="3158" end="3174" title="Kwame Kilpatrick" label="Kwame Kilpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365715" start="3464" end="3480" title="Kwame Kilpatrick" label="Kwame Kilpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="3500" end="3507" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254747" start="3955" end="3972" title="Delta Sigma Theta" label="Delta Sigma Theta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722348" start="4033" end="4087" title="List of African-American United States representatives" label="List of African-American United States representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031572" start="4090" end="4141" title="Women in the United States House of Representatives" label="Women in the United States House of Representatives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880751" wikidata="Q4948541" url="?curid=880751" title="Botch (professional wrestling)">
<text>To botch in professional wrestling means to fail in attempting a scripted move or spoken line by mistake, miscalculation, or an error in judgment. Many botches are harmless, such as a wrestler simply flubbing a line, missing a cue, or falling before his or her opponent&#x27;s move actually connects. At times, however, a poorly timed or executed move has resulted in serious injury or even death. 

==Causes==
A common cause of botches is inexperience. Jackie Gayda, winner of the &quot;Tough Enough 2&quot; competition, in one of her first televised matches (a tag team match with Christopher Nowinski against Trish Stratus and Bradshaw on the July 8, 2002 edition of &quot;Raw&quot; from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania), botched nearly every move that she tried or attempted to sell, the most infamous of which was a second-rope-bulldog by Stratus, which Gayda sold two seconds too late. On April 26, 1976, Bruno Sammartino suffered a neck fracture in a match against the relatively inexperienced Stan Hansen at Madison Square Garden, when Hansen improperly executed a body slam. Bruno came back eight weeks later for a rematch.

Another cause is due to suffering an injury right before or during the match, or not being in proper condition to carry a match and it going ahead anyway. Such as when during a poorly received match between The Undertaker and Goldberg at 2019&#x27;s Super Showdown, Goldberg (who was concussed throughout the match) failed to execute his Jackhammer finisher on the Undertaker and instead dropped him on his head without protection, Undertaker did not suffer a neck injury from the botch as he landed on Goldberg&#x27;s bicep which provided cushioning from the drop. Another example was the Jeff Hardy vs Sting championship match at 2011&#x27;s TNA Victory Road being cut short due to backstage concern over Jeff Hardy&#x27;s well-being as he reportedly drank and used drugs hours before the match and was not in a proper condition to compete in the match before it started.

==Aftermath==
===Injury===
Botches can occasionally be extremely dangerous and can result in the end of a wrestler&#x27;s career or loss of life. For example, WWE wrestler D&#x27;Lo Brown once botched a running sitout powerbomb on his opponent Droz, resulting in Droz being rendered quadriplegic (although he later regained some use of his upper body). This botch was mainly caused by D&#x27;Lo not being able to get a grip on the baggy clothing worn by Droz while holding him in the powerbomb position. Droz also did not cinch himself up at the waist as is the safety measure for powerbomb receivers. In other cases, the wrestler performing the move could be injured. Japanese wrestler Hayabusa botched a springboard moonsault in a match against Mammoth Sasaki when his foot slipped on the second rope and he landed on his head, causing damage to his spine and neck and paralyzing him, although he regained feeling in his legs before his death in 2016.

In May 2001, Brian Ong was training with Dalip Singh (better known as the Great Khali) and took a flapjack from Singh. The move was botched, reportedly because Ong had grabbed Singh&#x27;s shirt instead of pushing off Singh&#x27;s back as he was instructed. Although he had made the mistake several times before without incident, this time Ong landed tailbone first and his head was violently whipped back against the mat. The resulting impact caused catastrophic damage to his spine and brainstem. Coupled with a previous concussion, the move resulted in Ong&#x27;s death a few days later.

===Improvising endings===
In most cases, minor botches are simply glossed over and the match is continued. One example was the ending of the Hulk HoganSid Justice match at WrestleMania VIII. The planned ending was to involve Papa Shango running into the ring to break up Hogan&#x27;s pin attempt. However, Shango missed his cue, forcing Sid to kick out of the pin attempt and manager Harvey Whippleman to jump onto the ring apron to interfere and prompt the disqualification, just as Shango ran into the ring to assist Sid with the intended double-team beating of Hogan.

Serious botches resulting in injuries often result in improvised endings to matches, or the remainder of a match will be canceled if a wrestler cannot continue or requires immediate medical attention. During the match between Stone Cold Steve Austin and Owen Hart at SummerSlam 1997, Hart botched a piledriver, breaking Austin&#x27;s neck. Hart was forced to improvise an extended taunt sequence until Austin was able regain his composure and roll him up in a schoolboy pin, ending the match earlier than planned but with the desired winner. If a wrestler is seriously injured, the referee normally signals the need for immediate help by doing an &quot;X&quot; formation with his arms over his head. In recent years, as some wrestling fans have noticed this, the referee may sometimes perform the symbol in an attempt to indicate a kayfabe injury to another performer, which will lead to the match being called off.

Botches can also involve scripted lines. During the airing of WrestleMania XXX, Hulk Hogan—serving as the host of WrestleMania—mistakenly referred to the Mercedes-Benz Superdome to the live audience as the Silverdome, the home of WrestleMania III and where Hogan had his famous showdown with André the Giant. After Hogan corrected himself, Stone Cold Steve Austin and The Rock would rib Hogan for calling the Superdome the Silverdome, and it ended up being a running gag for the rest of WrestleMania XXX and into the post-WrestleMania &quot;Raw&quot; the next night.

===Positive impact===
Sometimes botches can lead to the accidental invention of new moves. For example, the diving headbutt was invented when Harley Race botched a splash from the top rope, but Race later regretted inventing the move since it caused lasting damage to his body. Jake &quot;The Snake&quot; Roberts claims to have invented the DDT when he was accidentally tripped by his opponent while applying a front facelock. Toshiaki Kawada inadvertently invented the Ganso bomb, one of the most dangerous moves in wrestling, after he failed to execute a powerbomb on Mitsuharu Misawa due to breaking his arm earlier in the match and instead dropped his head unprotected. Drew McIntyre has stated that his running kick finishing move, The Claymore, was accidentally invented as he slipped while delivering an attempted Big Boot, with the tight leather pants he was wearing at the time forcing him to fall to the mat.

Similarly, botches can also have positive impacts on wrestler&#x27;s careers. As an example, during a feud with Ronda Rousey, Becky Lynch led an invasion of the former&#x27;s show (as Rousey was a member of Monday Night Raw at the time, while Lynch was on SmackDown). During the ensuing Raw vs. SmackDown melee, Nia Jax botched a punch, resulting in a broken nose and concussion for Lynch. This event, and especially the bloody photographs of Lynch afterward, are attributed by fans, as well as Lynch herself, to be the catapult of her ascent to the top of the WWE Women&#x27;s Division and her current position at the peak of WWE women&#x27;s performers.

==See also==
* Glossary of professional wrestling terms
* Mass Transit incident (professional wrestling)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4948541" start="3" end="8" title="Botch (professional wrestling)" label="botch"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="12" end="34" title="professional wrestling" label="professional wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533584" start="454" end="466" title="Jackie Gayda" label="Jackie Gayda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149921" start="488" end="502" title="WWE Tough Enough" label="Tough Enough 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140002" start="583" end="603" title="Christopher Nowinski" label="Christopher Nowinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q229310" start="612" end="625" title="Trish Stratus" label="Trish Stratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44692" start="630" end="638" title="John Layfield" label="Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="676" end="679" title="WWE Raw" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="691" end="717" title="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="828" end="835" title="Professional wrestling throws#Bulldog" label="bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="860" end="864" title="Sell (professional wrestling)" label="sold"/>
<link wikidata="Q369270" start="906" end="922" title="Bruno Sammartino" label="Bruno Sammartino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033317" start="996" end="1007" title="Stan Hansen" label="Stan Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="1011" end="1032" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="1336" end="1350" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q115547" start="1355" end="1363" title="Bill Goldberg" label="Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q63805824" start="1379" end="1393" title="Super ShowDown (2019)" label="Super Showdown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1467" end="1477" title="Powerslam#Suplex powerslam" label="Jackhammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44137" start="1719" end="1729" title="Jeff Hardy" label="Jeff Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="1733" end="1738" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q376321" start="1777" end="1789" title="Victory Road (2011)" label="Victory Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="2163" end="2166" title="World Wrestling Entertainment" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320998" start="2176" end="2191" title="D&amp;#x27;Lo Brown" label="D&amp;#x27;Lo Brown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2207" end="2231" title="Powerbomb#Sit-Out Powerbomb" label="running sitout powerbomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687422" start="2248" end="2252" title="Darren Drozdov" label="Droz"/>
<link wikidata="Q944758" start="2287" end="2299" title="Tetraplegia" label="quadriplegic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2673" end="2678" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529667" start="2691" end="2699" title="Eiji Ezaki" label="Hayabusa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2710" end="2731" title="Moonsault#Springboard moonsault" label="springboard moonsault"/>
<link wikidata="Q44482" start="3000" end="3011" title="The Great Khali" label="Dalip Singh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3057" end="3065" title="Professional wrestling throws#Flapjack" label="flapjack"/>
<link wikidata="Q193176" start="3310" end="3318" title="Coccyx" label="tailbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051576" start="3410" end="3422" title="Catastrophic injury" label="catastrophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="3447" end="3456" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="3692" end="3702" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q703668" start="3702" end="3713" title="Sid Eudy" label="Sid Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q50853" start="3723" end="3740" title="WrestleMania VIII" label="WrestleMania VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066512" start="3776" end="3787" title="Charles Wright (wrestler)" label="Papa Shango"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989561" start="3935" end="3952" title="Bruno Lauer" label="Harvey Whippleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="4349" end="4372" title="Stone Cold Steve Austin" label="Stone Cold Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q317365" start="4377" end="4386" title="Owen Hart" label="Owen Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q59301" start="4390" end="4405" title="SummerSlam (1997)" label="SummerSlam 1997"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4422" end="4432" title="Piledriver (professional wrestling)#Reverse piledriver" label="piledriver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4566" end="4577" title="Pin (professional wrestling)#Roll-up" label="roll him up"/>
<link wikidata="Q721051" start="4705" end="4712" title="Referee (professional wrestling)" label="referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q387294" start="4955" end="4962" title="kayfabe" label="kayfabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879177" start="5102" end="5118" title="WrestleMania XXX" label="WrestleMania XXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q497240" start="5146" end="5150" title="Master of ceremonies" label="host"/>
<link wikidata="Q756452" start="5194" end="5217" title="Mercedes-Benz Superdome" label="Mercedes-Benz Superdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q211662" start="5246" end="5256" title="Pontiac Silverdome" label="Silverdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q50817" start="5270" end="5286" title="WrestleMania III" label="WrestleMania III"/>
<link wikidata="Q44368" start="5332" end="5347" title="André the Giant" label="André the Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="5380" end="5403" title="Stone Cold Steve Austin" label="Stone Cold Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="5408" end="5416" title="Dwayne Johnson" label="The Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469546" start="5499" end="5510" title="running gag" label="running gag"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="5581" end="5584" title="WWE Raw" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q721668" start="5716" end="5731" title="diving headbutt" label="diving headbutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q707647" start="5750" end="5761" title="Harley Race" label="Harley Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q919492" start="5886" end="5920" title="Jake Roberts" label="Jake &amp;quot;The Snake&amp;quot; Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q721118" start="5949" end="5952" title="DDT (professional wrestling)" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025412" start="6035" end="6050" title="Toshiaki Kawada" label="Toshiaki Kawada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6078" end="6088" title="Powerbomb#Ganso Bomb" label="Ganso bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q703827" start="6178" end="6194" title="Mitsuharu Misawa" label="Mitsuharu Misawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q311944" start="6282" end="6295" title="Drew McIntyre" label="Drew McIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q242201" start="6640" end="6652" title="Ronda Rousey" label="Ronda Rousey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301800" start="6654" end="6665" title="Becky Lynch" label="Becky Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797348" start="6784" end="6793" title="SmackDown (WWE brand)" label="SmackDown"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901722" start="6840" end="6847" title="Nia Jax" label="Nia Jax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205260" start="7089" end="7114" title="Women in WWE" label="WWE Women&amp;#x27;s Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="7200" end="7240" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms" label="Glossary of professional wrestling terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793338" start="7243" end="7289" title="Mass Transit incident (professional wrestling)" label="Mass Transit incident (professional wrestling)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880753" wikidata="Q1671367" url="?curid=880753" title="Interstate 595">
<text>Interstate 595 may refer to:
*Interstate 595 (Florida), a spur from I-75 across I-95 to Fort Lauderdale, Florida
*Interstate 595 (Maryland), an unsigned spur to Annapolis, Maryland
*Interstate 170 (Maryland), a partially built spur in Baltimore, Maryland that was renumbered Interstate 595 when I-70 was cancelled between I-695 and I-170
*Interstate 595 (Virginia), a never-built upgrade for US 1 in Arlington, Virginia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2433180" start="30" end="54" title="Interstate 595 (Florida)" label="Interstate 595 (Florida)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214728" start="114" end="139" title="Interstate 595 (Maryland)" label="Interstate 595 (Maryland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213854" start="182" end="207" title="Interstate 170 (Maryland)" label="Interstate 170 (Maryland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818331" start="339" end="364" title="Interstate 595 (Virginia)" label="Interstate 595 (Virginia)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880754" wikidata="Q7316307" url="?curid=880754" title="Restricted representation">
<text>In group theory, restriction forms a representation of a subgroup using a known representation of the whole group. Restriction is a fundamental construction in representation theory of groups. Often the restricted representation is simpler to understand. Rules for decomposing the restriction of an irreducible representation into irreducible representations of the subgroup are called branching rules, and have important applications in physics. For example, in case of explicit symmetry breaking, the symmetry group of the problem is reduced from the whole group to one of its subgroups. In quantum mechanics, this reduction in symmetry appears as a splitting of degenerate energy levels into multiplets, as in the Stark or Zeeman effect.

The induced representation is a related operation that forms a representation of the whole group from a representation of a subgroup. The relation between restriction and induction is described by Frobenius reciprocity and the Mackey theorem. Restriction to a normal subgroup behaves particularly well and is often called Clifford theory after the theorem of A. H. Clifford. Restriction can be generalized to other group homomorphisms and to other rings.

For any group &quot;G&quot;, its subgroup &quot;H&quot;, and a linear representation &quot;ρ&quot; of &quot;G&quot;, the restriction of &quot;ρ&quot; to &quot;H&quot;, denoted

: formula_1 

is a representation of &quot;H&quot; on the same vector space by the same operators:

: formula_2

== Classical branching rules ==
Classical branching rules describe the restriction of an irreducible complex representation (, &quot;V&quot;) of a classical group &quot;G&quot; to a classical subgroup &quot;H&quot;, i.e. the multiplicity with which an irreducible representation (&quot;σ&quot;, &quot;W&quot;) of &quot;H&quot; occurs in . By Frobenius reciprocity for compact groups, this is equivalent to finding the multiplicity of in the unitary representation induced from σ. Branching rules for the classical groups were determined by
* between successive unitary groups;
* between successive special orthogonal groups and unitary symplectic groups;
* from the unitary groups to the unitary symplectic groups and special orthogonal groups.

The results are usually expressed graphically using Young diagrams to encode the signatures used classically to label irreducible representations, familiar from classical invariant theory. Hermann Weyl and Richard Brauer discovered a systematic method for determining the branching rule when the groups &quot;G&quot; and &quot;H&quot; share a common maximal torus: in this case the Weyl group of &quot;H&quot; is a subgroup of that of &quot;G&quot;, so that the rule can be deduced from the Weyl character formula. A systematic modern interpretation has been given by in the context of his theory of dual pairs. The special case where σ is the trivial representation of &quot;H&quot; was first used extensively by Hua in his work on the Szegő kernels of bounded symmetric domains in several complex variables, where the Shilov boundary has the form &quot;G&quot;/&quot;H&quot;. More generally the Cartan-Helgason theorem gives the decomposition when &quot;G&quot;/&quot;H&quot; is a compact symmetric space, in which case all multiplicities are one; a generalization to arbitrary σ has since been obtained by . Similar geometric considerations have also been used by to rederive Littlewood&#x27;s rules, which involve the celebrated Littlewood–Richardson rules for tensoring irreducible representations of the unitary groups.
 has found generalizations of these rules to arbitrary compact semisimple Lie groups, using his path model, an approach to representation theory close in spirit to the theory of crystal bases of Lusztig and Kashiwara. His methods yield branching rules for restrictions to subgroups containing a maximal torus. The study of branching rules is important in classical invariant theory and its modern counterpart, algebraic combinatorics.

Example. The unitary group &quot;U&quot;(&quot;N&quot;) has irreducible representations labelled by signatures

:formula_3

where the &quot;f&quot;&quot;i&quot; are integers. In fact if a unitary matrix &quot;U&quot; has eigenvalues &quot;z&quot;&quot;i&quot;, then the character of the corresponding irreducible representation f is given by

:formula_4

The branching rule from &quot;U&quot;(&quot;N&quot;) to &quot;U&quot;(&quot;N&quot; – 1) states that

Example. The unitary symplectic group or quaternionic unitary group, denoted Sp(&quot;N&quot;) or &quot;U&quot;(&quot;N&quot;, H), is the group of all transformations of
H&quot;N&quot; which commute with right multiplication by the quaternions H and preserve the H-valued hermitian inner product

:formula_5

on H&quot;N&quot;, where &quot;q&quot;* denotes the quaternion conjugate to &quot;q&quot;. Realizing quaternions as 2 x 2 complex matrices, the group Sp(&quot;N&quot;) is just the group of block matrices (&quot;q&quot;&quot;ij&quot;) in SU(2&quot;N&quot;) with

:formula_6

where &quot;α&quot;&quot;ij&quot; and &quot;β&quot;&quot;ij&quot; are complex numbers.

Each matrix &quot;U&quot; in Sp(&quot;N&quot;) is conjugate to a block diagonal matrix with entries

:formula_7

where |&quot;z&quot;&quot;i&quot;| = 1. Thus the eigenvalues of &quot;U&quot; are (&quot;z&quot;&quot;i&quot;±1). The irreducible representations of Sp(&quot;N&quot;) are labelled by signatures

:formula_8

where the &quot;f&quot;&quot;i&quot; are integers. The character of the corresponding irreducible representation &quot;σ&quot;f is given by

: formula_9

The branching rule from Sp(&quot;N&quot;) to Sp(&quot;N&quot; – 1) states that

Here &quot;f&quot;&quot;N&quot; + 1 = 0 and the multiplicity &quot;m&quot;(f, g) is given by

:formula_10

where

:formula_11

is the non-increasing rearrangement of the 2&quot;N&quot; non-negative integers (&quot;f&quot;i), (&quot;g&quot;&quot;j&quot;) and 0.

Example. The branching from U(2&quot;N&quot;) to Sp(&quot;N&quot;) relies on two identities of Littlewood:

:formula_12

where Πf,0 is the irreducible representation of &quot;U&quot;(2&quot;N&quot;) with signature &quot;f&quot;1 ≥ ··· ≥ &quot;f&quot;&quot;N&quot; ≥ 0 ≥ ··· ≥ 0.

:formula_13

where &quot;f&quot;&quot;i&quot; ≥ 0.

The branching rule from U(2&quot;N&quot;) to Sp(&quot;N&quot;) is given by

where all the signature are non-negative and the coefficient &quot;M&quot; (g, h; k) is the multiplicity of the irreducible representation k of &quot;U&quot;(&quot;N&quot;) in the tensor product g formula_14 h. It is given combinatorially by the Littlewood–Richardson rule, the number of lattice permutations of the skew diagram k/h of weight g.

There is an extension of Littlewood&#x27;s branching rule to arbitrary signatures due to . The Littlewood–Richardson coefficients &quot;M&quot; (g, h; f) are extended to allow the signature f to have 2&quot;N&quot; parts but restricting g to have even column-lengths (&quot;g&quot;2&quot;i&quot; – 1 = &quot;g&quot;2&quot;i&quot;). In this case the formula reads

where &quot;M&quot;&quot;N&quot; (g, h; f) counts the number of lattice permutations of f/h of weight g are counted for which 2&quot;j&quot; + 1 appears no lower than row &quot;N&quot; + &quot;j&quot; of f for 1 ≤ &quot;j&quot; ≤ |&quot;g&quot;|/2.

Example. The special orthogonal group SO(&quot;N&quot;) has irreducible ordinary and spin representations labelled by signatures

* formula_15 for &quot;N&quot; = 2&quot;n&quot;;
*formula_16 for &quot;N&quot; = 2&quot;n&quot;+1.

The &quot;f&quot;&quot;i&quot; are taken in Z for ordinary representations and in ½ + Z for spin representations. In fact if an orthogonal matrix &quot;U&quot; has eigenvalues &quot;z&quot;&quot;i&quot;±1 for 1 ≤ &quot;i&quot; ≤ &quot;n&quot;, then the character of the corresponding irreducible representation f is given by

: formula_17

for &quot;N&quot; = 2&quot;n&quot; and by

:formula_18

for &quot;N&quot; = 2&quot;n&quot;+1.

The branching rules from SO(&quot;N&quot;) to SO(&quot;N&quot; – 1) state that

: \pi_{\mathbf{g}}&lt;/math&gt;

for &quot;N&quot; = 2&quot;n&quot; + 1 and

: \pi_{\mathbf{g}}&lt;/math&gt;

for &quot;N&quot; = 2&quot;n&quot;, where the differences &quot;f&quot;&quot;i&quot; − &quot;g&quot;&quot;i&quot; must be integers.

==Gelfand–Tsetlin basis==

Since the branching rules from formula_19 to formula_20 or formula_21 to formula_22 have multiplicity one, the irreducible summands corresponding to smaller and smaller &quot;N&quot; will eventually terminate in one-dimensional subspaces. In this way Gelfand and Tsetlin were able to obtain a basis of any irreducible representation of formula_19 or formula_21 labelled by a chain of interleaved signatures, called a Gelfand–Tsetlin pattern.
Explicit formulas for the action of the Lie algebra on the Gelfand–Tsetlin basis are given in . Specifically, for formula_25, the Gelfand-Testlin basis of the irreducible representation of formula_26 with dimension formula_27 is given by the complex spherical harmonics formula_28.

For the remaining classical group formula_29, the branching is no longer multiplicity free, so that if &quot;V&quot; and &quot;W&quot; are irreducible representation of formula_30 and formula_29 the space of intertwiners formula_32 can have dimension greater than one. It turns out that the Yangian formula_33, a Hopf algebra introduced by Ludwig Faddeev and collaborators, acts irreducibly on this multiplicity space, a fact which enabled to extend the construction of Gelfand–Tsetlin bases to formula_29.

== Clifford&#x27;s theorem ==

In 1937 Alfred H. Clifford proved the following result on the restriction of finite-dimensional irreducible representations from a group &quot;G&quot; to a normal subgroup &quot;N&quot; of finite index:

Theorem. Let : &quot;G&quot; formula_35 GL(&quot;n&quot;,&quot;K&quot;) be an irreducible representation with &quot;K&quot; a field. Then 
the restriction of to &quot;N&quot; breaks up into a direct sum of irreducible representations of &quot;N&quot; of equal dimensions. These irreducible representations of &quot;N&quot; lie in one orbit for the action of &quot;G&quot; by conjugation on the equivalence classes of irreducible representations of &quot;N&quot;. In particular the number of distinct summands is no greater than the index of &quot;N&quot; in &quot;G&quot;.

Twenty years later George Mackey found a more precise version of this result for the restriction of irreducible unitary representations of locally compact groups to closed normal subgroups in what has become known as the &quot;Mackey machine&quot; or &quot;Mackey normal subgroup analysis&quot;.

== Abstract algebraic setting ==

From the point of view of category theory, restriction is an instance of a forgetful functor. This functor is exact, and its left adjoint functor is called &quot;induction&quot;. The relation between restriction and induction in various contexts is called the Frobenius reciprocity. Taken together, the operations of induction and restriction form a powerful set of tools for analyzing representations. This is especially true whenever the representations have the property of complete reducibility, for example, in representation theory of finite groups over a field of characteristic zero.

== Generalizations ==
This rather evident construction may be extended in numerous and significant ways. For instance we may take any group homomorphism φ from &quot;H&quot; to &quot;G&quot;, instead of the inclusion map, and define the restricted representation of &quot;H&quot; by the composition

: formula_36

We may also apply the idea to other categories in abstract algebra: associative algebras, rings, Lie algebras, Lie superalgebras, Hopf algebras to name some. Representations or modules &quot;restrict&quot; to subobjects, or via homomorphisms.

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* available online
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="3" end="15" title="group theory" label="group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316307" start="17" end="28" title="Restricted representation" label="restriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055807" start="37" end="51" title="Group representation" label="representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q466109" start="57" end="65" title="subgroup" label="subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="108" end="113" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q13690522" start="299" end="325" title="irreducible representation" label="irreducible representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316307" start="386" end="401" title="Restricted representation" label="branching rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="438" end="445" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105337" start="471" end="497" title="explicit symmetry breaking" label="explicit symmetry breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q902019" start="503" end="517" title="symmetry group" label="symmetry group"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="593" end="610" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q584304" start="665" end="689" title="degenerate energy levels" label="degenerate energy levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598301" start="695" end="704" title="multiplet" label="multiplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q389407" start="717" end="722" title="Stark effect" label="Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q201805" start="726" end="739" title="Zeeman effect" label="Zeeman effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427423" start="746" end="768" title="induced representation" label="induced representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48998319" start="939" end="960" title="Frobenius reciprocity" label="Frobenius reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q743179" start="1002" end="1017" title="normal subgroup" label="normal subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133087" start="1064" end="1079" title="Clifford theory" label="Clifford theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q868169" start="1157" end="1175" title="group homomorphism" label="group homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="1190" end="1195" title="ring (mathematics)" label="rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q466109" start="1231" end="1239" title="subgroup" label="subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220368" start="1261" end="1282" title="linear representation" label="linear representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="1438" end="1450" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285809" start="1635" end="1650" title="classical group" label="classical group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887083" start="1856" end="1869" title="compact group" label="compact group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427423" start="1929" end="1959" title="induced representations" label="unitary representation induced"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500617" start="2049" end="2062" title="unitary group" label="unitary group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783179" start="2086" end="2110" title="special orthogonal group" label="special orthogonal group"/>
<link wikidata="Q936434" start="2116" end="2140" title="unitary symplectic group" label="unitary symplectic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166280" start="2286" end="2299" title="Young diagram" label="Young diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855669" start="2395" end="2421" title="invariant theory" label="classical invariant theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q71029" start="2423" end="2435" title="Hermann Weyl" label="Hermann Weyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q65201" start="2440" end="2454" title="Richard Brauer" label="Richard Brauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000120" start="2584" end="2597" title="maximal torus" label="maximal torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q768074" start="2616" end="2626" title="Weyl group" label="Weyl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990328" start="2725" end="2747" title="Weyl character formula" label="Weyl character formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306388" start="2834" end="2843" title="Reductive dual pair" label="dual pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q590111" start="2948" end="2951" title="Hua Loo-keng" label="Hua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345678" start="2971" end="2984" title="reproducing kernel" label="Szegő kernels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741926" start="2988" end="3012" title="hermitian symmetric space" label="bounded symmetric domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052951" start="3017" end="3042" title="several complex variables" label="several complex variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632516" start="3054" end="3069" title="Shilov boundary" label="Shilov boundary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3131" end="3154" title="Zonal spherical function#Cartan–Helgason theorem" label="Cartan-Helgason theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304008" start="3467" end="3493" title="Littlewood–Richardson rule" label="Littlewood–Richardson rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="3634" end="3643" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6648763" start="3656" end="3666" title="Littelmann path model" label="path model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191404" start="3738" end="3751" title="crystal basis" label="crystal bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q426855" start="3755" end="3762" title="George Lusztig" label="Lusztig"/>
<link wikidata="Q873583" start="3767" end="3776" title="Kashiwara" label="Kashiwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005603" start="3970" end="3993" title="algebraic combinatorics" label="algebraic combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q936434" start="4494" end="4520" title="quaternionic unitary group" label="quaternionic unitary group"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="4685" end="4696" title="quaternions" label="quaternions"/>
<link wikidata="Q884772" start="4951" end="4965" title="block matrix" label="block matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="5106" end="5120" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228257" start="5726" end="5738" title="multiplicity (mathematics)" label="multiplicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q381339" start="6035" end="6045" title="Dudley E. Littlewood" label="Littlewood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6664" end="6676" title="Skew tableau#Skew tableaux" label="skew diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103552" start="7394" end="7413" title="spin representation" label="spin representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q315414" start="8575" end="8582" title="I. M. Gelfand" label="Gelfand"/>
<link wikidata="Q877100" start="9016" end="9035" title="spherical harmonics" label="spherical harmonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048582" start="9340" end="9347" title="Yangian" label="Yangian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627597" start="9362" end="9374" title="Hopf algebra" label="Hopf algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030228" start="9389" end="9403" title="Ludwig Faddeev" label="Ludwig Faddeev"/>
<link wikidata="Q581272" start="9408" end="9421" title="LOMI" label="collaborators"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835172" start="9596" end="9614" title="Alfred H. Clifford" label="Alfred H. Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464168" start="9784" end="9789" title="Index of a subgroup" label="index"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="9918" end="9923" title="field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384643" start="10385" end="10398" title="George Mackey" label="George Mackey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359539" start="10478" end="10500" title="unitary representation" label="unitary representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147620" start="10505" end="10526" title="locally compact group" label="locally compact group"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="10723" end="10738" title="category theory" label="category theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646117" start="10772" end="10789" title="forgetful functor" label="forgetful functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q381725" start="10807" end="10812" title="exact functor" label="exact"/>
<link wikidata="Q357858" start="10822" end="10842" title="adjoint functor" label="left adjoint functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q106323967" start="11174" end="11195" title="completely reducible" label="complete reducibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526854" start="11213" end="11251" title="representation theory of finite groups" label="representation theory of finite groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="11259" end="11264" title="field (algebra)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q836088" start="11268" end="11287" title="characteristic zero" label="characteristic zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663694" start="11497" end="11510" title="inclusion map" label="inclusion map"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="11654" end="11670" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q744960" start="11672" end="11691" title="associative algebra" label="associative algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="11701" end="11712" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133024" start="11715" end="11731" title="Lie superalgebra" label="Lie superalgebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q18848" start="11781" end="11787" title="module (mathematics)" label="module"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880756" wikidata="Q422651" url="?curid=880756" title="WSF">
<text>WSF can refer to:

* Windows Script File
* Washington Square Films, an American production and management company
* Washington State Ferries
* World Science Festival
* World Social Forum
* World Squash Federation
* World Snooker Federation
* Workers Suffrage Federation, later Workers Socialist Federation
* Women&#x27;s Sport Foundation, later Women&#x27;s Sport and Fitness Foundation
* World Strongman Federation
* Wyższa Szkoła Filologiczna (&quot;Philological School of Higher Education&quot;), Wrocław, Poland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8024450" start="21" end="40" title="Windows Script File" label="Windows Script File"/>
<link wikidata="Q125202754" start="43" end="66" title="Washington Square Films" label="Washington Square Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500373" start="116" end="140" title="Washington State Ferries" label="Washington State Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091611" start="143" end="165" title="World Science Festival" label="World Science Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q472976" start="168" end="186" title="World Social Forum" label="World Social Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299530" start="189" end="212" title="World Squash Federation" label="World Squash Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030665" start="215" end="239" title="World Snooker Federation" label="World Snooker Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034744" start="277" end="305" title="Workers Socialist Federation" label="Workers Socialist Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031074" start="345" end="386" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Sport and Fitness Foundation" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Sport and Fitness Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036270" start="389" end="415" title="World Strongman Federation" label="World Strongman Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9380740" start="418" end="444" title="Wyższa Szkoła Filologiczna" label="Wyższa Szkoła Filologiczna"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880764" wikidata="Q1671350" url="?curid=880764" title="Interstate 395">
<text>Interstate 395 is the designation for the following five existing Interstate Highways in the United States, all of which are related to I-95:
*Interstate 395 (Connecticut–Massachusetts), a spur from I-95 to Auburn, Massachusetts
*Interstate 395 (Florida), a spur in Miami, Florida
*Interstate 395 (Maine), a spur in Bangor, Maine
*Interstate 395 (Maryland), a spur in Baltimore, Maryland
*Interstate 395 (Virginia–District of Columbia), a spur from I-95 to Washington, D.C.

Other:
*Interstate 395 (Delaware), a proposed portion of I-95 in Delaware, when it was under construction
*Interstate 395 (Pennsylvania), a proposed portion of I-76 in Pennsylvania which was at one point intended to be numbered I-395</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q94967" start="136" end="140" title="Interstate 95" label="I-95"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263410" start="143" end="185" title="Interstate 395 (Connecticut–Massachusetts)" label="Interstate 395 (Connecticut–Massachusetts)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433146" start="230" end="254" title="Interstate 395 (Florida)" label="Interstate 395 (Florida)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436483" start="282" end="304" title="Interstate 395 (Maine)" label="Interstate 395 (Maine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213992" start="331" end="356" title="Interstate 395 (Maryland)" label="Interstate 395 (Maryland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q718060" start="389" end="435" title="Interstate 395 (Virginia–District of Columbia)" label="Interstate 395 (Virginia–District of Columbia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q797920" start="483" end="508" title="Interstate 395 (Delaware)" label="Interstate 395 (Delaware)"/>
<link wikidata="Q94752" start="582" end="611" title="Interstate 395 (Pennsylvania)" label="Interstate 395 (Pennsylvania)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880768" wikidata="Q3235064" url="?curid=880768" title="You Boyz Make Big Noize">
<text>You Boyz Make Big Noize is the fourteenth and final studio album by the British rock group Slade. It was released on 27 April 1987 and reached number 98 in the UK Albums Chart. The album was largely produced by bassist Jim Lea, with two tracks produced by John Punter and another two by Roy Thomas Baker. It was the last studio album by the original lineup, prior to their split in 1992.

The US version of the album, which was released on the CBS label on 3 August 1987, replaced &quot;Fools Go Crazy&quot; with the title track &quot;You Boyz Make Big Noize&quot;, which was recorded after the UK and European release of the album.

==Background==
Following Slade&#x27;s decision to stop touring in 1984, the band continued to record new material. The 1985 album &quot;Rogues Gallery&quot; had been a hit across Europe but saw only limited success in the UK and US. When the band set out to record their next album in 1986, they hoped to record a hit album that would put Slade back into the public eye. Initially the band hired producer Roy Thomas Baker to produce the album, but the band felt his working methods were too lengthy and expensive. In the end, Baker completed two tracks, John Punter produced another two and Jim Lea finished the rest.

The lead single, &quot;Still The Same&quot; was released in February 1987 and stalled at No. 73. A lack of airplay on Radio One was seen as an important factor for the chart position as the single had been B-Listed and not A-Listed on the radio&#x27;s playlist. The second single, &quot;That&#x27;s What Friends Are For&quot; was released a week before the album in April and reached No. 95. The poor chartings saw RCA unwilling to invest large amounts of money into promoting the album, which reached No. 98 in the UK. In July, a non-album single of the same name, &quot;You Boyz Make Big Noize&quot; was released by the band under the Cheapskate label. It was distributed by RCA and reached No. 94. Around the same time, &quot;Ooh La La in L.A.&quot; was released from the album in America by CBS and Germany by RCA. The lack of commercial success resulted in the end of the band&#x27;s contract with RCA. Despite this, the album track &quot;We Won&#x27;t Give In&quot; was later released on the Cheapskate label as the album&#x27;s fourth and final single, but only reached No. 121 in the UK.

In a mid-1986 interview, lead vocalist Noddy Holder spoke of the upcoming album: &quot;We&#x27;ve finally got it finished and feel we have some of the best songs we&#x27;ve ever written.&quot; Speaking in a late 1987 fan club interview, Lea commented of his production work on the album: &quot;When I listened to &quot;You Boyz Make Big Noize&quot;, which is the last thing I did, I thought &quot;this really stands up, I can put this on and be proud of it&quot;.&quot;

Due to Holder&#x27;s personal reasons, the idea of touring to promote the album was ruled out. Speaking in a 1987 fan club interview, guitarist Dave Hill said: &quot;We could announce a tour now, but caution tells us that we&#x27;d do better to announce one on the back of a hit. We haven&#x27;t called it a day on the touring and if luck would have it, we could be touring after this LP.&quot; Responding to rumours of the band splitting up, Hill replied: &quot;Fans might be feeling a little left out and a bit disappointed, but they&#x27;ve got to understand that 21 years now is a long time to stay together as a group. We are a little older and we are still trying. I think that deep-seatedly within the group, every one of us would play live, but what we are searching for is a way to take us to another stage of success.&quot;

Without a contract with a major label, Slade would not record another album again. In 1991, the band recorded two new singles for Polydor, &quot;Radio Wall of Sound&quot; and &quot;Universe&quot;, but would split up shortly after in 1992. Drummer Don Powell later recalled of the album: &quot;It wasn&#x27;t us, there was no identity on that album. It would have been nice for the original band to have gone out with a better album, like the &quot;Slade in Flame&quot; album or &quot;Slayed?&quot;. It was like a certain magic was missing. The closeness that we&#x27;d had wasn&#x27;t there.&quot;

==Recording==
&quot;You Boyz Make Big Noize&quot; was recorded at Wessex Studios, Portland Studios, Redan Studios and Music Works. The album&#x27;s title was chosen after Betty, a Wessex Studios tea-lady, commented to Slade &quot;you boys make big noise&quot; during a recording session. For the album, Holder and Lea demoed around eighteen tracks, while Hill put forward four of his own demos.

In an early 1987 fan club interview, Powell spoke of the album&#x27;s completion: &quot;We finished the album yesterday, actually. We spent yesterday piecing it together and sorting out the running order. We know exactly which tracks will be on the album – all of which is new material. The album has taken us a long time to record, especially the tracks that John Punter and Roy produced. We spent the first two days with Roy just trying to get the drum sound as he wanted it. He had forty odd mikes over my kit, and it sounded like thunder in the studios. The album is more of a sing-a-long one, as opposed to a heavy metal album.&quot;

In a late 1986 fan club interview, Lea spoke of the band&#x27;s work with Roy Thomas Baker: &quot;I was out with Roy one night, and he got serious for one moment, and said &quot;The only reason I&#x27;m here with you lot is because right now in America all the young bands, certainly in Los Angeles, are searching for the formula that Slade created – commercial songs with that edge, and that sound where it all comes out as one&quot;. Roy Thomas Baker was the one who put the word &#x27;producer&#x27; on the modern map of production – it was a great compliment from him.&quot;

==Promotion==
The album received little promotion from the label, largely due to the disappointing sales of &quot;Still the Same&quot;. No music videos were filmed to promote the singles. In a 1987 fan club interview, Hill discussed the song&#x27;s failure: 

==Critical reception==

Upon its release, John Gibson of the &quot;Edinburgh Evening News&quot; commented how the band were &quot;hangin&#x27; on in there, determined to stay with chart trends&quot; and added, &quot;So determined here that they could pass for metallists. Call it the mature side of Slade.&quot; Paul Taylor of the &quot;Manchester Evening News&quot; stated that Slade are &quot;still in a class of their own for the blindingly obvious sway-along rock melody&quot;. He continued, &quot;In the cold light of day, it&#x27;s lumbering and cliché-ridden, but with the right company and the odd beverage, who can say they have not bopped joyfully to Noddy Holder&#x27;s gravelly tones? This album provides more of the same – more polished in production than of old, but still taken from the first pages of the ABC of yob rock.&quot; The &quot;Fife Free Press&quot; called the album &quot;typical Slade&quot;, &quot;full of sing-a-long anthems and bouncy scarf wavers guaranteed to provide the perfect panacea for whatever ails you&quot;. He added, &quot;In my book, Noddy and the lads can go on forever if they continue to dispense spirit-lifting albums of this ilk.&quot;

Mark Kearns of the &quot;Harrow Leader&quot; remarked that Slade &quot;still have the knack of knocking out catchy, if vacuous, tunes&quot; and felt that &quot;there&#x27;s no real quality here, but a certain dogged persistence that pays dividends&quot;. Jon Hotten of &quot;Kerrang!&quot; was mixed in his review, nothing that while &quot;all the songs bear the unmistakable Slade stamp, 12 potential singles, 12 stomp-along, shout-it-out choruses&quot;, there was &quot;nothing remotely new&quot; within the &quot;12 terrace anthems&quot; and even Holder, who &quot;as ever sings his heart out&quot;, &quot;sounds a little jaded after all this time&quot;. He concluded, &quot;At last Slade have carved a comfortable little niche for themselves under the heading &#x27;British Institution&#x27;, and their necks are getting a bit old and scraggy for sticking out now. If you like Slade, you&#x27;ll like this, if you don&#x27;t, then I don&#x27;t think this is the album to convert you.&quot;

In the US, reviews were generally positive. &quot;Billboard&quot; recommended the album and commented that the &quot;long-lived glam rockers cleave to their formula of raucous, guitar-based rock with shout-along choruses&quot;. &quot;Cash Box&quot; noted the album &quot;pulls no punches with Noddy Holder belting out the melodic stompers&quot;. Jim Zebora of &quot;Record-Journal&quot; considered it to &quot;prove that these rocking old-timers still have what it takes in the world of pop metal&quot; and continued, &quot;Perhaps the thing that Slade does best and what makes their playing so entertaining is the mixture of rocking sincerity and good humor about what it all means. &#x27;Sing Shout (Knock Yourself Out)&#x27; describes this philosophy in song, and boy does it make you want to move. If this were a just world, Slade would still be making hit records. That they&#x27;re not just doesn&#x27;t seem to be their fault.&quot; &quot;The Press of Atlantic City&quot; wrote, &quot;Today, Slade continue to play it heavy but their records are far more positive than most of the sonically similar newer acts. Yes, there is a sense of joy in their sound. Their British football cheer choruses remain, as does the blurry guitar mix.&quot;

Eric McClary of the &quot;Reno Gazette-Journal&quot; described the album as &quot;basher rock all in the spirit of fun&quot; and &quot;good-time music for rugby players and drinking buddies&quot;, with &quot;simple unison choruses&quot;, &quot;sentimental lyrics&quot; and &quot;lots of optimism&quot;. He concluded, &quot;Slade is not deaf to new rock sounds, but the lads know what&#x27;s kept them going all these years: teary-eyed pub anthems and carousing party tunes. See if you can resist them – I can&#x27;t.&quot; David Emerson of &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; remarked that Slade&#x27;s &quot;style of bombastic, teen anthems has changed little&quot;, with &quot;songs of defiance, camaraderie, and rock as savior still hold[ing] court in their much copied high camp fashion&quot;. He added, &quot;While their songs generally lack the speed of some of their descendants (AC/DC, Mötley Crüe etc...), they show here that they can still make big noize with the best of them. For those of you so inclined, take out your air guitar and turn up the volume.&quot; Tom Harrison of the Canadian newspaper &quot;The Province&quot; noted, &quot;The Troggs of the &#x27;80s are as unrepentantly loud as the LP&#x27;s title proclaims. This is bubblegum heavy metal worthy of the Archies and I mean that as a compliment. As one song suggests, &#x27;Sing Shout (Knock Yourself Out)&#x27;.&quot; Dale Winnitowy of &quot;The Surrey Leader&quot; praised it as &quot;glorious, trashy pop-rock tailor-made for excessive volume&quot;, with Slade &quot;still best at dynamite teen anthem sing-a-longs like the title song, &#x27;Me and the Boys&#x27;, &#x27;Sing Shout (Knock Yourself Out)&#x27;, and &#x27;It&#x27;s Hard Having Fun Nowadays&#x27;&quot;.

In a retrospective review, Doug Stone of AllMusic praised Slade for &quot;constantly deliver[ing] the goods&quot;, despite being &quot;nuked by the mainstream, metalheads, critics, and America&quot;, and noted that every track &quot;stomps out a variation on the Slade theme of &#x27;Sing Shout (Knock Yourself Out)&#x27;&quot;. He added, &quot;Face facts, AC/DC stole Slade&#x27;s shtick all those years ago and now can&#x27;t write its way out of a six pack, while these crazee boyz are still having fun slinging crisp chops and heavy hooks. Kudos. That&#x27;s what Slade is for.&quot;

==Track listing==

==Personnel==
Slade
* Noddy Holder – lead vocals, rhythm guitar
* Dave Hill – lead guitar, backing vocals
* Jim Lea – bass guitar, keyboards, guitars, backing vocals
* Don Powell – drums, percussion

Production
* Jim Lea – production (tracks 4–7, 9–12), arrangement (all tracks)
* John Punter – production (tracks 3, 8)
* Roy Thomas Baker – production (tracks 1, 2)
* Gerrard Johnson – keyboard programming
* Pete Hammond – keyboard programming
* Dave Garland – engineering
* Jerry Napier – engineering
* Mark Dearney – engineering
* Matt Butler – engineering
* Trevor Hallesey – engineering

==Charts==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="80" end="84" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q156872" start="91" end="96" title="Slade" label="Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="160" end="175" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567620" start="219" end="226" title="Jim Lea (musician)" label="Jim Lea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253546" start="256" end="267" title="John Punter" label="John Punter"/>
<link wikidata="Q556032" start="287" end="303" title="Roy Thomas Baker" label="Roy Thomas Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q556032" start="1039" end="1055" title="Roy Thomas Baker" label="Roy Thomas Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253546" start="1188" end="1199" title="John Punter" label="John Punter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617224" start="1276" end="1290" title="Still the Same (Slade song)" label="Still The Same"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711032" start="1540" end="1572" title="That&amp;#x27;s What Friends Are For (Slade song)" label="That&amp;#x27;s What Friends Are For"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056968" start="1825" end="1848" title="You Boyz Make Big Noize (song)" label="You Boyz Make Big Noize"/>
<link wikidata="Q55607175" start="1890" end="1900" title="Cheapskate Records" label="Cheapskate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095290" start="1982" end="1999" title="Ooh La La in L.A." label="Ooh La La in L.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q7977878" start="2197" end="2218" title="We Won&amp;#x27;t Give In" label="We Won&amp;#x27;t Give In"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281119" start="3801" end="3820" title="Radio Wall of Sound" label="Radio Wall of Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894202" start="3837" end="3845" title="Universe (Slade song)" label="Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253546" start="5011" end="5022" title="John Punter" label="John Punter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047597" start="6198" end="6220" title="Edinburgh Evening News" label="Edinburgh Evening News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070672" start="6468" end="6491" title="Manchester Evening News" label="Manchester Evening News"/>
<link wikidata="Q28402465" start="6985" end="7000" title="Fife Free Press" label="Fife Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="7591" end="7599" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="8361" end="8370" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="8545" end="8553" title="Cashbox (magazine)" label="Cash Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302815" start="8677" end="8691" title="Record-Journal" label="Record-Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758096" start="9257" end="9283" title="The Press of Atlantic City" label="The Press of Atlantic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313391" start="9584" end="9604" title="Reno Gazette-Journal" label="Reno Gazette-Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="10104" end="10120" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="10438" end="10443" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q486688" start="10445" end="10456" title="Mötley Crüe" label="Mötley Crüe"/>
<link wikidata="Q132110" start="10669" end="10681" title="The Province" label="The Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q943253" start="10701" end="10711" title="The Troggs" label="The Troggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q512836" start="10829" end="10840" title="the Archies" label="the Archies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754459" start="10971" end="10988" title="Surrey Now-Leader" label="The Surrey Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="11341" end="11349" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q387655" start="11930" end="11942" title="Noddy Holder" label="Noddy Holder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567581" start="11974" end="11983" title="Dave Hill (guitarist)" label="Dave Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567620" start="12016" end="12023" title="Jim Lea (musician)" label="Jim Lea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630855" start="12076" end="12086" title="Don Powell" label="Don Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253546" start="12189" end="12200" title="John Punter" label="John Punter"/>
<link wikidata="Q556032" start="12230" end="12246" title="Roy Thomas Baker" label="Roy Thomas Baker"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880772" wikidata="Q7342998" url="?curid=880772" title="Robert Coates">
<text>Robert Coates is the name of:

*Robert Coates (actor) (1772–1848), British would-be-actor, famous for his atrocious skills
*Robert Coates (cricketer) (1881–1956), New Zealand cricketer
*Robert Coates (writer) (1897–1973), American novelist, short-story writer and art critic
*Robert Coates (politician) (1928–2016), Canadian politician</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1747746" start="32" end="53" title="Robert Coates (actor)" label="Robert Coates (actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962442" start="124" end="149" title="Robert Coates (cricketer)" label="Robert Coates (cricketer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9069789" start="186" end="208" title="Robert M. Coates" label="Robert Coates (writer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343001" start="276" end="302" title="Robert Coates (politician)" label="Robert Coates (politician)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880773" wikidata="Q3054119" url="?curid=880773" title="Energy Plaza">
<text>Energy Plaza is a skyscraper in the City Center District of downtown Dallas, Texas, United States, north of Thanks-Giving Square at 1601 Bryan Street. Designed by I.M. Pei and Partners, the building is and 49 stories, making it the ninth-tallest building in Dallas.

The building itself is based on a design using three triangles. The communications tower at the top of the building is a small version of the Star Tower broadcast tower line from Landmark Tower Company, which went bankrupt after its owner and chief design engineer died from a heart attack in 2002.

Construction on the building began in May 1980 and the building opened in August 1983 for the Atlantic Richfield Company to be used as their regional headquarters. The structure&#x27;s original name was the ARCO Tower. Energy Future Holdings, Oncor Electric Delivery, and FuelcoLLC.com, are the primary tenants. Other notable tenants include Civitas Capital Management LLC. The building is connected to the Dallas Pedestrian Network and the Bullington Truck Terminal.

==See also==

*List of tallest buildings in Dallas

==References==
==External links==
* Dallas Skyscrapers: Energy Plaza </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3054119" start="0" end="12" title="Energy Plaza" label="Energy Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303" start="18" end="28" title="skyscraper" label="skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123063" start="36" end="56" title="City Center District, Dallas" label="City Center District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038331" start="60" end="75" title="downtown Dallas" label="downtown Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="77" end="82" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="84" end="97" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519574" start="108" end="128" title="Thanks-Giving Square" label="Thanks-Giving Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q46868" start="163" end="171" title="I.M. Pei" label="I.M. Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332504" start="409" end="419" title="Star Tower" label="Star Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q97280547" start="446" end="468" title="Landmark Tower Company" label="Landmark Tower Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q304769" start="661" end="687" title="ARCO" label="Atlantic Richfield Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054119" start="774" end="784" title="Energy Plaza" label="ARCO Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q956544" start="786" end="808" title="Energy Future Holdings" label="Energy Future Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092125" start="810" end="833" title="Oncor Electric Delivery" label="Oncor Electric Delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211377" start="974" end="999" title="Dallas Pedestrian Network" label="Dallas Pedestrian Network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1008" end="1033" title="Thanks-Giving Square#Bullington Truck Terminal" label="Bullington Truck Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504054" start="1051" end="1086" title="List of tallest buildings in Dallas" label="List of tallest buildings in Dallas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880774" wikidata="Q1599440" url="?curid=880774" title="Interstate 195">
<text>Interstate 195 (I-195) is the designation for the following six existing Interstate Highways in the United States, all of which are related to I-95:
*Interstate 195 (Maine), a spur in Saco
*Interstate 195 (Maryland), a spur to BWI Airport
*Interstate 195 (New Jersey), a spur to the Jersey Shore
*Interstate 195 (Rhode Island–Massachusetts), a spur to Cape Cod
*Interstate 195 (Virginia), a spur in Richmond
*Interstate 195 (Florida), a spur in Miami

Other
*Interstate 195 (District of Columbia), a future designation for the north–south portion of I-395 from the Southeast–Southwest Freeway to New York Avenue
*Interstate 195 (Delaware), a proposed portion of I-95 in Delaware, while under construction</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q94967" start="143" end="147" title="Interstate 95" label="I-95"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436477" start="150" end="172" title="Interstate 195 (Maine)" label="Interstate 195 (Maine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213885" start="190" end="215" title="Interstate 195 (Maryland)" label="Interstate 195 (Maryland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q811231" start="240" end="267" title="Interstate 195 (New Jersey)" label="Interstate 195 (New Jersey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q821185" start="297" end="340" title="Interstate 195 (Rhode Island–Massachusetts)" label="Interstate 195 (Rhode Island–Massachusetts)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449672" start="362" end="387" title="Interstate 195 (Virginia)" label="Interstate 195 (Virginia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449629" start="409" end="433" title="Interstate 195 (Florida)" label="Interstate 195 (Florida)"/>
<link wikidata="Q718060" start="459" end="496" title="Interstate 195 (District of Columbia)" label="Interstate 195 (District of Columbia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q797920" start="613" end="638" title="Interstate 195 (Delaware)" label="Interstate 195 (Delaware)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880777" wikidata="Q1051355" url="?curid=880777" title="Conversion disorder">
<text>Conversion disorder (CD) was a formerly diagnosed psychiatric disorder characterized by abnormal sensory experiences and movement problems during periods of high psychological stress. Individuals diagnosed with CD presented with highly distressing neurological symptoms such as numbness, blindness, paralysis, or convulsions, none of which were consistent with a well-established organic cause and could be traced back to a psychological trigger. CD is no longer diagnosed and was superseded by functional neurologic disorder (FND), a similar diagnosis that notably removed the requirement for a psychological stressor to be present. 

It was thought that these symptoms arise in response to stressful situations affecting a patient&#x27;s mental health. Individuals diagnosed with conversion disorder have a greater chance of experiencing certain psychiatric disorders including anxiety disorders, mood disorders, and personality disorders compared to those diagnosed with neurological disorders. 

Conversion disorder was partly retained in the DSM-5-TR and ICD-11, but was renamed to functional neurological symptom disorder (FNsD) and dissociative neurological symptom disorder (DNSD), respectively. FNsD covers a similar range of symptoms found in conversion disorder, but does not include the requirements for a psychological stressor to be present. The new criteria no longer requires feigning to be disproven before diagnosing FNsD. A fifth criterion describing a limitation in sexual functioning that was included in the DSM-IV was removed in the DSM-5 as well. The ICD-11 classifies DNSD as a dissociative disorder with unspecified neurological symptoms.

==Signs and symptoms==
Conversion disorder presented with symptoms following exposure to a certain stressor, typically associated with trauma or psychological distress. Usually, the physical symptoms of the disorder affect the senses or movement. Common symptoms included blindness, partial or total paralysis, inability to speak, deafness, numbness, difficulty swallowing, incontinence, balance problems, non-epileptic seizures, tremors, and difficulty walking. Feelings of breathlessness were said to have possibly indicated conversion disorder or sleep paralysis.

Sleep paralysis and narcolepsy can be ruled out with sleep tests. These symptoms were attributed to conversion disorder when a medical explanation for the conditions cannot be found. Symptoms of conversion disorder usually occur suddenly. Conversion disorder was typically observed in people ages 10 to 35, affecting between 0.011% and 0.5% of the general population.

Conversion disorder presented motor or sensory symptoms including:

Motor symptoms or deficits:
* Impaired coordination or balance
* Weakness/paralysis of a limb or the entire body (hysterical paralysis or motor conversion disorders)
* Impairment or loss of speech (hysterical aphonia)
* Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) or a sensation of a lump in the throat
* Urinary retention
* Psychogenic non-epileptic seizures or convulsions
* Persistent dystonia 
* Tremor, myoclonus or other movement disorders
* Gait problems (astasia-abasia)
* Loss of consciousness (fainting)

Sensory symptoms or deficits:
* Impaired vision, double vision
* Impaired hearing
* Loss or disturbance of touch or pain sensation

Conversion symptoms typically do not conform to known anatomical pathways and physiological mechanisms. It has sometimes been stated that the presenting symptoms tend to reflect the patient&#x27;s own understanding of anatomy and that the less medical knowledge a person has, the more implausible are the presenting symptoms. However, no systematic studies have yet been performed to substantiate this statement.

Sexual dysfunction and pain were also considered symptoms of conversion disorder, but if a patient only has these symptoms, they should be diagnosed with sexual pain disorder or pain disorder.

==Diagnosis==
===Definition===

Conversion disorder is now partly contained under functional neurological symptom disorder (FNsD). In cases of conversion disorder, there is a psychological stressor.

The diagnostic criteria for functional neurologic symptom disorder, as set out in DSM-5, are:
Specify type of symptom or deficit as:
* With weakness or paralysis
* With abnormal movement (e.g. tremor, dystonic movement, myoclonus, gait disorder)
* With swallowing symptoms
* With speech symptoms (e.g. dysphonia, slurred speech)
* With attacks or seizures
* With amnesia or memory loss
* With special sensory loss symptoms (e.g. visual blindness, olfactory loss, or hearing disturbance)
* With mixed symptoms.
Specify if:
* Acute episode: symptoms present for less than six months
* Persistent: symptoms present for six months or more.
Specify if:
* Psychological stressor (conversion disorder)
* No psychological stressor (functional neurologic symptom disorder)

===Exclusion of neurological disease===

Conversion disorder presents with symptoms that typically resemble a neurological disorder such as stroke, multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, hypokalemic periodic paralysis, or narcolepsy. The neurologist must carefully exclude neurological disease, through examination and appropriate investigations. However, it is not uncommon for patients with neurological disease to also have conversion disorder.

In excluding neurological disease, the neurologist has traditionally relied partly on the presence of positive signs of conversion disorder (i.e., certain aspects of the presentation that were thought to be rare in neurological disease but common in conversion disorder). The validity of many of these signs has been questioned by a study showing that they also occur in neurological disease. One such symptom, for example, is &quot;la belle indifférence&quot;, described in DSM-IV as &quot;a relative lack of concern about the nature or implications of the symptoms&quot;. In a 2006 study, no evidence was found that patients with functional symptoms are any more likely to exhibit this than patients with a confirmed organic disease. In the DSM-5, &quot;la belle indifférence&quot; was removed as a diagnostic criterion.

Another feature thought to be important was that symptoms tended to be more severe on the non-dominant, usually left side of the body. There have been a number of theories about this, such as the relative involvement of cerebral hemispheres in emotional processing, or more simply, that it was &quot;easier&quot; to live with a functional deficit on the non-dominant side. However, a literature review of 121 studies established that this was not true, with publication bias the most likely explanation for this commonly held view. Although agitation is often assumed to be a positive sign of conversion disorder, release of epinephrine is a well-demonstrated cause of paralysis from hypokalemic periodic paralysis.

Misdiagnosis does sometimes occur. In a highly influential study from the 1960s, Eliot Slater demonstrated that misdiagnoses had occurred in one third of his 112 patients with conversion disorder. Later authors have argued that the paper was flawed. A 2005 meta-analysis has shown that misdiagnosis rates since that paper was published are around four percent, the same as for other neurological diseases.

===Psychological mechanism===

The psychological mechanism of conversion can be the most difficult aspect of a conversion disorder diagnosis. Even if there is a clear antecedent trauma or other possible psychological trigger, it is still not clear exactly how this gives rise to the symptoms observed. Patients with medically unexplained neurological symptoms may not have any psychological stressor, hence the use of the term &quot;functional neurological symptom disorder&quot; in the DSM-5, as opposed to &quot;conversion disorder&quot;, and the DSM-5&#x27;s removal of the need for a psychological trigger. The change of name in the DSM-5 also came with a change of criteria. There was a removal of connection to sexual functioning as well as relation to any other medical condition. There was also an added connection to social and occupational functioning.

==Treatment==

Treatments for conversion disorder included hypnosis, psychotherapy, physical therapy, stress management, and transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). Treatment plans will consider duration and presentation of symptoms and may include one or multiple of the above treatments. This may include the following:
#Occupational therapy to maintain autonomy in activities of daily living.
#Treatment of comorbid depression or anxiety if present..
#Educating patients on the causes of their symptoms might help them learn to manage both the psychiatric and physical aspects of their condition. Psychological counseling is often warranted given the known relationship between conversion disorder and emotional trauma. This approach ideally takes place alongside other types of treatment.
#Medications such as serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), a class of antidepressants, and sedatives such as benzodiazepines may help reduce stress and also relieve or prevent symptoms from occurring.

There is little evidence-based treatment of conversion disorder. Other treatments such as cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), hypnosis, EMDR, and psychodynamic psychotherapy, EEG brain biofeedback need further trials. Psychoanalytic treatment may possibly be helpful. Most studies assessing the efficacy of these treatments are of poor quality and larger, better controlled studies are urgently needed. CBT is the most common treatment, with a 13% improvement rate.

==Prognosis==

Empirical studies have found that the prognosis for conversion disorder varies widely, with some cases resolving in weeks, and others enduring for years or decades. Although patients may go into remission, they can relapse at any point.

==Epidemiology==
===Frequency===

Information on the frequency of conversion disorder is limited, in part due to the complexities of the diagnostic process. In neurology clinics, the reported prevalence of unexplained symptoms among new patients is very high, between 30 and 60%. However, diagnosis of conversion disorder typically required an additional psychiatric evaluation, and since few patients will see a psychiatrist, it is unclear what proportion of the unexplained symptoms are actually due to the disorder. In 1976, large scale psychiatric registers in the U.S. and Iceland found incidence rates of 22 and 11 newly diagnosed cases per 100,000 person-years, respectively. In 2002, some estimates claim that in the general population, between 0.011% and 0.5% of the population have conversion disorder.

===Culture===

Although it is often thought that the frequency of conversion may be higher outside of the West, perhaps in relation to cultural and medical attitudes, evidence of this is limited. A 2007 community survey of urban Turkey found a prevalence of 5.6%. Many authors have found occurrence of conversion to be more frequent in rural, lower socio-economic groups, where technological investigation of patients is limited and people may know less about medical and psychological concepts.

===Gender===

In recent surveys of conversion disorder, females predominate, with between two and six female patients for every male. Some research suggests however that this gender disparity may be confounded by higher rates of violence against women.
===Age===

Conversion disorder may present at any age, but is rare in children younger than ten or in the elderly. Studies suggest a peak onset in the mid-to-late 30s.

==History==

The first evidence of conversion disorder dates back to 1900 B.C., when the symptoms were blamed on the uterus moving within the female body. The treatment varied &quot;depending on the position of the uterus, which must be forced to return to its natural position. If the uterus had moved upwards, this could be done by placing malodorous and acrid substances near the woman&#x27;s mouth and nostrils, while scented ones were placed near her vagina; on the contrary, if the uterus had lowered, the document recommends placing the acrid substances near her vagina and the perfumed ones near her mouth and nostrils.&quot;

In Greek mythology, hysteria, a similarly described condition, was thought to be caused by a lack of orgasms, uterine melancholy, and not procreating. Plato, Aristotle, and Hippocrates believed that a lack of sex causes complications in the uterus. Many Greeks believed it could be prevented and cured with wine and orgies. Hippocrates argued that a lack of regular sexual intercourse led to the uterus producing toxic fumes, causing it to move in the body. Therefore, he argued, all women should be married and enjoy a satisfactory sexual life.

Donald Capps argues that the diseases Jesus allegedly healed, such as paralysis and blindness, were actually forms of conversion disorder. He describes Jesus as a &quot;village psychiatrist&quot;, who believed that his words had power.

From the 13th century, women with hysteria were exorcised, as it was believed that they were possessed by the devil. It was believed that if doctors could not find the cause of a disease or illness, it must be caused by the devil.

At the beginning of the 16th century, women were sexually stimulated by midwives in order to relieve their symptoms. Gerolamo Cardano and Giambattista della Porta believed polluted water and fumes caused the symptoms of hysteria. Towards the end of the century, the role of the uterus was no longer thought central to the disorder, with Thomas Willis discovering that the brain and central nervous system were the cause of the symptoms. Thomas Sydenham argued that the symptoms of hysteria may have an organic cause. He also proved the uterus is not the cause of symptoms.

In 1692, in the U.S. town of Salem, Massachusetts, there was a reported outbreak of hysteria. This led to the Salem witch trials, where women who were accused of being witches had symptoms such as sudden movements, staring eyes, and uncontrollable jumping.

During the 18th century, there was a move from the idea of hysteria being caused by the uterus to it being caused by the brain. This led to an understanding that it could affect both sexes. Jean-Martin Charcot argued that hysteria was caused by &quot;a hereditary degeneration of the nervous system, namely a neurological disorder&quot;.

In the 19th century, hysteria moved from being considered a neurological disorder to being considered a psychological disorder, when Pierre Janet argued that &quot;dissociation appears autonomously for neurotic reasons, and in such a way as to adversely disturb the individual&#x27;s everyday life&quot;. As early as 1874, doctors including W. B. Carpenter and J. A. Omerod began to speak out against the hysteria phenomenon as there was no evidence to prove its existence.

Sigmund Freud referred to the condition as both hysteria and conversion disorder throughout his career. He believed those with the condition could not live in a mature relationship, and that those with the condition were unwell in order to achieve a &quot;secondary gain&quot;, in that they are able to manipulate their situation to fit their needs or desires. He also found that both men and women could have the disorder.

Freud&#x27;s model suggested the emotional charge deriving from painful experiences would be consciously repressed as a way of managing the pain, but that the emotional charge would be somehow &quot;converted&quot; into neurological symptoms. Freud later argued that the repressed experiences were of a sexual nature. As Peter Halligan comments, conversion has &quot;the doubtful distinction among psychiatric diagnoses of still invoking Freudian mechanisms&quot;.

Pierre Janet, a highly noted psychologist during the early 20th century, argued that symptoms arose through the power of suggestion, acting on a personality vulnerable to dissociation. In this hypothetical process, the subject&#x27;s experience of their leg, for example, is split off from the rest of their consciousness, resulting in paralysis or numbness in that leg.

Some support for the Freudian model comes from findings of high rates of childhood sexual abuse in conversion patients. Support for the dissociation model comes from studies showing heightened suggestibility in patients with conversion disorder. Critics argue that it can be challenging to find organic pathologies for all symptoms, and so the practice of diagnosing patients with such symptoms as having hysteria led to the disorder being meaningless, vague and a sham diagnosis, as it does not refer to any definable disease. 

Throughout its history, many patients have been misdiagnosed with hysteria or conversion disorder when they had organic disorders such as tumors, epilepsy, or vascular diseases. This has led to patient deaths, a lack of appropriate care, and suffering for the patients.

Eliot Slater, after studying the condition in the 1950s, stated: &quot;The diagnosis of &#x27;hysteria&#x27; is all too often a way of avoiding a confrontation with our own ignorance. This is especially dangerous when there is an underlying organic pathology, not yet recognised. In this penumbra we find patients who know themselves to be ill but, coming up against the blank faces of doctors who refuse to believe in the reality of their illness, proceed by way of emotional lability, overstatement and demands for attention... Here is an area where catastrophic errors can be made. In fact it is often possible to recognise the presence though not the nature of the unrecognisable, to know that a man must be ill or in pain when all the tests are negative. But it is only possible to those who come to their task in a spirit of humility. In the main the diagnosis of &#x27;hysteria&#x27; applies to a disorder of the doctor–patient relationship. It is evidence of non-communication, of a mutual misunderstanding... We are, often, unwilling to tell the full truth or to admit to ignorance... Evasions, even untruths, on the doctor&#x27;s side are among the most powerful and frequently used methods he has for bringing about an efflorescence of &#x27;hysteria&#x27;&quot;.

The onset of conversion disorder often correlates to a traumatic or stressful event. There are certain populations that are considered at risk for conversion disorder, including people with a medical illness or condition, people with personality disorders or dissociative disorders. No biomarkers have yet been found to support the idea that conversion disorder is caused by a psychiatric condition.

There has been much recent interest in using functional neuroimaging to study conversion. As researchers identify the mechanisms which underlie conversion symptoms, it is hoped they will enable the development of a neuropsychological model. A number of such studies have been performed, including some which suggest the blood-flow in patients&#x27; brains may be abnormal while they are unwell. The studies have all been too small to be confident of the generalisability of their findings, so no neuropsychological model has been clearly established.

An evolutionary psychology explanation for conversion disorder is that the symptoms may have been evolutionarily advantageous during warfare. A non-combatant with these symptoms signals non-verbally, possibly to someone speaking a different language, that she or he is not dangerous as a combatant and also may be carrying some form of dangerous infectious disease. This can explain that conversion disorder may develop following a threatening situation, that there may be a group effect with many people simultaneously developing similar symptoms, as in mass psychogenic illness, and the gender difference in prevalence.

==See also==
* Body-centred countertransference
* Functional neurologic disorder (FND)
* Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and Complex post-traumatic stress disorder (C-PTSD)
* Somatic symptom disorder
* Functional disorder

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1051355" start="0" end="19" title="Conversion disorder" label="Conversion disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051355" start="21" end="23" title="Conversion disorder" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="50" end="70" title="psychiatric disorder" label="psychiatric disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500368" start="162" end="182" title="psychological stress" label="psychological stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="248" end="260" title="neurological" label="neurological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641556" start="278" end="286" title="numbness" label="numbness"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="288" end="297" title="blindness" label="blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="299" end="308" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q852376" start="313" end="324" title="Convulsion" label="convulsions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="380" end="393" title="Disease" label="organic cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q15829738" start="424" end="445" title="Trauma trigger" label="psychological trigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146697" start="495" end="525" title="functional neurologic disorder" label="functional neurologic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="848" end="869" title="psychiatric disorders" label="psychiatric disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="880" end="897" title="Anxiety disorder" label="anxiety disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q188638" start="899" end="913" title="Mood disorder" label="mood disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q270673" start="919" end="940" title="Personality disorder" label="personality disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339235" start="974" end="996" title="Neurological disorder" label="neurological disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064664" start="1047" end="1055" title="DSM-5-TR" label="DSM-5-TR"/>
<link wikidata="Q55695727" start="1060" end="1066" title="ICD-11" label="ICD-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146697" start="1087" end="1127" title="functional neurological symptom disorder" label="functional neurological symptom disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527480" start="1332" end="1340" title="stressor" label="stressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="1530" end="1536" title="DSM-IV" label="DSM-IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064664" start="1556" end="1561" title="DSM-5" label="DSM-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627467" start="1603" end="1624" title="Dissociative disorders" label="dissociative disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q654426" start="1801" end="1807" title="Psychological trauma" label="trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817452" start="1811" end="1833" title="psychological distress" label="psychological distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="1938" end="1947" title="blindness" label="blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="1966" end="1975" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q671776" start="1977" end="1995" title="Muteness" label="inability to speak"/>
<link wikidata="Q12133" start="1997" end="2005" title="deafness" label="deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641556" start="2007" end="2015" title="Hypoesthesia" label="numbness"/>
<link wikidata="Q623289" start="2017" end="2038" title="Dysphagia" label="difficulty swallowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147182" start="2040" end="2052" title="Fecal incontinence" label="incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540864" start="2054" end="2070" title="Balance disorder" label="balance problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162371" start="2072" end="2094" title="Psychogenic non-epileptic seizure" label="non-epileptic seizures"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="2096" end="2102" title="tremor" label="tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q486851" start="2216" end="2231" title="sleep paralysis" label="sleep paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189561" start="2254" end="2264" title="narcolepsy" label="narcolepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539768" start="2287" end="2298" title="Sleep study" label="sleep tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q514686" start="2880" end="2887" title="aphonia" label="aphonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q623289" start="2914" end="2923" title="dysphagia" label="dysphagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162371" start="2986" end="3020" title="Psychogenic non-epileptic seizures" label="Psychogenic non-epileptic seizures"/>
<link wikidata="Q906492" start="3049" end="3057" title="dystonia" label="dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275" start="3069" end="3078" title="myoclonus" label="myoclonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9300736" start="3124" end="3138" title="astasia-abasia" label="astasia-abasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137463" start="3722" end="3740" title="Sexual dysfunction" label="Sexual dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="3745" end="3749" title="pain" label="pain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3876" end="3896" title="Sexual dysfunction#Sexual pain disorders" label="sexual pain disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297888" start="3900" end="3913" title="pain disorder" label="pain disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146697" start="3998" end="4038" title="Functional neurologic disorder" label="functional neurological symptom disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q906492" start="4317" end="4325" title="dystonic" label="dystonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275" start="4336" end="4345" title="myoclonus" label="myoclonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q836379" start="4418" end="4427" title="dysphonia" label="dysphonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146697" start="4840" end="4878" title="functional neurological symptom disorder" label="functional neurologic symptom disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339235" start="4991" end="5012" title="neurological disorder" label="neurological disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="5021" end="5027" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="5029" end="5047" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="5049" end="5057" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q622828" start="5059" end="5089" title="hypokalemic periodic paralysis" label="hypokalemic periodic paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189561" start="5094" end="5104" title="narcolepsy" label="narcolepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508852" start="5953" end="5971" title="functional symptom" label="functional symptom"/>
<link wikidata="Q919364" start="6603" end="6619" title="publication bias" label="publication bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="6770" end="6781" title="epinephrine" label="epinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q622828" start="6829" end="6859" title="hypokalemic periodic paralysis" label="hypokalemic periodic paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361257" start="6943" end="6955" title="Eliot Slater" label="Eliot Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q263962" start="8258" end="8291" title="transcranial magnetic stimulation" label="transcranial magnetic stimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q380141" start="8457" end="8477" title="Occupational therapy" label="Occupational therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="8553" end="8563" title="clinical depression" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="8567" end="8574" title="Anxiety disorder" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273909" start="8948" end="8992" title="Serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor" label="serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q847705" start="9034" end="9043" title="Sedative" label="sedatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="9052" end="9067" title="Benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147152" start="9235" end="9263" title="cognitive behavioral therapy" label="cognitive behavioral therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="9271" end="9279" title="hypnosis" label="hypnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385716" start="9281" end="9285" title="EMDR" label="EMDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279219" start="9291" end="9318" title="psychodynamic psychotherapy" label="psychodynamic psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179965" start="9320" end="9323" title="EEG" label="EEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q864329" start="9330" end="9341" title="biofeedback" label="biofeedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="9363" end="9377" title="Psychoanalytic" label="Psychoanalytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155640" start="9627" end="9644" title="Empirical studies" label="Empirical studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q592442" start="9665" end="9674" title="prognosis" label="prognosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q719602" start="10057" end="10067" title="prevalence" label="prevalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q217690" start="10457" end="10471" title="Incidence (epidemiology)" label="incidence rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q144119" start="12253" end="12261" title="hysteria" label="hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="12384" end="12389" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="12391" end="12400" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="12406" end="12417" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="12540" end="12544" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q912179" start="12549" end="12555" title="Orgy" label="orgies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="12599" end="12617" title="sexual intercourse" label="sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q51631" start="12818" end="12840" title="Miracles of Jesus" label="Jesus allegedly healed"/>
<link wikidata="Q184530" start="13366" end="13382" title="Gerolamo Cardano" label="Gerolamo Cardano"/>
<link wikidata="Q334154" start="13387" end="13411" title="Giambattista della Porta" label="Giambattista della Porta"/>
<link wikidata="Q452335" start="13586" end="13599" title="Thomas Willis" label="Thomas Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q559213" start="13686" end="13701" title="Thomas Sydenham" label="Thomas Sydenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q54140" start="13852" end="13872" title="Salem, Massachusetts" label="Salem, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="13933" end="13951" title="Salem witch trials" label="Salem witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710" start="14271" end="14290" title="Jean-Martin Charcot" label="Jean-Martin Charcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q328758" start="14553" end="14565" title="Pierre Janet" label="Pierre Janet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235238" start="14761" end="14776" title="William Benjamin Carpenter" label="W. B. Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="14895" end="14908" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q328758" start="15786" end="15798" title="Pierre Janet" label="Pierre Janet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18663" start="15957" end="15969" title="dissociation (psychology)" label="dissociation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="16826" end="16832" title="Neoplasm" label="tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="16834" end="16842" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266890" start="16847" end="16864" title="vascular diseases" label="vascular diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361257" start="16959" end="16971" title="Eliot Slater" label="Eliot Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q270673" start="18469" end="18489" title="personality disorder" label="personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627467" start="18494" end="18516" title="dissociative disorders" label="dissociative disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q864574" start="18521" end="18530" title="biomarker" label="biomarker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004354" start="18681" end="18704" title="functional neuroimaging" label="functional neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q3872" start="18851" end="18869" title="Neuropsychology" label="neuropsychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q219695" start="19191" end="19214" title="evolutionary psychology" label="evolutionary psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="19534" end="19552" title="infectious disease" label="infectious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532199" start="19743" end="19767" title="mass psychogenic illness" label="mass psychogenic illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936771" start="19826" end="19858" title="Body-centred countertransference" label="Body-centred countertransference"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146697" start="19861" end="19891" title="Functional neurologic disorder" label="Functional neurologic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="19900" end="19930" title="Post-traumatic stress disorder" label="Post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q477502" start="19942" end="19980" title="Complex post-traumatic stress disorder" label="Complex post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q936549" start="19992" end="20016" title="Somatic symptom disorder" label="Somatic symptom disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474598" start="20019" end="20038" title="Functional disorder" label="Functional disorder"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880785" wikidata="Q17191" url="?curid=880785" title="Expedition 8">
<text>Expedition 8 was the eighth expedition to the International Space Station.

==Crew==

===Planned crew before &quot;Columbia&quot; disaster===
==Mission parameters==
*Perigee: 384 km
*Apogee: 396 km
*Inclination: 51.6°
*Period: 92 min
*Docked: 20 October 2003 – 07:15:58 UTC
*Undocked: 29 April 2004 – 20:52:09 UTC
*Time Docked: 192 days, 13 h, 36 min, 11 s

==Mission objectives==
Expedition 8 Commander and NASA Station Science Officer Michael Foale, Flight Engineer Alexander Kaleri and ESA Astronaut Pedro Duque docked the Soyuz TMA-3 with the International Space Station at 07:15:58 UTC on 20 October 2003. At the time of docking, both spacecraft orbited the Earth above Russia.

Once the Expedition 7 crew undocked, Foale and Kaleri settled down to work, beginning a more than six-month stint focused on Station operations and maintenance.

The new station crew, along with Duque, launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 05:38:03 UTC, on 18 October 2003.

Foale and Kaleri departed the station for earth aboard the Soyuz TMA-3 spacecraft on 29 April 2004 along with ESA Astronaut André Kuipers, who had arrived with the Expedition 9 crew aboard Soyuz TMA-4 nine days earlier.

==Spacewalks==
The Expedition 8 crew conducted the first two-person spacewalk at the International Space Station. Unlike previous spacewalks conducted by ISS crews, there was not a crewmember inside the Station as the spacewalkers worked outside. The spacewalk was based out of the Pirs docking compartment; the spacewalkers wore Russian Orlan space suits.

This was the 52nd spacewalk devoted to Space Station assembly, operations and maintenance, bringing the cumulative total to 322 hours and 32 minutes. It was the 27th based out of the Station, bringing the total to 155 hours and 17 minutes.

==Images==
==References==

==External links==

* Expedition 8 Photography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17191" start="0" end="12" title="Expedition 8" label="Expedition 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="46" end="73" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="166" end="173" title="Perigee" label="Perigee"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="183" end="189" title="Apogee" label="Apogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112212" start="199" end="210" title="Inclination" label="Inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q37640" start="219" end="225" title="Orbital period" label="Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="489" end="492" title="European Space Agency" label="ESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q448547" start="503" end="514" title="Pedro Duque" label="Pedro Duque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424715" start="526" end="537" title="Soyuz TMA-3" label="Soyuz TMA-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q454649" start="1100" end="1113" title="André Kuipers" label="André Kuipers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17192" start="1140" end="1152" title="Expedition 9" label="Expedition 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353793" start="1165" end="1176" title="Soyuz TMA-4" label="Soyuz TMA-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="1265" end="1274" title="Extra-vehicular activity" label="spacewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q741916" start="1479" end="1503" title="Pirs (ISS module)" label="Pirs docking compartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141042" start="1535" end="1551" title="Orlan space suit" label="Orlan space suit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880786" wikidata="Q2830544" url="?curid=880786" title="Alan Macnaughton">
<text>Alan Aylesworth Macnaughton (July 30, 1903 – July 16, 1999) was a Canadian lawyer and politician who served as Speaker of the House of Commons of Canada from 1963 to 1966.

==Life and career==
Macnaughton was born in Greater Napanee, Ontario, and educated at Upper Canada College. He studied law at McGill University (BCL 1929) and began a law practice in Montreal, where he served as a Crown Attorney from 1933 to 1942.

Macnaughton first won a seat in the House of Commons of Canada in the 1949 election, when he was returned as a Liberal Member of Parliament (MP) for the riding of Mount Royal. Macnaughton served as Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee after the 1958 election, and his performance in that position led to the newly elected Liberal government nominating him for the position of Speaker following the 1963 election.

Macnaughton presided over a House of Commons led by a minority government in which no party had control of the House, resulting in long and bitter debates that made it a challenge for any Speaker to maintain order.

Acrimonious debates included that over the adoption of a new flag of Canada, as well as scandals like the Munsinger affair. As Speaker, he attempted to bring in procedural reforms to make Parliament more efficient. He established four subcommittees of the Special Committee on Procedure and Organization, each chaired by a member of a different political party (Liberal, Progressive-Conservative, Social Credit, and New Democrat). The result of this process were recommendations for new procedures of time allocation in debates, a new committee structure, the abolition of the right to appeal rulings of the Speaker, research budgets for members and other changes, most of which were ultimately implemented.

During the Flag Debate, Macnaughton set a precedent by allowing the motion to be split into two and allowing separate motions on making the Maple Leaf the new flag and using the Union Flag as a symbol of Canada&#x27;s membership in the Commonwealth of Nations. This was the first time a Speaker took it upon his own authority to split a motion. Macnaughton did so in the hope of facilitating debate and calming the House.

Late in his term as Speaker, he served as a production consultant on the politically-themed CBC Television drama series &quot;Quentin Durgens, M.P.&quot;.

Macnaughton did not contest the 1965 election, and retired from electoral politics. Future prime minister Pierre Trudeau succeeded him as MP for Mount Royal.

In 1966, Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson recommended that Macnaughton be appointed to a seat in the Senate of Canada. He served in that body until his retirement in 1978. In 1994, he was made an Officer of the Order of Canada.

In 1967, Macnaughton founded World Wildlife Fund Canada (WWF-Canada), which is the Canadian branch of the global conservation organization, World Wide Fund for Nature (formerly named World Wildlife Fund).

==Archives==
There is an Alan Macnaughton fonds at Library and Archives Canada.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2830544" start="0" end="27" title="Alan Macnaughton" label="Alan Aylesworth Macnaughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506685" start="111" end="152" title="Speaker of the House of Commons of Canada" label="Speaker of the House of Commons of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007509" start="217" end="232" title="Greater Napanee" label="Greater Napanee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="234" end="241" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542352" start="259" end="279" title="Upper Canada College" label="Upper Canada College"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="299" end="316" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="356" end="364" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406487" start="387" end="401" title="Crown Attorney" label="Crown Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="446" end="450" title="Legislative seat" label="seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="458" end="484" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q912416" start="492" end="505" title="1949 Canadian federal election" label="1949 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="533" end="540" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964890" start="541" end="561" title="Member of Parliament (Canada)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973938" start="575" end="581" title="electoral district (Canada)" label="riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321616" start="585" end="596" title="Mount Royal (electoral district)" label="Mount Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q595982" start="672" end="685" title="1958 Canadian federal election" label="1958 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q937472" start="825" end="838" title="1963 Canadian federal election" label="1963 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="895" end="914" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q80110" start="1118" end="1132" title="flag of Canada" label="flag of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q379498" start="1163" end="1179" title="Munsinger affair" label="Munsinger affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="1428" end="1452" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive-Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q951941" start="1454" end="1467" title="Social Credit Party of Canada" label="Social Credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="1473" end="1485" title="New Democratic Party" label="New Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598922" start="1777" end="1788" title="Great Canadian flag debate" label="Flag Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173323" start="1944" end="1954" title="Union Flag" label="Union Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="2002" end="2025" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="2281" end="2295" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271259" start="2315" end="2336" title="Quentin Durgens, M.P." label="Quentin Durgens, M.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q780004" start="2377" end="2390" title="1965 Canadian federal election" label="1965 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="2436" end="2450" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="2451" end="2465" title="Pierre Trudeau" label="Pierre Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q128604" start="2528" end="2545" title="Lester B. Pearson" label="Lester B. Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q841180" start="2605" end="2621" title="Senate of Canada" label="Senate of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="2715" end="2730" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957219" start="2762" end="2788" title="World Wildlife Fund Canada" label="World Wildlife Fund Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="2873" end="2899" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="World Wide Fund for Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052382" start="2981" end="2986" title="fonds" label="fonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q913250" start="2990" end="3017" title="Library and Archives Canada" label="Library and Archives Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880790" wikidata="Q4707208" url="?curid=880790" title="Alan MacNaughton">
<text>Alan MacNaughton may refer to:

*Alan Macnaughton (1903–1999), Canadian politician
*Alan MacNaughtan (1920–2002), British television actor </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2830544" start="33" end="49" title="Alan Macnaughton" label="Alan Macnaughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707209" start="84" end="100" title="Alan MacNaughtan" label="Alan MacNaughtan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880795" wikidata="Q3439663" url="?curid=880795" title="Rogers Wireless">
<text>Rogers Wireless Inc. is a Canadian mobile network operator headquartered in Toronto, providing service nationally throughout Canada. It is a wholly owned subsidiary of Rogers Communications. The company had revenues of just under $15.1 billion in 2018. Rogers Wireless is the largest wireless carrier in Canada, with 13.7 million subscribers as of Q2 2023.

The company was originally started by David Margolese as an expansion of his pager firm, Canadian Telecom, formed in 1978. With the 1983 introduction of AMPS, the first North American standard for cell phones, Margolese started plans to expand the company into this new market. This required large amounts of capital. A group of private investors consisting of Margolese, Ted Rogers, Marc Belzberg and Philippe de Gaspé Beaubien formed the newly renamed Cantel in 1984 and opening for service in July 1985.

Rogers purchased a controlling interest in the company in 1986, and bought out all of the shares of the other members by 1990. Starting in 1984, he also purchased an increasing share of CNCP Telecommunications, who operated a number of microwave relay networks suitable for carrying long distance calls. AT&amp;T purchased a share of the new company, which also allowed Cantel to avoid using Bell Canada lines for access into the U.S. where possible. In 2003, the company was renamed Rogers Wireless, and in 2004 Rogers bought out AT&amp;T&#x27;s remaining shares. The same year, Rogers purchased Microcell Solutions, today known as Fido, Canada&#x27;s first user of GSM systems as opposed to the more widespread (in North America) CDMA. The company then expanded GSM service throughout their network.

Rogers Wireless has remained Canada&#x27;s leading wireless provider throughout its history. This was aided in its early Cantel years by the slow uptake of cellular service by Bell Canada and the limited capital of smaller players like BC Tel and Shaw Communications. The use of GSM proved to be a major boon when the iPhone was released in 2007 and only ran on GSM. This handed the company exclusive access to this product until 2009 when Bell Mobility and Telus Mobility agreed to share towers and switch/upgrade to UMTS/HSPA in time to capture the lucrative international market as part of the 2010 Winter Olympics. Today, Rogers retains its preeminent position with widespread service, continued acquisitions, and the use of fighter brands like Fido and Chatr.

== History ==

Rogers Wireless was founded by Ted Rogers, David Margolese, Marc Belzberg and Philippe de Gaspé Beaubien.

In 1978, future Sirius XM Radio founder David Margolese dropped out of university and founded the paging company Canadian Telecom. Foreseeing that cellular wireless technology would be used for more than simply voice calls, Margolese proposed a plan to obtain a license for Canada’s cellular phone rights. At the time, there were no such licenses or commercial cellular services in existence, as the wireless technology was still in the laboratory and experimental.

Needing significant financing, he approached Rogers Communications, which was owned by Ted Rogers, to partner with him. Rogers ultimately joined with Margolese, Marc Belzberg of First City Financial and Telemedia founder Philippe de Gaspé Beaubien to form Cantel, which Margolese named after Canadian Telecom. In 1984, the group was granted Canada’s national cellular license. Cantel launched service on July 1, 1985.

In 1986, Ted Rogers purchased a controlling stake in Cantel, which was at the time Canada&#x27;s only national supplier of cellular telephone service. Over the next four years, Rogers bought out his partners, becoming the sole owner of Cantel. Cantel was later renamed Cantel AT&amp;T, Rogers Cantel AT&amp;T and Rogers AT&amp;T Wireless; in December 2003, the company became known by its current name, Rogers Wireless, which led to Rogers purchasing AT&amp;T’s 34% stake in the company for $1.8 billion the following year.

===Spectrum purchases===
Through spectrum auctions, Rogers has made the following purchases of spectrum:

==Networks==
Rogers operates GSM, UMTS, LTE, and 5G NR networks in all of Canada&#x27;s provinces and offers roaming in Canada&#x27;s territories.

===AMPS===
Rogers previously operated an AMPS/D-AMPS network in the 850 MHz and 1900 MHz bands in Canada. The network was shut down on May 31, 2007.

===GSM===
Since 2002, the company&#x27;s 2G GSM network with EDGE has operated in Canada. It provides compatibility for GSM-based devices, including those frequently used by international travelers. However, this technology is limited to speeds up to 236 kilobits per second, which is only about four times the speed of dial-up.

The 1900 MHz PCS network was shut down on June 7, 2021. 850 MHz was retired on December 31, 2021, for business class IoT devices. Other devices can still connect to the 850MHz 2G GSM network in existing markets as of September 2023.

===UMTS===
In 2006, Rogers became the first Canadian carrier to operate a 3G UMTS/HSPA network, which was upgraded to HSPA+ in 2009. Enhancements included download speeds of up to a theoretical 21 Mbit/s. Further enhancements increased the download speeds up to a theoretical 42 Mbit/s.

Rogers&#x27; UMTS network coverage is in all Canadian provinces and operating on 850 MHz but is in none of the territories.

It is impossible to travel between the Pacific and Atlantic coasts in Canada without encountering a gap in cellular coverage as there are areas lacking cellular coverage in both British Columbia and Ontario.

The 1900 MHz PCS network was shut down on June 7, 2021 and the 850 MHz network will remain active until at least December 31, 2025.

===LTE===
In July 2011, Rogers was the first Canadian telecom operator to launch a commercial long-term evolution (LTE) network. In May 2013, Rogers deployed LTE service on its 2600 MHz spectrum in some markets, which the company began marketing as LTE Max. LTE Max is available in a fraction of Rogers&#x27; LTE coverage area. On April 17, 2014, Rogers launched LTE service on its 700 MHz spectrum.

Rogers has not announced its goals for expanding LTE coverage across Canada, but announced plans in June 2014 to have LTE coverage expanded to 98.3% of the population of British Columbia by the end of 2016.

According to Rogers, as of December 31, 2016, its LTE coverage reached 95% of the Canadian population.

On March 31, 2015, Rogers Wireless launched voice over LTE (VoLTE), the first carrier in Canada to offer this service.

Cat-6 LTE-Advanced has been available since January 2015, through carrier aggregation of band 4 and band 7, with a maximum download speed of 225 Mbit/s.

===5G NR===
Rogers launched its 5G network in January 2020 and uses Block I from the 2500Mhz Frequency Block Plan. The company stated that rollout will expand to use its further reaching 600 MHz spectrum later in the year for improved 5G coverage. As of December 16, 2020, Rogers offers both NSA mode and SA modes in select markets. Rogers was the first Canadian carrier to offer 5G service.

Rogers partnered with Swedish Telecom giant Ericsson to launch its 5G wireless technology. Today, Rogers&#x27;s 5G network is live in more than 160 communities across Canada, including Calgary, Toronto, Vancouver, Ottawa, and Montreal.

===Radio frequency summary===

The following is a list of known frequencies that Rogers employs in Canada:

==Products==
Rogers Wireless carries feature phones, and smartphones that support either Android OS or iOS.

==On Demand Mobile==
Customers with select smartphones, tablets, computers, LG Smart TVs, Xbox 360 and Xbox One gaming systems can use the Rogers On Demand mobile service, which was renamed Rogers Live before its current incarnation, Rogers Anyplace TV. Rogers Anyplace TV offers TV shows, movies and sports on demand.

==Subsidiaries==

===Fido===

In 2004, Rogers bought Canada’s first and, at the time, only other GSM provider, Fido, along with Fido’s partner, Sprint Canada, for a total of $1.4 billion. At the time, Fido had nearly 1.3 million customers. In 2008, Fido was rebranded as a discount mobile virtual network operator with a new logo and cheaper plans.

===Chatr===

Rogers launched the Chatr Mobile brand in mid-2010 in response to the emergence of new phone carriers Mobilicity, Public Mobile, and Freedom Mobile (previously Wind Mobile) to directly compete with the new carriers in their coverage areas. Chatr became a cheaper option than Fido, making Fido more of a mid-range offering.

==Retail presence==
Rogers has its own corporate retail stores, known as Rogers Plus, and also allows third parties to become exclusive dealers. Best Buy and Walmart stores in Canada provide Fido products along with prepaid and postpaid services. Additionally, Loblaw Companies stores sell prepaid feature phones and top-up vouchers. Loblaw stores have a special booth, called The Mobile Shop, where the phones are displayed.

===Former retailers===
While Shoppers Drug Mart carried only Rogers Wireless prepaid phones at one time, the stores temporarily partnered with Rogers. As a result, Shoppers stores added both prepaid and postpaid products and services for Rogers and its two other brands, Fido and Chatr. As of March 2011, however, Shoppers stores ended their partnership. They only sell prepaid top-up vouchers for these providers.

==Criticism==
===Misdirected phone charges===
In 2005, Rogers lost a court case against an Osgoode Hall Law School university professor, Susan Drummond, over a $12,000 charge for overseas calls that was placed on her bill after the phone was stolen, for which the company insisted she pay. Following the case becoming public knowledge, Ted Rogers issued a formal apology and cancelled the charges. Drummond filed a lawsuit, for which she was then also paid punitive and compensatory damages. Drummond and her partner Harry Gefen published further on the case in an SSHRC funded research project, and for which she and her partner were cited by &quot;Time&quot; magazine as &quot;heroes of the year&quot; in 2007. During her research, Drummond showed that the phones of Rogers executives had been cloned by members of Hezbollah and used to make thousands of overseas phone calls in 1997 and 1998. It also turned up information that Rogers had been allowing phones that they were alerted had potentially fraudulent call patterns to continue to remain functional despite the warning.

===Text messaging charges===
On July 7, 2009, Rogers Wireless began charging a nominal fee for incoming text messages to customers without a text messaging plan. The change was similar to policies of charging for incoming text message that were adopted in August 2008 by Bell Mobility and Telus Mobility. Some users complained that Rogers had unilaterally changed the terms of their contracts. The company maintained that changes to services and fees are permitted in the &quot;terms of service&quot; document.

===Government Regulatory Recovery Fee===

Rogers has been criticized for its Government Regulatory Recovery Fee (GRRF), formerly known as the System Access Fee (SAF). The fee ranges between $1.93 to $3.35 per month. On July 4, 2012, Rogers announced it would no longer be charging a separate GRRF fee to new customers, instead raising the price of the Monthly Service Charge. The bills of existing customers would remain the same. An $18 billion class action lawsuit against: Bell, Rogers, and Telus, originally filed in a Saskatchewan court in 2004 regarding these hidden fees, is still pending.

===Anticompetitive tactics===

Rogers launched the Chatr brand with low-end feature phones and pricing plans similar to that of new entrants such as Wind Mobile, Mobilicity and Public Mobile. Chatr was criticized for being a fighter brand created by Rogers. The brand&#x27;s &quot;fewer dropped calls&quot; claim was disputed by the Competition Bureau. In 2013, the Ontario Superior Court of Justice ruled that Chatr&#x27;s advertising of fewer dropped calls, in connection with its 2010 launch, was fair and accurate.

==See also==
*Fido Solutions
*Chatr
*Mobilicity
*List of Canadian mobile phone companies

==References==

* https://1vjoxz2ghhkclty8c1wjich1-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Rogers_Annual_Report_2017_Bookmarked.pdf

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3439663" start="0" end="20" title="Rogers Wireless" label="Rogers Wireless Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1941618" start="35" end="58" title="mobile network operator" label="mobile network operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q658255" start="154" end="164" title="subsidiary" label="subsidiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q165684" start="168" end="189" title="Rogers Communications" label="Rogers Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565883" start="276" end="310" title="List of Canadian mobile phone companies" label="largest wireless carrier in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237122" start="396" end="411" title="David Margolese" label="David Margolese"/>
<link wikidata="Q832436" start="435" end="440" title="pager" label="pager"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439663" start="447" end="463" title="Rogers Wireless" label="Canadian Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q379651" start="511" end="515" title="Advanced Mobile Phone System" label="AMPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q462656" start="730" end="740" title="Edward Samuel Rogers" label="Ted Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380947" start="760" end="786" title="Philippe de Gaspé Beaubien" label="Philippe de Gaspé Beaubien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439663" start="812" end="818" title="Rogers Wireless" label="Cantel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013093" start="1052" end="1075" title="CNCP Telecommunications" label="CNCP Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q747066" start="1102" end="1117" title="microwave relay" label="microwave relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424919" start="1149" end="1162" title="Long-distance calling" label="long distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="1170" end="1178" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="1258" end="1269" title="Bell Canada" label="Bell Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439663" start="1350" end="1365" title="Rogers Wireless" label="Rogers Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071471" start="1499" end="1503" title="Fido Solutions" label="Fido"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="1533" end="1536" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q233394" start="1598" end="1602" title="Code-division multiple access" label="CDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="1845" end="1856" title="Bell Canada" label="Bell Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835333" start="1905" end="1911" title="BC Tel" label="BC Tel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516849" start="1916" end="1935" title="Shaw Communications" label="Shaw Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="1987" end="1993" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894594" start="2109" end="2122" title="Bell Mobility" label="Bell Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697925" start="2127" end="2141" title="Telus Mobility" label="Telus Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="2187" end="2191" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q731991" start="2192" end="2196" title="High Speed Packet Access" label="HSPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="2266" end="2286" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447850" start="2398" end="2411" title="fighter brand" label="fighter brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087766" start="2427" end="2432" title="Chatr" label="Chatr"/>
<link wikidata="Q462656" start="2481" end="2491" title="Edward Samuel Rogers" label="Ted Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237122" start="2493" end="2508" title="David Margolese" label="David Margolese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380947" start="2528" end="2554" title="Philippe de Gaspé Beaubien" label="Philippe de Gaspé Beaubien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277465" start="2573" end="2588" title="Sirius XM Radio" label="Sirius XM Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517315" start="3227" end="3236" title="Telemedia" label="Telemedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="3894" end="3902" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346752" start="4001" end="4017" title="spectrum auction" label="spectrum auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="4063" end="4071" title="Electromagnetic spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="4103" end="4106" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="4108" end="4112" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79703" start="4114" end="4117" title="LTE (telecommunication)" label="LTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q62029351" start="4123" end="4128" title="5G NR" label="5G NR"/>
<link wikidata="Q379651" start="4263" end="4267" title="Advanced Mobile Phone System" label="AMPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q887303" start="4268" end="4274" title="D-AMPS" label="D-AMPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="4416" end="4419" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q204833" start="4433" end="4437" title="Enhanced Data Rates for GSM Evolution" label="EDGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q192731" start="4692" end="4699" title="dial-up Internet access" label="dial-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187511" start="4715" end="4718" title="Personal Communications Service" label="PCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="5013" end="5017" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071187" start="5054" end="5059" title="Evolved HSPA" label="HSPA+"/>
<link wikidata="Q79703" start="5785" end="5810" title="LTE (telecommunication)" label="long-term evolution (LTE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18136234" start="6448" end="6470" title="VoLTE" label="voice over LTE (VoLTE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345402" start="6530" end="6542" title="LTE-Advanced" label="LTE-Advanced"/>
<link wikidata="Q62029351" start="6710" end="6720" title="5G NR" label="5G network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6970" end="6978" title="5G NR#Deployment modes" label="NSA mode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6983" end="6991" title="5G NR#Deployment modes" label="SA modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="7115" end="7123" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q965424" start="7453" end="7466" title="feature phone" label="feature phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="7473" end="7483" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="7505" end="7515" title="Android OS" label="Android OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="7519" end="7522" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="7581" end="7588" title="Tablet computer" label="tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q162345" start="7601" end="7612" title="LG Smart TV" label="LG Smart TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q48263" start="7615" end="7623" title="Xbox 360" label="Xbox 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="7628" end="7636" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581300" start="7989" end="8002" title="Sprint Canada" label="Sprint Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058891" start="8127" end="8158" title="mobile virtual network operator" label="mobile virtual network operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317656" start="8310" end="8320" title="Mobilicity" label="Mobilicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410420" start="8322" end="8335" title="Public Mobile" label="Public Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023931" start="8341" end="8355" title="Freedom Mobile" label="Freedom Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q533415" start="8677" end="8685" title="Best Buy" label="Best Buy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645718" start="8690" end="8697" title="Walmart Canada" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q909856" start="8793" end="8809" title="Loblaw Companies" label="Loblaw Companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q965424" start="8830" end="8843" title="feature phone" label="feature phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820137" start="8988" end="9006" title="Shoppers Drug Mart" label="Shoppers Drug Mart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071471" start="9230" end="9234" title="Fido Solutions" label="Fido"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087766" start="9239" end="9244" title="Chatr" label="Chatr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993802" start="9940" end="9945" title="SSHRC" label="SSHRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="10192" end="10201" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894594" start="10728" end="10741" title="Bell Mobility" label="Bell Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697925" start="10746" end="10760" title="Telus Mobility" label="Telus Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="11445" end="11449" title="Bell Canada" label="Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q165858" start="11463" end="11468" title="Telus" label="Telus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="11492" end="11504" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087766" start="11618" end="11623" title="Chatr" label="Chatr"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023931" start="11716" end="11727" title="Wind Mobile" label="Wind Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317656" start="11729" end="11739" title="Mobilicity" label="Mobilicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410420" start="11744" end="11757" title="Public Mobile" label="Public Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447850" start="11792" end="11805" title="fighter brand" label="fighter brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q18642488" start="11900" end="11918" title="Competition Bureau" label="Competition Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094918" start="11933" end="11966" title="Ontario Superior Court of Justice" label="Ontario Superior Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071471" start="12101" end="12115" title="Fido Solutions" label="Fido Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087766" start="12117" end="12122" title="Chatr" label="Chatr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317656" start="12124" end="12134" title="Mobilicity" label="Mobilicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565883" start="12136" end="12175" title="List of Canadian mobile phone companies" label="List of Canadian mobile phone companies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880797" wikidata="Q1039881" url="?curid=880797" title="Jim Turner">
<text>Jim Turner may refer to:
==Entertainment==
* Jim Turner (editor) (1945–1999), editor at Arkham House
* Jim Turner (comedian) (born 1952), American comedian and actor
* Jim Turner (singer) (born 1946), American country singer and songwriter on &quot;The Lawrence Welk Show&quot;

==Sports==
===American football===
* Jim Turner (center) (1912–1995), American football player
* Jim Turner (placekicker) (1941–2023), American football player

===Other sports===
* Jim Turner (baseball) (1903–1998), Major League Baseball pitcher
* Jim Turner (basketball), American basketball player
* Jim Turner (sailor) (born 1975), New Zealand Olympic sailor

==Others==
* Jim Turner (criminal) (fl. 1854–1866), American criminal figure, pugilist, and enforcer for Tammany Hall
* Jim Turner (politician) (born 1946), U.S. Congressman from Texas
* James Harvey Turner (1930–1991), Mississippi state legislator

==See also==
* Jimmy Turner (disambiguation)
* James Turner (disambiguation)
* Turner (surname)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1039881" start="0" end="10" title="Jim Turner" label="Jim Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198618" start="45" end="64" title="Jim Turner (editor)" label="Jim Turner (editor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198616" start="103" end="124" title="Jim Turner (comedian)" label="Jim Turner (comedian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198621" start="168" end="187" title="Jim Turner (singer)" label="Jim Turner (singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21151758" start="316" end="335" title="Jim Turner (center)" label="Jim Turner (center)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198620" start="376" end="400" title="Jim Turner (placekicker)" label="Jim Turner (placekicker)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198614" start="461" end="482" title="Jim Turner (baseball)" label="Jim Turner (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q100938051" start="528" end="551" title="Jim Turner (basketball)" label="Jim Turner (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198623" start="582" end="601" title="Jim Turner (sailor)" label="Jim Turner (sailor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198617" start="656" end="677" title="Jim Turner (criminal)" label="Jim Turner (criminal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638994" start="763" end="786" title="Jim Turner (politician)" label="Jim Turner (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123339925" start="830" end="849" title="James Harvey Turner" label="James Harvey Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q22349262" start="908" end="937" title="Jimmy Turner (disambiguation)" label="Jimmy Turner (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144481" start="940" end="969" title="James Turner (disambiguation)" label="James Turner (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12804512" start="972" end="988" title="Turner (surname)" label="Turner (surname)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880805" wikidata="Q709049" url="?curid=880805" title="Tan Kah Kee">
<text>Tan Kah Kee (; also spelled as Chen Jiageng; 21 October 1874 – 12 August 1961) was a Chinese businessman, investor, and philanthropist active in Singapore and the Chinese cities of Hong Kong, Shanghai, Xiamen, and Guangzhou.

A prominent figure in the overseas Chinese community in Singapore and wider Southeast Asia during the 20th century, he was responsible for gathering much support from the community to aid China in major events such as the Xinhai Revolution (1911), the Kuomintang&#x27;s Northern Expedition (1926–28), and the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–45).

Apart from donating most of his assets and earnings to aid China in those major events, Tan set up funds in Southeast Asia and Hong Kong and contributed to the establishment of several schools in Southeast Asia and China&#x27;s Fujian Province, including Xiamen University.

==Life==
Tan Kah Kee was born in Xiamen, Fjian Province, in 1874 during the Qing dynasty of China. In 1890, at the age of 16, he travelled to Singapore in the Straits Settlements to help his father, who owned a rice trading business. In 1903, after his father&#x27;s business collapsed, Tan started his own company and built a business empire from rubber plantations, manufacturing, sawmills, canneries, real estate, import and export brokerage, ocean transport and rice trading. As he was proficient in Hokkien, he achieved much success doing business in Singapore because Hokkien was the common language of overseas Chinese in Singapore throughout most of the 19th and 20th centuries. His business was at its prime from 1912 to 1914 when he was known as the &quot;Henry Ford of the Malayan community&quot;.

Tan had a leading role among the 110 founders of Tao Nan School in Singapore. In 1919, he set up The Chinese High School (now Hwa Chong Institution) in Singapore. Earlier, in 1918, he established the Jimei Schools (now Jimei University) in Xiamen. Tan was also a member of the Anglo-Chinese College Council and had pledged S$100,000 to the proposed Anglo Chinese School College in 1919. However, when the proposal was turned down by the Government, he agreed to channel the $30,000 he had given to the Anglo-Chinese School fund for physics and chemistry. This helped to complete the Secondary School at Cairnhill in 1928. In 1921, he set up Xiamen University and financially supported it until the Nationalist government of the Republic of China took over in 1937. In 1920, Tan arranged a marriage between his daughter, Tan Ai Leh, and Lee Kong Chian, his protégé and a businessman.

Tan was one of the prominent overseas Chinese to provide financial support to China during the Second Sino-Japanese War. He organised many relief funds under his name, one of which alone managed to raise ten million Straits dollars in 1937. He was also a participant in the Legislative Yuan of the Nationalist government in Chongqing. After the Japanese invaded and occupied Malaya and Singapore in 1942, they deemed these contributors &quot;undesirable&quot; and conducted systematic extermination of anti-Japanese elements in Singapore through the Sook Ching Massacre. Tan survived because he escaped from Singapore before it fell to the Japanese, and went into hiding in Malang, a town in East Java province, Indonesia. He strongly rejected proposals to attempt to negotiate with the Japanese and regarded such attempts as characteristic of a &quot;hanjian&quot; (a Chinese term for race traitor). He also attempted to dissuade Wang Jingwei from such activities. He exercised considerable effort against the governor of Fujian Province, Chen Yi, for perceived maladministration.

In 1943, while he was in Java, Tan began writing his memoirs, &quot;The Memoirs of an Overseas Chinese of the Southern Ocean&quot; (), which later became an important document of the history of the overseas Chinese in Southeast Asia.

Tan was the &quot;de facto&quot; leader of the Chinese community in Singapore, serving as chairman of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce and helping to organise the Hokkien clan association. However, he lost this role when the Chinese Civil War divided Singapore&#x27;s Chinese community into Communist and Kuomintang sympathisers. Tan Kah Kee has consistently demonstrated a keen interest in business, philanthropy, and education, with a dedicated commitment to uplifting ASEAN and his homeland, particularly in Jimei and Xiamen. He refrains from aligning with any political party but advocates for the principles of diligence and achieving commendable outcomes. The venerable individual does not concern himself with affiliations or factions and disapproves of malpractices within the Kuomintang. 

In 1947 Tan founded the Chiyu Banking Corporation in Hong Kong, an intended to be a sustainable business with profits to be devoted to education in Xiamen and the rest of Fujian province in China.

After the Communist victory in China and the founding of the People&#x27;s Republic of China in 1949, Tan tried to return to Singapore in 1950 but was denied entry by the British colonial authorities concerned about communist influence in Singapore and Malaya. He then moved permanently to China and served in numerous positions in the Chinese Communist Party.

Tan died in 1961 in Beijing and was given a state funeral by the Chinese government. In Singapore, the Tan Kah Kee Scholarship Fund, which later became known as the Tan Kah Kee Foundation, was established in memory of this philanthropy.

==Personal life==
Tan&#x27;s sons were:
* Tan Chay Bing (), Tan Khuat Siong (), Tan Pok Ai (), Tan Pok Chay (), Tan Kok Kheng (), Tan Guan Khai (), Tan Guan Chay (), Tan Kok Whye () and Tan Guan Aik ()

Tan&#x27;s daughters were:
* Tan Ai Leh (), Tan Lay Ho (), Tan Ah Hui (), Tan Siew Mui, Tan Mary (), Tan Lay Choo (), Tan Poh Tee () and Tan Ai Eng ()

Many of his children maintained close relationship with or even married other prominent Chinese figures in Singapore. For example, Tan Ai Leh, his eldest daughter, was married to Lee Kong Chian; Tan Lay Ho was married to Lim Chong Kuo, the eldest son of respected merchant Lim Nee Soon.

==Legacy==
In recognition of Tan&#x27;s contributions to education and society throughout his lifetime, there are places and establishments in China and Southeast Asia named after Tan or built to commemorate him, including: the Tan Kah Kee Memorial Museum in Tan&#x27;s hometown in Jimei; the Tan Kah Kee Foundation, which offers postgraduate scholarships; the Tan Kah Kee MRT station along the Downtown MRT line in Singapore, next to the current site of Hwa Chong Institution. The schools in the Anglo-Chinese School family have houses named after Tan. Chongfu School&#x27;s Main Hall is named after him. Tan Kah Kee Hall at the University of California, Berkeley, is also named after him.

The asteroid 2963 Chen Jiageng is named after him.

==Image gallery==
==See also==
* Tan Kah Kee MRT station, a train station in Singapore named after Tan Kah Kee
* Lee Kong Chian, Tan Kah Kee&#x27;s son-in-law, who was also a businessman

==References==
===Footnotes===
===General references===
*
*

==External links==
* Tan Kah Kee Biography &amp; Photo Album
* Tan Kah Kee Foundation Homepage.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q709049" start="0" end="11" title="Tan Kah Kee" label="Tan Kah Kee"/>
<link wikidata="Q709049" start="31" end="43" title="Tan Kah Kee" label="Chen Jiageng"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="145" end="154" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="181" end="190" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="192" end="200" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q68744" start="202" end="208" title="Xiamen" label="Xiamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="214" end="223" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="252" end="268" title="overseas Chinese" label="overseas Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="448" end="465" title="Xinhai Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="478" end="488" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="496" end="515" title="Northern Expedition" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="535" end="559" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="800" end="815" title="Fujian" label="Fujian Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153539" start="827" end="844" title="Xiamen University" label="Xiamen University"/>
<link wikidata="Q68744" start="880" end="886" title="Xiamen" label="Xiamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="923" end="935" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420036" start="989" end="1025" title="Singapore in the Straits Settlements" label="Singapore in the Straits Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="1058" end="1070" title="rice trading" label="rice trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="1195" end="1212" title="rubber plantation" label="rubber plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624231" start="1351" end="1358" title="Hokkien" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="1403" end="1412" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="1456" end="1472" title="overseas Chinese" label="overseas Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="1613" end="1623" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="1631" end="1648" title="British Malaya" label="Malayan community"/>
<link wikidata="Q25247355" start="1706" end="1720" title="Tao Nan School" label="Tao Nan School"/>
<link wikidata="Q27965162" start="1754" end="1777" title="The Chinese High School (Singapore)" label="The Chinese High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874255" start="1783" end="1804" title="Hwa Chong Institution" label="Hwa Chong Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199182" start="1876" end="1892" title="Jimei University" label="Jimei University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763600" start="2159" end="2179" title="Anglo-Chinese School" label="Anglo-Chinese School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763610" start="2240" end="2256" title="Anglo-Chinese School (Independent)" label="Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153539" start="2298" end="2315" title="Xiamen University" label="Xiamen University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="2355" end="2377" title="Nationalist government" label="Nationalist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="2385" end="2402" title="Republic of China (1912–49)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847031" start="2493" end="2507" title="Lee Kong Chian" label="Lee Kong Chian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="2636" end="2660" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q261447" start="2757" end="2771" title="Straits dollar" label="Straits dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q715869" start="2815" end="2831" title="Legislative Yuan" label="Legislative Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="2865" end="2874" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q716144" start="3091" end="3110" title="Sook Ching Massacre" label="Sook Ching Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11445" start="3215" end="3221" title="Malang" label="Malang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586" start="3233" end="3242" title="East Java" label="East Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="3253" end="3262" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154793" start="3393" end="3400" title="hanjian" label="hanjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278981" start="3427" end="3439" title="race traitor" label="race traitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q22303" start="3472" end="3484" title="Wang Jingwei" label="Wang Jingwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q709887" start="3581" end="3588" title="Chen Yi (Kuomintang)" label="Chen Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="3649" end="3653" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522929" start="3965" end="3992" title="Singapore Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Industry" label="Chinese Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818339" start="4021" end="4045" title="Singapore Hokkien Huay Kuan" label="Hokkien clan association"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="4083" end="4100" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="4149" end="4158" title="Communist Party of China" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="4163" end="4173" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q877121" start="4681" end="4706" title="Chiyu Banking Corporation" label="Chiyu Banking Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="4710" end="4719" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5320" end="5348" title="Tan Kah Kee Scholarship Fund" label="Tan Kah Kee Scholarship Fund"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5382" end="5404" title="Tan Kah Kee Foundation" label="Tan Kah Kee Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847031" start="5989" end="6003" title="Lee Kong Chian" label="Lee Kong Chian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548738" start="6083" end="6095" title="Lim Nee Soon" label="Lim Nee Soon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6326" end="6353" title="Tan Kah Kee Memorial Museum" label="Tan Kah Kee Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q974546" start="6380" end="6385" title="Jimei District" label="Jimei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6391" end="6413" title="Tan Kah Kee Foundation" label="Tan Kah Kee Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12983052" start="6459" end="6482" title="Tan Kah Kee MRT station" label="Tan Kah Kee MRT station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663943" start="6493" end="6510" title="Downtown MRT line" label="Downtown MRT line"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874255" start="6553" end="6574" title="Hwa Chong Institution" label="Hwa Chong Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915726" start="6628" end="6634" title="House system" label="houses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6652" end="6666" title="Chongfu School" label="Chongfu School"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="6728" end="6762" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110360" start="6803" end="6820" title="2963 Chen Jiageng" label="2963 Chen Jiageng"/>
<link wikidata="Q12983052" start="6875" end="6898" title="Tan Kah Kee MRT station" label="Tan Kah Kee MRT station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847031" start="6955" end="6969" title="Lee Kong Chian" label="Lee Kong Chian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880815" wikidata="Q7151505" url="?curid=880815" title="Paul J. Perrone">
<text>Paul J. Perrone has written numerous books and articles on various Java-based software technologies. He has also founded Perrone Robotics fusing open and standard software technologies with the field of robotics. He has helped push robotics into the mainstream and brought the term &quot;popular robotics&quot; into the public eye.

In addition to robotics software for personal and professional use. Perrone was the team lead for Team Jefferson, a 2005 DARPA Grand Challenge team, and a DARPA Grand Challenge (2007) team.

He has been a frequent presenter at Sun Microsystem&#x27;s JavaOne conference, namely James Gosling&#x27;s keynote sessions presenting an autonomous dune buggy (Tommy), an unmanned helicopter , an autonomous Scion Xb (Tommy Jr) , and Lincvolt, an energy-efficient vehicle owned and spearheaded by rock star Neil Young. He received a Duke Award for Tommy, and a Golden Duke and Lifetime Achievement Award for Lincvolt .

He is featured in a documentary about a robotic car entered into the historic 2005 DARPA Grand Challenge and was featured in a Discovery Science special called &quot;RoboCars&quot; for his robotic car entered into the 2007 DARPA Urban Challenge .

In 2010, he was also one of 25 individuals living in Charlottesville, Virginia who are well regarded in their respective fields .

==External links==
*http://www.sun.com/aboutsun/pr/2009-06/sunflash.20090601.3.xml
*http://www.lincvolt.com
*http://www.perronerobotics.com
*http://www.washingtonexaminer.com/local/ap/va-firm-helps-convert-neil-youngs-car-63909752.html</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7151505" start="0" end="15" title="Paul J. Perrone" label="Paul J. Perrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="78" end="86" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989741" start="121" end="137" title="Perrone Robotics" label="Perrone Robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="203" end="211" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q507220" start="449" end="475" title="2005 DARPA Grand Challenge" label="2005 DARPA Grand Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151710" start="488" end="516" title="DARPA Grand Challenge (2007)" label="DARPA Grand Challenge (2007)"/>
<link wikidata="Q92622" start="610" end="623" title="James Gosling" label="James Gosling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550314" start="758" end="766" title="Lincvolt" label="Lincvolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="831" end="841" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880817" wikidata="Q2530030" url="?curid=880817" title="Strigolniki">
<text>The strigolniki (; ) were followers of a Russian religious sect which appeared in the mid-14th century, known as strigolnichestvo (). They first appeared in Pskov before spreading to Novgorod and Tver. By the early 15th century, they had disappeared. Along with the Judaizers, they were one of the major sects in medieval Russia.

The origins of the name remain unclear. Some historians believe it has something to do with handicrafts that the first &quot;strigolniki&quot; were engaged in, such as cloth-cutting or hairdressing (it appears that the word &quot;strigolnik&quot; derives from the Russian root &quot;strig-&quot;, which connotes &quot;cutting&quot; or &quot;trimming&quot;). Others think the name comes from a special initiation ceremony (a specific haircut, or &quot;strizhka&quot;), performed by a deacon named Karp – a supposed founder of the sect (together with deacon Nikita), yet others think it could mean that these people refused to either grow a beard or cut their beards when they entered churches.

Active participants of the sect were tradespeople and low-ranking clergy. They renounced all ecclesiastic hierarchy and monasticism, sacraments done by Russian clergy due to recognizing the Orthodox priesthood as illegitimate: priesthood, communion, penance, and baptism, which had been accompanied by large fees (&quot;extortions&quot;, in their view) to the benefit of the clergy. Criticizing and exposing the venality, vices, and ignorance of the priests, the &quot;strigolniki&quot; demanded the right to a religious sermon for laymen. Their sermons were full of social motifs: they reproached the rich for enslaving the free and the poor. They were opposed by a number of high-level Russian bishops.

== Beliefs ==

There is some debate if the &quot;strigolniki&quot; were &quot;heretical&quot;, if they were a proto-Protestant movement among Orthodox Christians, being similar to Lollardy or the Hussites, or if they merely opposed the priesthood. The &quot;strigolniki&quot; movement has been suggested to have had iconoclastic tendencies, though it is not clear if they came out against the use of icons. It is clearer that they came out against monasticism.

The &quot;strigolniki&quot; opposed the ruling church, refusing to recognize its bishops and priests, and rejected going to Orthodox churches, instead gathering at separate meetings. They are also known to have criticized Orthodox priests whom they called &quot;drunkards&quot;. They also repudiated ordainment, believing that simple laymen could perform church service, and the established church rituals. They also criticized the feudal order. The nature of the movement is seen from the words of Stephen of Perm: &quot;Of the &quot;strigolniki&quot; illiterate people say: those neither steal nor collect wealth&quot;.

Karetnikova suggested that the &quot;strigolniki&quot; were a response to changes in the Russian Orthodox Church, wanting to return from ritualism to the simplicity of New Testament Christianity, emphasizing the spiritual meaning of the sacraments and basing their views primarily on scripture, seeing it as their ultimate authority. Petrushko on the other hand argued that in the attitude of the &quot;strigolniki&quot; about the church and church hierarchy, though there are some similarities with Bogomils and Cathars, based on surviving sources they did not have a dogmatic system of theology and did not disagree with the church about Christology and on soteriology, instead most of their disagreements being with ecclesiology. Petrushko, judging by the fact that Photius believed it possible to return the &quot;strigolniki&quot; to the church, their disagreement with Orthodox dogma was not as dramatic as the Heresy of the Judaizers.

M. V. Pechnikov argued that the &quot;strigolniki&quot; merely rejected the Orthodox priesthood, simony and confession to clergy, while not denying the sacraments of the church nor most dogma.

Obolensky has instead suggested that the &quot;strigolniki&quot; were born from Bogomil or Cathar missionaries in Russia during the times of Kievan Rus&#x27;.

Stephen of Perm mentioned that the &quot;strigolniki&quot; did not confess their sins to clergy but instead to the ground; however, the meaning of what Stephen meant is not clear.

== History ==

According to an epistle by Stephen of Perm, Karp &quot;began to tell the people: it is neither dignified to sing over the dead, nor to mention them; nor to bring offerings for the dead to the church; nor to have feasts; nor to give alms for the soul of the departed&quot;.

Deacon Karp found many followers in Pskov, but had to move to Novgorod to avoid persecution. Some scholars argue that the archbishop of Novgorod, Vasily Kalika (1330–1352), ignored the heresy, but that his successors, Moisei (1325–1330; 1352–1359) and Aleksei (1359–1388), took firm measures against the heretics. Beginning in 1382, the sect was opposed by Archbishop Dionysios of Suzdal. In epistles addressed to the clergy and the inhabitants of Novgorod and Pskov, the leadership of the church attempted to discredit the movement and prove its right to earn its income. The &quot;strigolniki&quot; faced persecution, being driven from towns or simply killed.

In 1375, enraged citizens of Novgorod threw three heretics from the bridge into the Volkhov River. According to the 16th-century &quot;Nikon Chronicle&quot;, the justification for this was a literal interpretation of the Gospel (Matthew 18:6): &quot;Whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in me to sin, it were better for him to have a great milestone hung around his neck, and to be drowned in the depths of the sea&quot;. The chronicles mention that &quot;the heretic &quot;strigolniki&quot; were beaten; deacon Nikita and Parishioner Karp and a third man with them were thrown from the bridge&quot;.

Stephen of Perm wrote a letter to Nilus of Constantinople in 1382 about the &quot;strigolniki&quot;.

However, the teachings of the &quot;strigolniki&quot; lived on. They spread widely in Novgorod, in Pskov, and also in Tver, where bishops Feodor Dobry and Yevfimiy Vislen came forward with support for the movement. In the early 15th century, Photius, Metropolitan of Kiev and all Russia, denounced the teachings of the &quot;strigolniki&quot;.

The &quot;strigolniki&quot; disappeared in the early 15th century due to persecution, as well as due to disagreement among the &quot;strigolniki&quot;. The last mention of the &quot;strigolniki&quot; was in 1487.

== See also ==
* Non-possessors
* Protestantism in Russia
* Spiritual Christianity

== References ==
==Sources==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19097" start="59" end="63" title="sect" label="sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214" start="157" end="162" title="Pskov" label="Pskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235" start="183" end="191" title="Novgorod" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288" start="196" end="200" title="Tver" label="Tver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622627" start="266" end="275" title="Heresy of the Judaizers" label="Judaizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q877729" start="423" end="433" title="handicraft" label="handicraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q594939" start="732" end="742" title="initiation" label="initiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627975" start="743" end="751" title="ceremony" label="ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="814" end="820" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="1091" end="1097" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1118" end="1130" title="ecclesiastic" label="ecclesiastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="1131" end="1140" title="hierarchy" label="hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q148836" start="1145" end="1156" title="monasticism" label="monasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="1158" end="1167" title="sacrament" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="1252" end="1262" title="priesthood" label="priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="1264" end="1273" title="Eucharist" label="communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10909316" start="1275" end="1282" title="penance" label="penance"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="1288" end="1295" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11765" start="1333" end="1336" title="fee" label="fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="1345" end="1354" title="extortion" label="extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q60797" start="1546" end="1552" title="sermon" label="sermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407657" start="1557" end="1563" title="laymen" label="laymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q56292614" start="1841" end="1857" title="Proto-Protestantism" label="proto-Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q731652" start="1911" end="1919" title="Lollardy" label="Lollardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131372" start="1927" end="1935" title="Hussites" label="Hussites"/>
<link wikidata="Q181543" start="2047" end="2059" title="Iconoclasm" label="iconoclastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q467438" start="2692" end="2707" title="Stephen of Perm" label="Stephen of Perm"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="2905" end="2928" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="2984" end="2997" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q204095" start="3316" end="3324" title="Bogomilism" label="Bogomils"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="3329" end="3336" title="Catharism" label="Cathars"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="3456" end="3467" title="Christology" label="Christology"/>
<link wikidata="Q326255" start="3475" end="3486" title="soteriology" label="soteriology"/>
<link wikidata="Q223693" start="3535" end="3547" title="ecclesiology" label="ecclesiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q117967" start="3585" end="3592" title="Photius, Metropolitan of Moscow" label="Photius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622627" start="3733" end="3756" title="Heresy of the Judaizers" label="Heresy of the Judaizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q205302" start="3856" end="3862" title="simony" label="simony"/>
<link wikidata="Q204095" start="4033" end="4040" title="Bogomilism" label="Bogomil"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="4044" end="4050" title="Catharism" label="Cathar"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4067" end="4073" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="4094" end="4110" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q467438" start="4113" end="4128" title="Stephen of Perm" label="Stephen of Perm"/>
<link wikidata="Q215495" start="4325" end="4332" title="epistle" label="epistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q467438" start="4336" end="4351" title="Stephen of Perm" label="Stephen of Perm"/>
<link wikidata="Q851824" start="4663" end="4674" title="persecution" label="persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q954858" start="4705" end="4727" title="archbishop of Novgorod" label="archbishop of Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4104405" start="4729" end="4742" title="Vasily Kalika" label="Vasily Kalika"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243" start="5330" end="5343" title="Volkhov (river)" label="Volkhov River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031256" start="5381" end="5396" title="Nikon Chronicle" label="Nikon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q762961" start="5897" end="5920" title="Nilus of Constantinople" label="Nilus of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="6095" end="6101" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q117967" start="6207" end="6214" title="Photius, Metropolitan of Moscow" label="Photius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369121" start="6541" end="6555" title="Non-possessors" label="Non-possessors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381717" start="6558" end="6581" title="Protestantism in Russia" label="Protestantism in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q948515" start="6584" end="6606" title="Spiritual Christianity" label="Spiritual Christianity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880820" wikidata="None" url="?curid=880820" title="Law of Fives">
<text></text><links>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880821" wikidata="Q1313779" url="?curid=880821" title="Robert Finch (politician)">
<text>Robert Hutchinson Finch (October 9, 1925 – October 10, 1995) was a Republican politician from La Canada Flintridge, California. From 1967 to 1969, he served as the 38th lieutenant governor of California. Following Richard Nixon&#x27;s presidential campaign in 1968, he was appointed Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare in 1969. He was the Counselor to the President from 1970 until 1972. During the 1976 California United States Senate election, he lost in the Republican primary to S.I. Hayakawa.

==Early life and education==
Finch was born in Tempe, Arizona. He was the son of Robert L. Finch, a member of the Arizona House of Representatives, and his wife, Gladys Hutchinson. Finch was enlisted in the Marine Corps during World War II. He married the former Carol Crothers on February 14, 1946; they had three daughters and one son: Maureen F. Shaw, Kevin Finch, Priscilla Finch and Cathleen F. Morser.

After serving in the Marines briefly during World War II, Finch entered Occidental College in Los Angeles, where he graduated in 1947 with a bachelor&#x27;s degree. After the graduation from Occidental College in 1947, went to Washington, D.C., where he worked as an administrative aide Congressman Norris Poulson, representative from California. During this time, he met and became friendly with freshman Congressman and future president Richard Nixon. Partly at Nixon&#x27;s suggestion, Mr. Finch returned to California to study law at the University of Southern California, where he took his LL.B. degree in 1951.

==Career==

He had worked on the Norris Poulson election campaign in 1946, and on Nixon&#x27;s campaign in 1948. He returned to Southern California and earned his LL.B at the University of Southern California Law School in 1951.

He was a Marine officer during the Korean War from 1951 to 1953. He ran for the Congress unsuccessfully in 1952 and in 1954 against Democrat Cecil R. King, who practiced law in Pasadena, and was the chairman of the Los Angeles County Republican Central Committee, from 1956 to 1958. He returned to Washington as Vice-president Nixon&#x27;s aide in 1958.

He was Nixon&#x27;s campaign manager in the 1960 presidential campaign, against Massachusetts Senator John F. Kennedy.

In 1964, Finch managed U.S. Sen. George Murphy&#x27;s victorious campaign over Pierre Salinger. In 1966, Finch was elected the 38th lieutenant governor of California. He received more votes than Ronald Reagan, who was elected governor of California at the same time. In 1968, Finch was the senior adviser in Nixon&#x27;s presidential campaign and was appointed Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare. In 1970, Finch left the HEW to be Counselor to the President. He left the White House on December 15, 1972, to practice law in Pasadena, and he stayed involved in the Republican politics. Even though Finch had no involvement in the Watergate scandal, references to it dimmed his efforts for elective office.

He was an unsuccessful primary candidate for U.S. Senate in the 1976 California election against S.I. Hayakawa, who went on to win the general election.

During the 1968 presidential election, Finch was Nixon&#x27;s first choice as his vice presidential running mate, but Finch declined and Nixon then chose Governor of Maryland Spiro Agnew. A Nixon-Finch ticket was possible because, although Nixon was born in California, and had represented California in Congress, during the 1968 election he was a resident of New York, so California&#x27;s electors could have cast their votes for both men. If both had been California residents at the time, California&#x27;s electors could have voted for only one of them.

Following Nixon&#x27;s election, Finch was given his choice in the new Cabinet, and he selected Secretary of HEW because of his long interest in health and education issues. Finch was more liberal than Nixon, especially on social issues, but political differences never affected their long and close relationship, with the two staying in contact until Nixon&#x27;s death in April 1994.

==Death==
Finch died of a heart attack, in Pasadena, California, on October 10, 1995, a day after his 70th birthday. He is interred in Forest Lawn Memorial Park, Glendale.

==References==
==External links==
* Finding aid for the Robert H. Finch Oral History, Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library
* &quot;Political Themes for a Non-Presidential Election Year&quot; is an audio recording of a talk by Finch at the Commonwealth Club of California in 1970, from the Hoover Institution Archives.
*

|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1313779" start="0" end="23" title="Robert Finch (politician)" label="Robert Hutchinson Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="67" end="77" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011181" start="94" end="126" title="La Canada Flintridge, California" label="La Canada Flintridge, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238284" start="169" end="202" title="Lieutenant Governor of California" label="lieutenant governor of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="214" end="227" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="235" end="256" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305968" start="283" end="326" title="United States Secretary of Health and Human Services" label="Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q732029" start="347" end="373" title="Counselor to the President" label="Counselor to the President"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891407" start="407" end="452" title="United States Senate election in California, 1976" label="1976 California United States Senate election"/>
<link wikidata="Q942027" start="491" end="504" title="S.I. Hayakawa" label="S.I. Hayakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q51685" start="554" end="568" title="Tempe, Arizona" label="Tempe, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="588" end="603" title="Robert L. Finch" label="Robert L. Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444543" start="621" end="653" title="Arizona House of Representatives" label="Arizona House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="714" end="726" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="734" end="746" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346110" start="988" end="1006" title="Occidental College" label="Occidental College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752310" start="1215" end="1229" title="Norris Poulson" label="Norris Poulson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="1458" end="1491" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q798137" start="1511" end="1516" title="LL.B." label="LL.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q798137" start="1697" end="1701" title="LL.B" label="LL.B"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866339" start="1709" end="1753" title="University of Southern California Law School" label="University of Southern California Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="1799" end="1809" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="1844" end="1852" title="United States House of Representatives" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890274" start="1871" end="1875" title="United States House of Representatives elections in California, 1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890275" start="1883" end="1887" title="United States House of Representatives elections in California, 1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="1896" end="1904" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052337" start="1905" end="1918" title="Cecil R. King" label="Cecil R. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="1941" end="1949" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2062" end="2072" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027838" start="2139" end="2155" title="campaign manager" label="campaign manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="2163" end="2189" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="1960 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="2199" end="2212" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="2213" end="2220" title="United States Senator" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="2221" end="2236" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="2262" end="2271" title="U.S. Senator" label="U.S. Sen."/>
<link wikidata="Q527052" start="2272" end="2285" title="George Murphy" label="George Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273067" start="2318" end="2333" title="Pierre Salinger" label="Pierre Salinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853525" start="2366" end="2370" title="List of Lieutenant Governors of California" label="38th"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="2434" end="2447" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q887010" start="2465" end="2487" title="governor of California" label="governor of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="2877" end="2894" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="2999" end="3010" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q942027" start="3051" end="3064" title="S.I. Hayakawa" label="S.I. Hayakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="3119" end="3145" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q693032" start="3262" end="3282" title="Governor of Maryland" label="Governor of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q203433" start="3283" end="3294" title="Spiro Agnew" label="Spiro Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="4081" end="4093" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437214" start="4190" end="4225" title="Forest Lawn Memorial Park, Glendale" label="Forest Lawn Memorial Park, Glendale"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880824" wikidata="Q1961355" url="?curid=880824" title="UEC Saturn">
<text>UEC NPO Saturn, PJSC () is a Russian aircraft engine manufacturer, formed from the mergers of Rybinsk Motors and Lyul&#x27;ka-Saturn (after Arkhip Mikhailovich Lyulka) in 2001. Saturn&#x27;s engines power many former Eastern Bloc aircraft, such as the Tupolev Tu-154. Saturn holds a 50% stake in the PowerJet joint venture with Safran Aircraft Engines. The company, founded by Pavel Soloviev, has its headquarters in the town of Rybinsk.

==History==
UEC Saturn was established in 2001, following the merger of Rybinsk Motors and Lyulka-Saturn.

Rybinsk Motors was established on 20 October 1916 as the Russian Renault automotive plant. In 1917 it started producing aviation engines for the Ilya Muromets aircraft. The company was nationalized in 1918.

Rybinsk was originally known as the Kolesov Engine Design Bureau. Kolesov took over the organization from V.A. Dobrynin who founded it in the late 1930s or early 1940s. Under Kolesov&#x27;s direction, the bureau designed turbojet engines for the Myasishchev M-50 Bounder experimental supersonic bomber, turbojets for the Tu-22 Blinder medium bomber, RD-36-35FVR lift engines for the Yak-38 Forger, RD-36-51A supersonic engines for the Tu-144 SST, RD-36-51V engines for the Myasishchev M-17 Mystic, and lift engines for the Yak-141 Freestyle.

Lyulka-Saturn was named after its founder, A. M. Lyulka.

Following the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation, the Ukrainians refused to supply the Russian Navy with marine gas turbines from Zorya-Mashproekt, and so Saturn has been commissioned to design new engines for the &quot;Admiral Gorshkov&quot; and &quot;Admiral Grigorovich&quot;-class frigates. USC forecast these new engines will be available in 2017-18, allowing ships to be commissioned from 2020.

UEC Saturn announced in April 2017 that Saturn&#x27;s marine turbines are now in production and undergoing sea trials prior to delivery. This is the first venture by a Russian manufacturer into the production of large marine gas turbines, aimed at completely replacing the earlier Ukrainian equivalents.

== Products ==
=== Turbojets ===
*AL-7
*AL-21
*AL-32

=== Turboshaft ===
* Saturn RD-600V (1500 hp)

=== Turboprop ===
* Saturn/Lyulka AL-34
* Saturn TVD-1500B

=== Turbofans ===
* AL-31 (&quot;izdeliye&quot; 99) series
** AL-31FP
** AL-41F-1 (&quot;izdeliye&quot; 117)
** AL-41F-1S (&quot;izdeliye&quot; 117S)
* AL-32
* AL-41 (&quot;izdeliye&quot; 20)
* AL-51 (&quot;izdeliye&quot; 30)
* 36MT (TRDD50) and 37-01E, developed for the Kh-59M Kh55 Kh65 Kh101 KhBD family of air-launched tactical missiles and UAV UCAV use
: 37-03 37-04 for cruise missiles, UAV, UCAV
* AL-146 or SD146 PowerJet SaM146 (50/50 with Safran Aircraft Engines), along subcontracted CFM56 with Safran Aircraft Engines since 1998
*AL-55
* D-30K/F

=== Gas turbines ===
====Saturn VMF====
* M70FR FRU (D090/DO90 UGT15000 M70) 10 14 MW unit M27 M7N1, M70RU (6 8 to 14,8 MW)
* M70FRU2 (DP71 DM71 UGT6000) 6 8 MW unit M35; M75RU Gas Turbine (5 7 to 8 MW), M75FR (5.2 to 5.4 MW)
* E70/8RD (within 8.48 MW or little more, derived from M70FRU and SaM146)
* M90FR FRU (UGT15000R+ M90 DA91)unit M55R (20.2 MW, max 26 28)
: M90RU and M85RU (14 16 to 18 24 MW DO90 DA70 DA80 DA90 DA91 DT59 DN59 D090)
* M80RU FR FRU (DA80 M80 DN80) (25 to 28.6 MW)
* D049R, DO49R, D055R
* AL-31ST 16 MW at UMPO along AL31STN and other GTs
* AL-31STE 18 MW at UMPO
* GT-25PU (25 26 MW)
* AL-41ST-25 25 MW UMPO 
* GTD-110 GTD110M (110 MW)
* GTN-25-1 25 MW built at Tjumen Engine Plant TMZ and Ural Turbine Plant UTZ at Ekaterinburg
* Baltika-25 (SGT-600) unit with 25 MW engine GT-10 built at AVV Nevskij (Saint Petersburg)
* GTE45 (TeploEnergoServis with Engineering Center of Gas Turbine Production) (45,4 MW)
* GTU32 (MS5002E) &quot;Ladoga&quot; built at NZL plant Saint Petersburg
* GTU86 (6FA 6F03) 82 MW (GTU52 6F01 54 MW) at RGT, Rybinsk
* GTE-180, GTE-160, further, along SilMash, GTT, KTZ and UTZ
* GTN-25 UTZ Gas TurboGenerator 25 MW GPA-25/76 at Nevsky Zavod, GPA25 GCP25 Iskra Perm
* GP2 (PS90GP2) (15.2 MW, GP3 20 GP4 25), GT-12PU 12.4 MW GTU-12PG-2 12.3 MW
* GTD-6/8RM, DO49, GTD-4RM, GTD-10RM, GTD-6,3RM
: M7N1 unit made by 2x UGT16000 (DT59) 16.48 MW and 2x UGT6000 (DS71) 7.45 MW
:: so M90FR 20.58 MW or M70FRU with M70FRU2 (or M90FR with M75RU layout)
: M36 unit have 4 DT59 (16,7 MW), comparable unit would be 4x M90FR or 2x M90FR with 2x M70FRU
: M55 unit 2x DA91 + 2x diesel (2x M90FR + 2x diesel or M70FRU or 4x M90FR to 40,5 MW 54400 hp), M3N, M8
: M5N unit 4x DN59 2x DS71 92000 hp, M9B unit 2x D090 2x DT59 74000 hp, M27 2x D090 2x DS71, M10 M16 1x D71 2x D050
: M25A unit 2x DA80 2x diesel 92000 hp, M44 2x D090 1x diesel, M73 2x DP73 M35 5x DP71, M10D 2x D050 DT59
: M21A unit 4x DT59 2x DS71 2x Steam Turbines 110000 hp 82 MW (4x M90FR 2x M70FRU2 or M75RU 2x Steam, 4x M90FR 2x M70FRU 2x M70FRU2 or M75RU)
* PGU-165/325/495 Steam Gas units respectively 165 325 and 495 MW electric power.

====Turborus====
: (at Production)
* M3N M5E M8 M10, M15A M15-B M15V, M35, M7K, M7N M7N1, M9, M21A, MT70, DT4
* DT 59, DK 59, DN 59, DE 59, D063, DR77 DS 77 DN 77, DD 50, DO 75, DM 71 DR 71 DP 71 DS 71, DR 76, DM 76, DA 90, DO 90, DA 91.

=== Rocket engines ===
* LREs
* Vernier, other

=== Snow mobile ===
&quot;Russkaya Mekhanika“ company is the manufacturer of snowmobiles Tajga and Buran, Approximately 10,000 are produced annually. It is a 100% affiliated company of NPO Saturn. The snowmobiles have been produced in Rybinsk in the Yaroslavl Oblast. (approx. 400 km north of Moscow) since 1971.

== References ==
== External links ==

* Official site
* NPO Saturn history</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4330400" start="0" end="3" title="United Engine Corporation" label="UEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961355" start="4" end="20" title="UEC Saturn" label="NPO Saturn, PJSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q743004" start="37" end="52" title="aircraft engine" label="aircraft engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961355" start="94" end="108" title="UEC Saturn" label="Rybinsk Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961355" start="113" end="132" title="UEC Saturn" label="Lyul&amp;#x27;ka-Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q634658" start="140" end="166" title="Arkhip Mikhailovich Lyulka" label="Arkhip Mikhailovich Lyulka"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="217" end="229" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q172957" start="252" end="266" title="Tupolev Tu-154" label="Tupolev Tu-154"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972480" start="300" end="308" title="PowerJet" label="PowerJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q773875" start="328" end="351" title="Safran Aircraft Engines" label="Safran Aircraft Engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q203264" start="377" end="391" title="Pavel Soloviev" label="Pavel Soloviev"/>
<link wikidata="Q193413" start="429" end="436" title="Rybinsk" label="Rybinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q280488" start="691" end="704" title="Sikorsky Ilya Muromets" label="Ilya Muromets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142353" start="1000" end="1016" title="Myasishchev M-50" label="Myasishchev M-50"/>
<link wikidata="Q213342" start="1075" end="1088" title="Tu-22 Blinder" label="Tu-22 Blinder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1104" end="1115" title="RD-36-35FVR" label="RD-36-35FVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q505643" start="1137" end="1143" title="Yak-38" label="Yak-38"/>
<link wikidata="Q20900407" start="1152" end="1161" title="RD-36-51A" label="RD-36-51A"/>
<link wikidata="Q188513" start="1189" end="1195" title="Tu-144" label="Tu-144"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1201" end="1210" title="RD-36-51V" label="RD-36-51V"/>
<link wikidata="Q39723" start="1227" end="1243" title="Myasishchev M-17" label="Myasishchev M-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q430766" start="1277" end="1284" title="Yak-141" label="Yak-141"/>
<link wikidata="Q634658" start="1340" end="1352" title="Arkhip Lyulka" label="A. M. Lyulka"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="1369" end="1415" title="annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation" label="annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114760" start="1497" end="1513" title="Zorya-Mashproekt" label="Zorya-Mashproekt"/>
<link wikidata="Q358930" start="1581" end="1609" title="Admiral Gorshkov-class frigate" label="&amp;quot;Admiral Gorshkov&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791893" start="1614" end="1645" title="Admiral Grigorovich-class frigate" label="&amp;quot;Admiral Grigorovich&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075763" start="2108" end="2112" title="Lyulka AL-7" label="AL-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866814" start="2114" end="2119" title="Lyulka AL-21" label="AL-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334484" start="2121" end="2126" title="NPO Saturn AL-32" label="AL-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q85799783" start="2195" end="2214" title="AL-34" label="Saturn/Lyulka AL-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322080" start="2255" end="2260" title="Lyulka AL-31" label="AL-31"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567667" start="2395" end="2400" title="Saturn AL-41" label="AL-41"/>
<link wikidata="Q109546665" start="2429" end="2434" title="Saturn AL-51" label="AL-51"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188430" start="2507" end="2513" title="Kh-59" label="Kh-59M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078034" start="2656" end="2671" title="PowerJet SaM146" label="PowerJet SaM146"/>
<link wikidata="Q773875" start="2684" end="2707" title="Safran Aircraft Engines" label="Safran Aircraft Engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574620" start="2730" end="2735" title="CFM56" label="CFM56"/>
<link wikidata="Q3950830" start="2777" end="2782" title="NPO Saturn AL-55" label="AL-55"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049409" start="2785" end="2789" title="Soloviev D-30" label="D-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078034" start="3086" end="3092" title="PowerJet SaM146" label="SaM146"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880833" wikidata="Q1052576" url="?curid=880833" title="Macintosh Classic II">
<text>The Macintosh Classic II (also sold as the Performa 200) is a personal computer designed and manufactured by Apple Computer, Inc. from October 1991 to September 1993. The system has a compact, appliance design with an integrated 9&quot; monitor, typical of the earliest of the Macintosh range. A carrying handle moulded into the case added a degree of portability at a time when laptops were still relatively uncommon.

Like the preceding Macintosh SE/30, the Classic II was powered by a 16 MHz Motorola 68030 CPU but experienced about 30% slower performance due to the limitations imposed by a cost-reduced 16-bit data bus, versus the 32-bit bus used in the SE/30 design. The system had a base memory configuration of 2 MB, with a 10 MB upper limit and was supplied with either a 40 or 80 MB hard disk.

While the Classic II was styled after the earlier Classic, architecturally it had more in common with the Macintosh LC. The use of custom ICs, identical to those used in the LC, enabled the Classic II to have a lower component count than older Macs, which reduced manufacturing costs. Unlike the LC and the SE/30 before it, the Classic II lacked an internal Processor Direct Slot, making it the second slotless desktop Macintosh after the Classic.

The Classic II is one of three machines to be originally repackaged as a Macintosh Performa when the brand was first introduced in September 1992 to compete in the home user space. Called the &quot;Performa 200&quot;, it was sold with the same specifications as the original Classic II but often supplied with bundled software. The exact packaged software varied by retailer but usually included the At Ease desktop alternative, which aimed to provide a simpler user interface experience than the standard Macintosh Finder. The Performa 200 was initially offered at a retail price of about US$1,250.

The Classic II is the last black-and-white compact Macintosh, and the last desktop Macintosh to include an external floppy disk drive port. Apple discontinued support for the Classic II on January 1, 2001.

== Models ==
* Macintosh Classic II: Sold in two configurations:
**2/40: 2 MB RAM, 40 MB HDD. USD $1,899.
**4/80: 4 MB RAM, 80 MB HDD. USD $2,399.
* Macintosh Performa 200:

== Hardware ==
Processor: 16 MHz (15.6672 MHz) Motorola 68030 (32-bit internally, 16-bit bus), with an optional Motorola 68882 FPU

RAM: 2 MB, expandable to 10 MB using two 100 ns 30-pin SIMMs

Display: 9&quot; monochrome screen, 512 × 342 pixels

Audio: 8-bit mono 22 kHz

Hard drive: 40 or 80 MB

Floppy: 1.44 MB double-sided

Addressing: 24-bit or 32-bit

Battery: 3.6 V lithium

Expansion: Connectors on the rear panel include an ADB port for keyboard and mouse, two mini-DIN-8 RS-422 serial ports, DB-25 SCSI, DB-19 External floppy drive, and two 3.5 mm minijack audio sockets for audio in and headphone out.

The Classic II has a 50-pin internal expansion slot intended for either an FPU co-processor or additional ROM. The socket is unsuited for use as a general purpose expansion slot. Apple never produced an expansion card for this slot, although third-party FPUs were available including the FastMath Classic II by Applied Engineering and Sonnet offered a synchronous (16 MHz) and asynchronous (50 MHz) 68882 FPU. Retro computing hobbyists have also subsequently produced open-source designs for this slot.

The main board from the Classic II (left) contains the logic for the system. High voltage components such as the PSU and CRT driver circuitry were on a separate &quot;analogue&quot; board. The 68030 CPU can be seen on the right, which is next to the FPU/ROM expansion slot. Two ROM chips in sockets are below the CPU. The RAM is to the bottom left. This model contains 4MB, of which 2MB is soldered to the board and 2MB is in SIMM sockets. Just above the RAM is the Apple &quot;Eagle&quot; chip which contains video interface circuitry and glue logic. Above that is an AMD manufactured SCSI controller and serial chip, close to an internal and external SCSI connector used to attach hard disks or other peripherals. There is a PRAM battery carrier to the left of the CPU (the battery is not present) with an internal floppy drive connector just above it with the floppy controller chip on the left. To the right of the floppy connector is an 8-bit microcontroller which manages the ADB bus.

== Gallery ==
== Timelines ==

== References ==
==External links==
* Classic II (Performa 200)Information pages at Mac512.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1052576" start="4" end="24" title="Macintosh Classic II" label="Macintosh Classic II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052576" start="43" end="55" title="Macintosh Classic II" label="Performa 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="62" end="79" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="109" end="129" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Computer, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="277" end="286" title="Mac (computer)" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142726" start="439" end="454" title="Macintosh SE/30" label="Macintosh SE/30"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="491" end="494" title="MHz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q378761" start="495" end="509" title="Motorola 68030" label="Motorola 68030"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="608" end="614" title="16-bit" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="721" end="723" title="Megabyte" label="MB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="793" end="802" title="Hard disk drive" label="hard disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052576" start="803" end="803" title="Macintosh Classic II" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q756013" start="855" end="862" title="Macintosh Classic" label="Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18752602" start="911" end="923" title="Macintosh LC" label="Macintosh LC"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="943" end="945" title="Integrated circuit" label="IC"/>
<link wikidata="Q541370" start="1163" end="1184" title="Processor Direct Slot" label="Processor Direct Slot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882835" start="1327" end="1345" title="Macintosh Performa" label="Macintosh Performa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812304" start="1654" end="1661" title="At Ease" label="At Ease"/>
<link wikidata="Q910951" start="1770" end="1776" title="Finder (software)" label="Finder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052876" start="1898" end="1915" title="compact Macintosh" label="compact Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="1971" end="1982" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q378761" start="2283" end="2297" title="Motorola 68030" label="Motorola 68030"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153410" start="2348" end="2362" title="Motorola 68882" label="Motorola 68882"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="2375" end="2377" title="Megabyte" label="MB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063762" start="2423" end="2427" title="SIMM" label="SIMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="2476" end="2481" title="pixel" label="pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q210868" start="2502" end="2508" title="Sampling rate" label="22 kHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q621236" start="2670" end="2673" title="Apple Desktop Bus" label="ADB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359217" start="2707" end="2715" title="mini-DIN" label="mini-DIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q608019" start="2718" end="2724" title="RS-422" label="RS-422"/>
<link wikidata="Q385390" start="2725" end="2736" title="serial port" label="serial port"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045191" start="2739" end="2744" title="DB-25" label="DB-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q220868" start="2745" end="2749" title="SCSI" label="SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045191" start="2751" end="2756" title="DB-19" label="DB-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="2795" end="2816" title="Phone connector (audio)" label="minijack audio socket"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="2926" end="2929" title="Floating-point unit" label="FPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="2957" end="2960" title="Read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153410" start="3250" end="3255" title="Motorola 68881" label="68882"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972" start="3468" end="3471" title="Power supply unit (computer)" label="PSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="3476" end="3479" title="Cathode-ray tube" label="CRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063762" start="3781" end="3785" title="SIMM" label="SIMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q10997658" start="4082" end="4086" title="Non-volatile memory" label="PRAM"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="880850" wikidata="Q7883705" url="?curid=880850" title="Underinsured">
<text>Underinsured refers to various degrees of being insured for some real risks and uninsured for others, at the same time.

==Health care==
Johns Hopkins University professor Vicente Navarro stated in 2003, &quot;the problem does not end here, with the uninsured. An even larger problem is the underinsured&quot; and &quot;The most credible estimate of the number of people in the United States who have died because of lack of medical care was provided by a study carried out by Harvard Medical School. Professors Himmelstein and Woolhandler (&quot;New England Journal of Medicine&quot; 336, no. 11, 1997). They concluded that almost 100,000 people died in the United States each year because of lack of needed care—three times the number of people who died of AIDS.&quot;

==Auto insurance==

In the auto insurance industry, underinsured motorist coverage is designed to protect motorists in the event that they have an accident with an at-fault underinsured motorist.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7883705" start="0" end="12" title="Underinsured" label="Underinsured"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="48" end="55" title="insured" label="insured"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="80" end="89" title="uninsured" label="uninsured"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="137" end="161" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329638" start="172" end="187" title="Vicente Navarro" label="Vicente Navarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="250" end="259" title="uninsured" label="uninsured"/>
<link wikidata="Q49121" start="477" end="499" title="Harvard Medical School" label="Harvard Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q582728" start="547" end="578" title="New England Journal of Medicine" label="New England Journal of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="759" end="763" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068361" start="799" end="813" title="auto insurance" label="auto insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885259" start="824" end="854" title="underinsured motorist coverage" label="underinsured motorist coverage"/>
</links>
</doc>
