<doc id="173634" wikidata="Q875521" url="?curid=173634" title="Sexual slavery">
<text>Sexual slavery and sexual exploitation is an attachment of any ownership right over one or more people with the intent of coercing or otherwise forcing them to engage in sexual activities. This includes forced labor that results in sexual activity, forced marriage and sex trafficking, such as the sexual trafficking of children.

Sexual slavery has taken various forms throughout history, including single-owner bondage and ritual servitude linked to religious practices in regions such as Ghana, Togo, and Benin. Moreover, slavery&#x27;s reach extends beyond explicit sexual exploitation. Instances of non-consensual sexual activity are interwoven with systems designed for primarily non-sexual purposes, as witnessed in the colonization of the Americas. This epoch, characterized by encounters between European explorers and Indigenous peoples, saw Forced labor for economic gains and was also marred by the widespread prevalence of non-consensual sexual activities.

In unraveling the intricate layers of this historical narrative, Gilberto Freyre&#x27;s seminal work &#x27;Casa-Grande e Senzala&#x27; casts a discerning light on the complex social dynamics that emerged from the amalgamation of European, Indigenous, and African cultures in the Brazilian context.

In some cultures, Concubinage has been a traditional form of sexual slavery, in which women spent their lives in sexual servitude, notably Concubinage in Islam. In some cultures, enslaved concubines and their children had distinct rights and legitimate social positions.

The Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action calls for an international effort to make people aware of sexual slavery and that sexual slavery is an abuse of human rights. The incidence of sexual slavery by country has been studied and tabulated by UNESCO, with the cooperation of various international agencies.
==Definitions==

The Rome Statute (1998) (which defines the crimes over which the International Criminal Court may have jurisdiction) encompasses crimes against humanity (Article 7) which include &quot;enslavement&quot; (Article 7.1.c) and &quot;sexual enslavement&quot; (Article 7.1.g) &quot;when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population&quot;. It also defines sexual enslavement as a war crime and a breach of the Geneva Conventions when committed during an international armed conflict (Article 8.b.xxii) and indirectly in an internal armed conflict under Article(8.c.ii), but the courts jurisdiction over war crimes is explicitly excluded from including crimes committed during &quot;situations of internal disturbances and tensions, such as riots, isolated and sporadic acts of violence or other acts of a similar nature&quot; (Article 8.d).

The text of the Rome Statute does not explicitly define sexual enslavement, but does define enslavement as &quot;the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children&quot; (Article 7.2.c).

In the commentary on the Rome Statute, Mark Klamberg states:

==Types==

===Commercial sexual exploitation of adults===

Commercial sexual exploitation of adults (often referred to as &quot;sex trafficking&quot;) is a type of human trafficking involving the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harboring or receipt of people, by coercive or abusive means for the purpose of sexual exploitation. Commercial sexual exploitation is not the only form of human trafficking and estimates vary as to the percentage of human trafficking which is for the purpose of transporting someone into sexual slavery.

The BBC News cited a report by UNODC as listing the most common destinations for victims of human trafficking in 2007 as Thailand, Japan, Israel, Belgium, the Netherlands, Germany, Italy, Turkey and the United States. The report lists Thailand, China, Nigeria, Albania, Bulgaria, Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine as major sources of trafficked persons.

===Commercial sexual exploitation of children===
Commercial sexual exploitation of children (CSEC) includes child prostitution (or child sex trafficking), child sex tourism, child pornography, or other forms of transactional sex with children. The Youth Advocate Program International (YAPI) describes CSEC as a form of coercion and violence against children and a contemporary form of slavery.

A declaration of the World Congress Against the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children, held in Stockholm in 1996, defined CSEC as, &quot;sexual abuse by the adult and remuneration in cash or in kind to the child or to a third person or persons. The child is treated as a sexual object and as a commercial object&quot;.

====Child prostitution====

Child prostitution, or child sex trafficking, is a form of sexual slavery. It is the commercial sexual exploitation of children, in which a child performs the services of prostitution, usually for the financial benefit of an adult.

India&#x27;s federal police said in 2009 that they believed around 1.2 million children in India to be involved in prostitution. A CBI statement said that studies and surveys sponsored by the Ministry of Women and Child Development estimated about 40% of India&#x27;s prostitutes to be children.

Thailand&#x27;s Health System Research Institute reported that children in prostitution make up 40% of prostitutes in Thailand.

In some parts of the world, child prostitution is tolerated or ignored by the authorities. Reflecting an attitude which prevails in many developing countries, a judge from Honduras said, on condition of anonymity: &quot;If the victim [the child prostitute] is older than 12, if he or she refuses to file a complaint and if the parents clearly profit from their child&#x27;s commerce, we tend to look the other way&quot;.

====Child sex tourism====

Child sex tourism is a form of child sex trafficking, and is mainly centered on buying and selling children into sexual slavery. It is when an adult travels to a foreign country for the purpose of engaging in commercially facilitated child sexual abuse. Child sex tourism results in both mental and physical consequences for the exploited children, that may include &quot;disease (including HIV/AIDS), drug addiction, pregnancy, malnutrition, social ostracism, and possibly death&quot;, according to the State Department of the United States. Thailand, Cambodia, India, Brazil and Mexico have been identified as leading hotspots of child sexual exploitation.

====Child pornography====

Child pornography, sometimes referred to as &#x27;child abuse images&#x27;, refers to images or films depicting sexually explicit activities involving a child. As such, child pornography is often a visual record of child sexual abuse. Abuse of the child occurs during the sexual acts which are photographed in the production of child pornography, and the effects of the abuse on the child (and continuing into maturity) are compounded by the wide distribution and lasting availability of the photographs of the abuse.

Child sex trafficking often involves child pornography. Children are commonly purchased and sold for sexual purposes without the parents knowing. In these cases, children are often used to produce child pornography, especially sadistic forms of child pornography where they may be tortured.

===Cybersex trafficking===

Victims of cybersex trafficking, primarily women and children, are sex slaves who are trafficked and then forced to perform in live streaming shows involving coerced sex acts or rape on webcam. They are usually made to watch the paying consumers on shared screens and follow their orders. It occurs in &#x27;cybersex dens&#x27;, which are rooms equipped with webcams.

===Forced prostitution===

Forced prostitution may be viewed as a kind of sexual slavery. The terms &quot;forced prostitution&quot; and &quot;enforced prostitution&quot; appear in international and humanitarian conventions but have been insufficiently understood and inconsistently applied. &quot;Forced prostitution&quot; generally refers to conditions of control over a person who is coerced by another to engage in sexual activity.

The issue of consent in prostitution is hotly debated. Legal opinions in places such as Europe have been divided over the question of whether prostitution should be considered a free choice or as inherently exploitative of women. The law in Sweden, Norway, and Iceland – where it is illegal to pay for sex, but not to sell sexual services – is based on the notion that all forms of prostitution are inherently exploitative, opposing the notion that prostitution can be voluntary. In contrast, prostitution is a recognized profession in countries such as the Netherlands, Germany, and Singapore.

In 1949 the UN General Assembly adopted the Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and of the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others (the 1949 Convention). Article 1 of the 1949 Convention provides punishment for any person who &quot;[p]rocures, entices or leads away, for purposes of prostitution, another person&quot; or &quot;[e]xploits the prostitution of another person, even with the consent of that person.&quot; To fall under the provisions of the 1949 Convention, the trafficking need not cross international lines.

In contrast, organizations such as UNAIDS, WHO, Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch and UNFPA have called on states to decriminalize sex work in the global effort to tackle the HIV/AIDS epidemic, other STD-related health issues, and to ensure sex workers&#x27; access to health services.

===Forced marriage===

A forced marriage is a marriage where one or both participants are married, without their freely given consent. Forced marriage is a form of sexual slavery. Causes for forced marriages include customs such as bride price and dowry; poverty; the importance given to female premarital virginity; &quot;family honor&quot;; the fact that marriage is considered in certain communities a social arrangement between the extended families of the bride and groom; limited education and economic options; perceived protection of cultural or religious traditions; assisting immigration. Forced marriage is most common in parts of South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa.

===Crime against humanity===
The Rome Statute Explanatory Memorandum, which defines the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court, recognizes rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced sterilization, &quot;or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity&quot; as crimes against humanity if the action is part of a widespread or systematic practice. Sexual slavery was first recognized as a crime against humanity when the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia issued arrest warrants based on the Geneva Conventions and Violations of the Laws or Customs of War. Specifically, it was recognized that Muslim women in Foča (southeastern Bosnia and Herzegovina) were subjected to systematic and widespread gang rape, torture and sexual enslavement by Bosnian Serb soldiers, policemen, and members of paramilitary groups after the takeover of the city in April 1992. The indictment was of major legal significance and was the first time that sexual assaults were investigated for the purpose of prosecution under the rubric of torture and enslavement as a crime against humanity. The indictment was confirmed by a 2001 verdict by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia that rape and sexual enslavement are crimes against humanity. This ruling challenged the widespread acceptance of rape and sexual enslavement of women as an intrinsic part of war. The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia found three Bosnian Serb men guilty of rape of Bosniak (Bosnian Muslim) women and girls – some as young as 12 and 15 years of age – in Foča, eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina. The charges were brought as crimes against humanity and war crimes. Furthermore, two of the men were found guilty of the crime against humanity of sexual enslavement for holding women and girls captive in a number of de facto detention centers. Many of the women had subsequently disappeared.

In areas controlled by Islamic militants, non-Muslim women are enslaved in occupied territories. Many Islamists see the abolition of slavery as forced upon Muslims by the West and want to revive the practice of slavery. (See: Slavery in 21st-century Islamism). In areas controlled by Catholic priests, clerical abuse of nuns, including sexual slavery, has been acknowledged by the Pope.

===Bride kidnapping and raptio===
Bride kidnapping, also known as marriage by abduction or marriage by captive, is a form of forced marriage practiced in some traditional cultures. Though the motivations behind bride kidnapping vary by region, the cultures with traditions of marriage by abduction are generally patriarchal with a strong social stigma against sex or pregnancy outside marriage and illegitimate births. In most cases, however, the men who resort to capturing a wife are often of lower social status, whether because of poverty, disease, poor character or criminality. In some cases, the couple collude together to elope under the guise of a bride kidnapping, presenting their parents with a fait accompli. These men are sometimes deterred from legitimately seeking a wife because of the payment the woman&#x27;s family expects, the bride price (not to be confused with a dowry, paid &quot;by&quot; the woman&#x27;s family).

Bride kidnapping is distinguished from &quot;raptio&quot; in that the former refers to the abduction of one woman by one man (and/or his friends and relatives), and is often a widespread and ongoing practice. The latter refers to the large-scale abduction of women by groups of men, most frequently in a time of war (see also war rape). The Latin term &quot;raptio&quot; refers to abduction of women, either for marriage (by kidnapping or elopement) or enslavement (particularly sexual slavery). In Roman Catholic canon law, &quot;raptio&quot; refers to the legal prohibition of matrimony if the bride was abducted forcibly (Canon 1089 CIC).

The practice of &quot;raptio&quot; is surmised to have existed since anthropological antiquity. In Neolithic Europe, excavation of a Linear Pottery culture site at Asparn-Schletz, Austria, unearthed the remains of numerous slain victims. Among them, young women and children were clearly under-represented, suggesting that perhaps the attackers had killed the men but abducted the young women.

===During armed conflict and war===

Rape and sexual violence have accompanied warfare in virtually every known historical era. Before the 19th century, military circles supported the notion that all persons, including unarmed women and children, were still the enemy, with the belligerent (nation or person engaged in conflict) having conquering rights over them.
&quot;To the victor go the spoils&quot; has been a war cry for centuries and women were included as part of the spoils of war. Institutionalized sexual slavery and enforced prostitution have been documented in a number of wars, most notably the Second World War (See #During the Second World War) and in the War in Bosnia.

==Historical cases==

===Ancient Greece and Roman Empire===

Employing female and occasionally male slaves for prostitution was common in the Hellenistic and Roman world. Ample references exist in literature, law, military reports and art. A prostitute (slave or free) existed outside the moral codex restricting sexuality in Greco-Roman society and enjoyed little legal protection. See ancient Rome&#x27;s law on rape as an example. Male intercourse with a slave was not considered adultery by either society.

===Asia===
Slavery was commonly practiced in ancient China. During the Chinese rule of Vietnam, Nanyue girls were sold as sex slaves to the Chinese. A trade developed where the native girls of southern China were enslaved and brought north to the Chinese. Natives in Fujian and Guizhou were sources of slaves as well. Southern Yue girls were sexually eroticized in Chinese literature and in poems written by Chinese who were exiled to the south.

In the 16th and 17th centuries, some Portuguese visitors and their South Asian &quot;lascar&quot; and African crew members would engage in slavery in Japan; where they bought or captured young Japanese women and girls, who were either used as sexual slaves on their ships or taken to Macau and other Portuguese colonies in Southeast Asia, the Americas, and India. For example, in Goa, a Portuguese colony in India, there was a community of Japanese slaves and traders during the late 16th and 17th centuries.

Dutch colonial forces in Taiwan raided Liuqiu island in 1636 and 1642, enslaving the population. The women and children became servants and wives for the Dutch officers. Multiple Taiwanese aboriginal villages in frontier areas rebelled against the Dutch in the 1650s due to acts of oppression, such as when the Dutch ordered that aboriginal women be turned over to them for sex. During the 1662 Siege of Fort Zeelandia in which Chinese Ming loyalist forces commanded by Koxinga besieged and defeated the Dutch East India Company and conquered Taiwan, Dutch male prisoners were executed. Surviving women and children were enslaved, and a number of them were sold to Chinese soldiers to become their wives or concubines. A teenage daughter of the Dutch missionary Antonius Hambroek became a concubine to Koxinga.

In the 19th and early 20th centuries, there was a network of Chinese prostitutes trafficked to cities like Singapore, and a separate network of Japanese prostitutes being trafficked across Asia, in countries such as China, Japan, Korea, Singapore and India, in what was then known as the &#x27;Yellow Slave Traffic&#x27;. There was also a network of prostitutes from continental Europe being trafficked to India, Ceylon, Singapore, China and Japan at around the same time, in what was then known as the &#x27;White Slave Traffic&#x27;. were Japanese girls and women in the late 19th and early 20th centuries who were trafficked from poverty stricken agricultural prefectures in Japan to destinations in East Asia, Southeast Asia, Siberia (Russian Far East), Manchuria, and India to serve as prostitutes and sexually serviced men from a variety of races, including Chinese, Europeans, native Southeast Asians, and others. The main destinations of &quot;karayuki-san&quot; included China (particularly Shanghai), Hong Kong, the Philippines, Borneo, Sumatra, Thailand, Indonesia, and the western USA (in particular San Francisco). They were often sent to Western colonies in Asia where there was a strong demand from Western military personnel and Chinese men. The experience of Japanese prostitutes in China was written about in a book by a Japanese woman, Tomoko Yamazaki. Japanese girls were easily trafficked abroad since Korean and Chinese ports did not require Japanese citizens to use passports and the Japanese government realized that money earned by the karayuki-san helped the Japanese economy since it was being remitted, and the Chinese boycott of Japanese products in 1919 led to reliance on revenue from the karayuki-san. Since the Japanese viewed non-westerners as inferior, the karayuki-san Japanese women felt humiliated since they mainly sexually served Chinese men or native Southeast Asians. Borneo natives, Malaysians, Chinese, Japanese, French, American, British and men from every race visited the Japanese prostitutes of Sandakan. A Japanese woman named Osaki said that the men, Japanese, Chinese, whites, and natives, were dealt with alike by the prostitutes regardless of race, and that a Japanese prostitute&#x27;s &quot;most disgusting customers&quot; were Japanese men, while they used &quot;kind enough&quot; to describe Chinese men, and Western men were the second-best clients, while the native men were the best and fastest to have sex with.

During World War II, Imperial Japan organized a governmental system of &quot;comfort women&quot;, which is a euphemism of military sex slaves for the estimated 200,000, mostly Korean, Chinese, and Filipino women who were forced into sexual slavery in Japanese military &quot;comfort stations&quot; during World War II. Japan collected, carried, and confined Asian ladies coercively and collusively to have sexual intercourse with Japan&#x27;s soldiers during their invasions across East Asia and Southeast Asia. Some Korean women claim that these cases should be judged by an international tribunal as child sex violence. The legal demand has been made because of the victims&#x27; anger at what they see as the inequity of the existing legal measures and the denial of Japan&#x27;s involvement in child sex slavery and kidnapping. On 28 December 2015, Japan and South Korea agreed that Japan would pay 1 billion Yen into a fund for a Memorial Hall of comfort women. Despite this agreement, some Korean victims have complained that they were not consulted during the negotiation process. They maintain that Japan and Korea sought neither the legal recognition of their claim nor the revision of Japanese history textbooks. Park Yuha&#x27;s book &quot;Comfort Women of the Empire&quot; challenges the forced sexual slavery narrative, portraying the system as shaped by imperial policies, economic factors, and social hierarchies. She argues that many Korean women were deceived and sold by private brokers rather than systematically abducted by Japan. The book also criticizes the Korean Council for Justice and Remembrance for disregarding alternative testimonies. Park calls for mutual historical recognition and a Japanese apology to foster reconciliation and regional cooperation.

===Middle East ===

Slave trade, including trade of sex slaves, fluctuated in certain regions in the Middle East up until the 20th century. 
Victims of the Arab slave trade and/or prisoners of war captured in battle from non-Arab lands often ended up as concubine slaves in the Arab World. 
These slaves came largely from Sub-Saharan Africa (mainly &quot;Zanj&quot; via the Trans-Saharan slave trade, Red Sea slave trade and Indian Ocean slave trade) and Central Asia (mainly Tartars via the Crimean slave trade) and the Caucasus (mainly Circassians via the Circassian slave trade).

In Muslim society in general, monogamy was common because keeping multiple wives and concubines was not affordable for many households. The practice of keeping concubines was common in the Muslim upper class. Muslim rulers preferred having children with concubines because it helped them avoid the social and political complexities arising from marriage and kept their lineages separate from the other lineages in society. Keeping slave concubines was the norm for many royal muslim dynasties, from the royal Abbasid harem of the Abbasid Caliphate in the 9th-century until the harem of the Khedive of Egypt in the 19th-century a thousand years later.

The slave trade of women for sexual slavery are known early on. People taken captive during the viking raids in Western Europe, such as Ireland, could be sold to Moorish Spain (al-Andalus) via the Dublin slave trade or transported to Hedeby or Brännö in Scandinavia and from there via the Volga trade route to Russia from where they continued to the Muslim world; first via the Khazar Kaghanate, and later via Volga Bulgaria and from there by caravan to Khwarazm, to the Samanid slave market in Central Asia and finally via Iran to the Abbasid Caliphate.

Many of the female slaves became concubines. The most famous of the harems of Al-Andalus was perhaps the harem of the Caliph of Cordoba. The slaves of the Caliph were often European saqaliba slaves trafficked from Northern or Eastern Europe, and the female saqaliba were usually placed in the harem.
The harem could contain thousands of slave concubines; the harem of Abd al-Rahman I consisted of 6,300 women. 
In the late Middle ages, European slaves were trafficked to the Middle East via the Balkan slave trade and later via the Italian Black Sea slave trade, in which female slaves could end up as concubines.

Historian Robert Davis estimated that the Barbary pirates captured as many as 1-1.25 million slaves from Christian Europe between the 16th and 19th centuries. However, Robert Davis&#x27;s research is not the mainstream view among historians. Most estimates for the number of European slaves captured are much lower, perhaps in the tens of thousands, and one historian has suggested that Davis&#x27;s much higher estimate is an over-exaggeration.

In parallel with the Barbary slave trade in West and South Europe the Crimean slave trade was conducted in Eastern Europe. Between the 15th to the late 18th century, the Crimean–Nogai slave raids in Eastern Europe captured slaves in Eastern Europe and Russia, which were trafficked via the Crimean slave trade to the Ottoman Empire and the Islamic world. 
While African slave women were foremost bought as domestic laborers, white slave women were preferred for exclusively sexual slavery; as concubines or as wives. The Crimean slave trade was one of the biggest suppliers of women to the Ottoman Imperial Harem. 
The male Mamluk aristocrats of Ottoman Egypt, who themselves were often of white slave origin (often Circassian or from Georgia), preferred to marry women of similar ethnicity, while black slave women were used as domestic maids.

In contrast to the Atlantic slave trade where the male-female ratio was 2:1 or 3:1, the Arab slave trade usually had a higher female:male ratio instead, suggesting a general preference for female slaves.
Ehud R. Toledano claims that female slaves from Africa were imported mainly for menial household labor than for reproduction; it was more common for female slaves from Caucasus to be used for reproduction, but also in their case their use as concubines have been exaggerated, and female slaves used in menial household jobs were not necessarily used for concubinage and childbearing.
However, reproduction and sexual use was not synonyms in the Islamic world, since a man was allowed to use his female slave for sexual pleasure separate from reproduction; according to Islamic Law, a man had legal right to use contraceptives when having intercourse with his female slave in order to prevent offspring, which could result in his slave becoming an Umm walad and thus no longer legal to sell.

Aside from the female slaves used as concubines in private harems, female slaves were also used for prostitution. The Islamic Law formally prohibited prostitution. However, since Islamic Law allowed a man to have sexual intercourse with his female slave, prostitution was practiced by a pimp selling his female slave on the slave market to a client, who returned his ownership of her after 1–2 days on the pretext of discontent after having had intercourse with her, which was a legal and accepted method for prostitution in the Islamic world. This form of prostitution was practiced by for example Ibn Batuta, who acquired several female slaves during his travels.

When the Crimean slave trade was ended with the Annexation of the Crimean Khanate by the Russian Empire in 1783, the Circassian slave trade in so called Circassian beauties continued as a separate trade until the end of the Ottoman Empire. The Circassian slave trade was heavily focused on girls, bought to become wives or concubines (sex slaves) for rich men.
To buy a daughter-in-law was seen as a good alternative when arranging a marriage, since she was likely to become a humble wife, lacking both her own money as well as relatives and completely dependent upon her in-laws.

The slave trade in primarily white girls intended for the harems attracted attention in the West. Attempting to suppress the practice, another &quot;firman&quot; abolishing the trade of Circassians and Georgians was issued in October 1854. The decree did not abolish slavery as such, only the import of new slaves. However, in March 1858, the Ottoman Governor of Trapezunt informed the British Consul that the 1854 ban had been a temporary war time ban due to foreign pressure, and that he had been given orders to allow slave ships on the Black Sea passage on their way to Constantinople, and in December formal tax regulations were introduced, legitimizing the Circassian slave trade again. The so-called Circassian slave trade was to continue until the 20th century.
The sex slave trade in white girls for sexual slavery (concubinage) did not stop, and the British travel writer John Murray described a batch of white slave girls in the Middle East in the 1870s: 
:&quot;Their complexion are sallow, and none of them [sic] are even good looking. But the daily Turkish bath, protection from the sun, and a wholesome diet, working upon and excellent consitutiton, accomplish wonders in a short space of time&quot;.

Chattel slavery, and thus the existence of concubines, lasted longer in some Islamic states. During the 20th century, the League of Nations founded a number of commissions, Temporary Slavery Commission (1924–1926), Committee of Experts on Slavery (1932) and the Advisory Committee of Experts on Slavery (1934–1939), which conducted international investigations of the institution of slavery and created international treaties to eradicate the institution worldwide. Slavery was eventually declared illegal at the global level in 1948 under the United Nations&#x27; Universal Declaration of Human Rights, followed by the Ad Hoc Committee on Slavery (1950–1951). By this time, the Arab world was the only region in the world where chattel slavery was still legal. Slavery in Saudi Arabia, slavery in Yemen and slavery in Dubai were abolished in 1962–1963, with slavery in Oman following in 1970.

Girls from Caucasus and the Circassian colonies in Anatolia were still trafficked to the Middle East in the 1920s; in 1928 at least 60 white slave girls were discovered for sexual purposes in Kuwait.
The report of the Advisory Committee of Experts on Slavery (ACE) about Hadhramaut in Yemen in the 1930s described the existence of Chinese girls (Mui tsai) trafficked from Singapore for enslavement as concubines,; the King and Imam of Yemen, Ahmad bin Yahya (r. 1948–1962), were reported to have had a harem of 100 slave women, and Sultan Said bin Taimur of Oman (r. 1932–1970) reportedly owned around 500 slaves, an estimated 150 of whom were women, who were kept at his palace at Salalah.

In the 1940s, it was reported that Baluchi girls were shipped via Oman to the Arabian Peninsula, where they were popular as concubines since Caucasian girls were no longer available, and were sold for $350–450 in Mecca. 
The legal sex slave trade to the Middle East was ended with the abolition of slavery in Saudi Arabia, slavery in Dubai and slavery in Oman in the 1960s.

===White slavery===

In Anglophone countries in the 19th and early 20th centuries, the phrase &quot;white slavery&quot; was used to refer to sexual enslavement of white women. It was particularly associated with accounts of women enslaved in Middle Eastern harems, such as the so-called Circassian beauties, which was a slave trade that was still ongoing in the early 20th-century.

Circassians were identified as &quot;white&quot;, and the slave trade of &quot;white girls&quot; to harems for sexual exploitation attracted attention in the international press and became an issue of concern for Western powers. 
In 1854, the Ottoman Empire banned the slave trade in &quot;white women&quot; with the firman of 1854 after pressure from Great Britain and France.
However, in March 1858 the Ottoman Governor of Trapezunt informed the British Consul that the 1854 ban had been a temporary wartime ban due to foreign pressure, and that he had been given orders to allow slave ships on the Black Sea to pass on their way to Constantinople, and in December formal tax regulations were introduced, legitimizing the Circassian slave trade again.

In the 1850s the slave trade of &quot;white girls&quot; to the harems particularly attracted the attention of the international press, when the Ottoman slave market was flooded by Circassian girls due to the Circassian genocide, which resulted in the price for white slave girls to become cheaper, and Muslim men who was not able to buy white girls before now exchanged their black slave women for white ones. The New York Daily Times reported on August 6, 1856: 
:&quot;There has been lately an unusually large number of Circassians going about the streets of Constantinople. [...] They are here as slave dealers, charged with the disposal of the numerous parcels of Circassian girls that have been for some time pouring into this market. [...] ...never, perhaps, at any former period, was white human flesh so cheap as it is at this moment. In former times a “good middling” Circassian girl was thought very cheap at 100 pounds, but at the present moment the same description of goods may be had for 5 pounds! [...] Formerly a Circassian slave girl was pretty sure of being bought into a good family, where not only good treatment, but often rank and fortune awaited her; but at present low rates she may be taken by any huxter who never thought of keeping a slave before. Another evil is that the temptation to possess a Circassian girl at such low prices is so great in the minds of the Turks that many who cannot afford to keep several slaves have been sending their blacks to market, in order to make room for a newly-purchased white girl.&quot;
There was a greater reluctance from Ottoman authorities to prohibit the Circassian slave trade than the African slave trade, because the Circassian slave trade was regarded as in effect a marriage market, and it continued until the end of the Ottoman Empire (1922).
These reports about the sexual enslavement of &quot;white&quot; women in Eastern harems attracted attention in the West and contributed to the Western campaign against &quot;white slavery&quot; in the late 19th-century.

The phrase &quot;white slavery&quot; gradually came to be used as a euphemism for prostitution. The phrase was especially common in the context of the exploitation of minors, with the implication that children and young women in such circumstances were not free to decide their own fates.

In Victorian Britain, campaigning journalist William Thomas Stead, editor of the &quot;Pall Mall Gazette&quot;, procured a 13-year-old girl for £5, an amount then equal to a laborer&#x27;s monthly wage (&quot;see&quot; the Eliza Armstrong case). Moral panic over the &quot;traffic in women&quot; rose to a peak in England in the 1880s, after the exposure of the internationally infamous White slave trade affair in 1880. At the time, &quot;white slavery&quot; was a natural target for defenders of public morality and crusading journalists. The ensuing outcry led to the passage of antislavery legislation in Parliament. Parliament passed the 1885 Criminal Law Amendment Act, raising the age of consent from thirteen to sixteen in that year.

An international campaign against the white slave trade started in several countries in the West in the late 19th-century. 
Many of the procurers and prostitutes who had accompanied the British and French troops to Constantinople during the Crimean war in the 1850s opened brothels in Port Said in Egypt during the construction of the Suez Canal, and these brothels were a destination for many victims of the white slave trade, since they were under protection of the foreign consulates because of the Capitulatory privileges until 1937 and therefore protected from the police.
In 1877 the first international congress for the abolition of prostitution took place in Geneva in Switzerland, followed by the foundation of the International Association of Friends of Young Girls (German:&quot;Internationale Verein Freundinnen junger Mädchen&quot; or FJM; French: &quot;Amies de la jeune fille&quot;); after this, national associations to combat the white slave trade was gradually founded in a number of nations, such as the Freundinnenverein in Germany, the National Vigilance Association in Britain and &quot;Vaksamhet&quot; in Sweden.

In 1884, the Anglo-Egyptian Slave Trade Convention pressed upon Egypt by the British explicitly banned the sex slave trade of &quot;white women&quot; to slavery in Egypt; this law was particularly targeted against the import of white women (mainly from Caucasus and usually Circassians via the Circassian slave trade), which were the preferred choice for harem concubines among the Egyptian upper class.

In 1899 the first international congress against white slave trade took place in London, where the International Bureau for the Suppression of the Traffic in Women and Children was founded to coordinate an international campaign, and as a result of the campaign of the movement suggestions was put forward on how to combat the white slave trade in Paris in 1902, which eventually resulted in the International Agreement for the suppression of the White Slave Traffic in May 1904.

A subsequent scare occurred in the United States in the early twentieth century, peaking in 1910, when Chicago&#x27;s U.S. attorney announced (without giving details) that an international crime ring was abducting young girls in Europe, importing them, and forcing them to work in Chicago brothels. These claims, and the panic they inflamed, led to the passage of the United States White-Slave Traffic Act of 1910, generally known as the &quot;Mann Act&quot;. It also banned the interstate transport of females for immoral purposes. Its primary intent was to address prostitution and immorality.

Immigration inspectors at Ellis Island in New York City were held responsible for questioning and screening European prostitutes from the U.S. Immigration inspectors expressed frustration at the ineffectiveness of questioning in determining if a European woman was a prostitute, and claimed that many were &quot;lying&quot; and &quot;framing skillful responses&quot; to their questions. They were also accused of negligence should they accept a fictitious address from an immigrant or accept less-than-complete responses. Inspector Helen Bullis investigated several homes of assignment in the Tenderloin district of New York, and found brothels existed in the early 20th century in New York City. She compiled a list of houses of prostitutes, their proprietors, and their &quot;inmates&quot;. The New York inspection director wrote a report in 1907, defending against accusations of negligence, saying there was no sense to the public &quot;panic&quot;, and he was doing everything he could to screen European immigrants for prostitution, especially unmarried ones. In a report by the Commissioner General of Immigration in 1914, the Commissioner said that many prostitutes would intentionally marry American men to secure citizenship. He said that for prostitutes, it was &quot;no difficult task to secure a disreputable citizen who will marry a prostitute&quot; from Europe.

===United States===
From the beginning of African slavery in the North American colonies, the casual sexual abuse of African women and girls was common. It has been established by historians that white men raped enslaved African women, and this has also been supported by numerous genetic studies. As populations increased, slave women were taken advantage of by plantation owners, white overseers, planters&#x27; younger sons before and after they married, and other white men associated with the slaveholders. Some African slave women and girls were sold into brothels outright.

&quot;Plaçage&quot;, a formalized system of concubinage among slave women or free people of color, developed in Louisiana and particularly New Orleans by the 18th century, but it was fairly rare. White men had no obligation to trade anything for sex with black or mixed women. This left most of these women subject to the whims of white male pursuers. If another female caught his eye or the chosen women grew too old or too &quot;difficult&quot; in the minds of these white men these men could end the arrangement or continue the sexual contact without reward.

The advancement of mixed-race blacks over their darker counterparts has led to the theory of consistent patronage by white fathers. While light-skinned Blacks certainly enjoyed a level of privilege, there is little proof that most received educations and dowries directly from their white fathers. Most light-skinned blacks lived off of compensatory benefit received one to three generations early; and expanded on this usually in black and mixed-race enclaves where they could own businesses and earn a living as the educated/trained &quot;blacks&quot;. These compensatory benefits occasionally came from white grand or great grandfathers. Other times, they came from former slave masters rewarding prized mixed-race slaves for years of service in &quot;the house&quot; or as close assistants to the Master (a position that darker black people were afforded less often).
A small portion of white fathers would pay for the education of their mixed-race children, especially sons, who might be educated in France. Why Black females of African descent are consistently ascribed such different experiences from white, Asian, and indo-native females when discussing sexual slavery and abuse, has long been a topic of debate.

From the 17th century, Virginia and other colonies passed laws determining the social status of children born in the colonies. Under the common law system in the colonies, children took the status of the father when it came to legal matters. To settle the issue of the status of children born in the colony, the Virginian House of Burgesses passed a law in 1662 that ruled that children would take the status of their mother at birth, under the Roman legal principle known as &quot;partus sequitur ventrem.&quot; Thus all children born to enslaved mothers were legally slaves, regardless of the paternity or ancestry of their fathers. They were bound for life and could be sold like any slave unless formally freed.

The term &quot;white slaves&quot; was sometimes used for those mixed-race or mulatto slaves who had a visibly high proportion of European ancestry. Among the most notable at the turn of the 19th century was Sally Hemings, who was 3/4 white and believed by historians to be a half sister of Martha Wayles Skelton Jefferson by their common father John Wayles. Hemings is known for having four surviving children from her decades-long concubinage with President Thomas Jefferson; they were 7/8 European by ancestry. Three of these mixed-race children passed easily into white society as adults (Jefferson freed them all – two informally and two in his will). Three of his Hemings grandsons served as white men in the Union Regular Army in the American Civil War; John Wayles Jefferson advanced to the rank of colonel.

Not all white fathers abandoned their slave children; some provided them with education, apprenticeships, or capital; a few wealthy planters sent their mixed-race children to the North for education and sometimes for freedom. Some men freed both their enslaved women and their mixed-race children, especially in the 20 years after the American Revolution, but southern legislatures made such manumissions more difficult. Both Mary Chesnut and Fanny Kemble wrote in the 19th century about the scandal of white men having enslaved Black women and natural mixed-race children as part of their extended households. Numerous mixed-race families were begun before the Civil War, and many originated in the Upper South.

Zora Neale Hurston wrote about contemporary sexual practices in her anthropological studies in the 1930s of the turpentine camps of North Florida. She noted that white men with power often forced black women into sexual relationships.

Although she never named the practice as &quot;paramour rights&quot;, author C. Arthur Ellis ascribed this term to the fictionalized Hurston in his book, &quot;Zora Hurston and the Strange Case of Ruby McCollum.&quot; The same character asserted that the death knell of paramour rights was sounded by the trial of Ruby McCollum, a black woman who murdered Dr. C. Leroy Adams, in Live Oak, Florida, in 1952. McCollum had testified that Adams forced her into sex and bearing his child. Journalist Hurston covered McCollum&#x27;s trial in 1952 for the &quot;Pittsburgh Courier&quot;. McCollum&#x27;s case was further explored in the 2015 documentary &quot;You Belong to Me: Sex, Race and Murder in the South.&quot;

The Chinese Tanka females were sold from Guangzhou to work as prostitutes for the overseas Chinese male community in the United States. During the California Gold Rush in the late 1840s, Chinese merchants transported thousands of young Chinese girls, including babies, from China to the United States. They sold the girls into sexual slavery within the red light district of San Francisco. Girls could be bought for $40 (about $1455 in 2023 dollars) in Guangzhou and sold for $400 (about $14,550 in 2023 dollars) in the United States. Many of these girls were forced into opium addiction and lived their entire lives as prostitutes.

===During the Second World War===

====Germany during World War II====

During World War II, Germany established brothels in Nazi concentration camps (Lagerbordell). The women forced to work in these brothels came from the Ravensbrück concentration camp, Soldier&#x27;s brothels (Wehrmachtsbordell) were usually organized in already established brothels or in hotels confiscated by the Germans. The leaders of the Wehrmacht became interested in running their own brothels when sexual disease spread among the soldiers. In the controlled brothels, the women were checked frequently to avoid and treat sexually transmittable infections (STI).

It is estimated that a minimum of 34,140 women from occupied states were forced to work as prostitutes in Nazi Germany. In occupied Europe, the local women were often forced into prostitution. On 3 May 1941 the Foreign Ministry of the Polish government-in-exile issued a document describing the mass Nazi raids made in Polish cities with the goal of capturing young women, who later were forced to work in brothels used by German soldiers and officers. Women often tried to escape from such facilities, with at least one mass escape known to have been attempted by women in Norway.

====Japan during World War II====

&quot;Comfort women&quot; are a widely publicized example of sexual slavery. The term refers to the women, from occupied countries, who were forced to serve as sex slaves in the Japanese army&#x27;s camps during World War II. Estimates vary as to how many women were involved, with numbers ranging from as low as 20,000 from some Japanese scholars to as high as 410,000 from some Chinese scholars. The numbers are still being researched and debated. The majority of women were taken from Korea, China, and other occupied territories part of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. They were often recruited by kidnapping or deception to serve as sex slaves. Each slave reportedly suffered &quot;an average of 10 rapes per day (considered by some to be a low estimate), for a five-day work week; this figure can be extrapolated to estimate that each &#x27;comfort girl&#x27; was raped around 50 times per week or 2,500 times per year. For three years of service – the average – a comfort girl would have been raped 7,500 times.&quot; (Parker, 1995 United Nations Commissions on Human Rights)

Chuo University professor Yoshiaki Yoshimi states there were about 2,000 centers where as many as 200,000 Japanese, Chinese, Korean, Filipino, Taiwanese, Burmese, Indonesian, Dutch and Australian women were interned and used as sex slaves.

===After World War II===

====Japan====
The (RAA) was the largest of the organizations established by the Japanese government to provide organized prostitution and other leisure facilities for occupying Allied troops immediately following World War II.

The RAA established its first brothel on 28 August: the Komachien in Ōmori. By December 1945, the RAA owned 34 facilities, 16 of which were &quot;comfort stations&quot;. The total number of prostitutes employed by the RAA amounted to 55,000 at its peak.

The dispersal of prostitution made it harder for GHQ to control STIs and also caused an increase in rapes by GIs, from an average of 40 a day before the SCAP order to an estimated 330 per day immediately after.

===During the Korean War===
During the Korean War, the South Korean military institutionalized a &quot;special comfort unit&quot; similar to the one used by the Japanese military during World War II, kidnapping and pressing several North Korean women into sexual slavery. Until recently, very little was known about this apart from testimonies of retired generals and soldiers who had fought in the war. In February 2002, Korean sociologist Kim Kwi-ok wrote the first scholarly work on Korea&#x27;s comfort women through official records.

The South Korean &quot;comfort&quot; system was organized around three operations. First, there were &quot;special comfort units&quot; called Teugsu Wiandae (특수위안대, 特殊慰安隊), which operated from seven different stations. Second, there were mobile units of comfort women that visited barracks. Third, there were prostitutes who worked in private brothels that were hired by the military. Although it is still not clear how recruitment of these comfort women was organized in the South, South Korean agents were known to have kidnapped some of the women from the North.

According to anthropologist Chunghee Sarah Soh, the South Korean military&#x27;s use of comfort women has produced &quot;virtually no societal response&quot;, despite the country&#x27;s women&#x27;s movement&#x27;s support for Korean comfort women within the Japanese military. Both Kim and Soh argue that this system is a legacy of Japanese colonialism, as many of Korea&#x27;s army leadership were trained by the Japanese military. Both the Korean and Japanese militaries referred to these comfort women as &quot;military supplies&quot; in official documents and personal memoirs. The South Korean armed forces also used the same arguments as the Japanese military to justify the use of comfort women, viewing them as a &quot;necessary social evil&quot; that would raise soldiers&#x27; morale and prevent rape.

==Present day==
Official estimates of individuals in sexual slavery worldwide vary. In 2001 the International Organization for Migration estimated 400,000, the Federal Bureau of Investigation estimated 700,000 and UNICEF estimated 1.75 million.

===Africa===

In Africa, the European colonial powers abolished slavery in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. However, in areas outside their jurisdiction, such as the Mahdist empire in Sudan, the practice continued to thrive. Institutional slavery has been banned worldwide, but there are numerous reports of women sex slaves in areas without effective government control, such as Sudan, Liberia, Sierra Leone, northern Uganda, Congo, Niger and Mauritania. In Ghana, Togo and Benin, a form of religious prostitution known as &quot;trokosi&quot; (&quot;ritual servitude&quot;) forcibly keeps thousands of girls and women in traditional shrines as &quot;wives of the gods&quot;, where priests perform the sexual function in place of the gods.

In April 2014, Boko Haram kidnapped 276 female students from Chibok, Borno, a state of Nigeria. More than 50 of them soon escaped, but the remainder have not been released. Instead, Abubakar Shekau, who had a reward of $7 million offered by the United States Department of State for information leading to his capture, announced his intention of selling them into slavery.

===Americas===

The &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; reported in 2006 that in the 21st century, women, mostly from South America, Southeast Asia, and the former Soviet Union, are trafficked into the United States for the purposes of sexual slavery. A 2006 ABC News story stated that, contrary to existing misconceptions, American citizens may also be coerced into sex slavery.

The San Francisco Gate reported that San Francisco is one of the centers of sexual slavery in the United States. Most of the victims trafficked in San Francisco are women from East Asia, with women of Korean descent being particularly over-represented among the victims. There is extremely high demand for women of East Asian descent in the sex industry in the United States. In one case, all 100 women detained at a massage parlor in San Francisco were Korean. According to San Francisco police, the number of Asian massage parlors in San Francisco increased by 100% between the years 2004 and 2006, owing to the extreme profitability of the industry. The report described a sense of urgency among San Francisco authorities regarding the widespread trafficking of East Asian immigrant women.

In 2001 the United States State Department estimated that 50,000 to 100,000 women and girls are trafficked each year into the United States. In 2003, the State Department report estimated that a total of 18,000 to 20,000 individuals were trafficked into the United States for either forced labor or sexual exploitation. The June 2004 report estimated the total trafficked annually at between 14,500 and 17,500. The Bush administration set up 42 Justice Department task forces and spent more than $150 million on attempts to reduce human trafficking. However, in the seven years since the law was passed, the administration has identified only 1,362 victims of human trafficking brought into the United States since 2000, nowhere near the 50,000 or more per year the government had estimated.

The Girl&#x27;s Education &amp; Mentoring Services (GEMS), an organization based in New York, claims that the majority of girls in the sex trade were abused as children. Poverty and a lack of education play major roles in the lives of many women in the sex industry.

According to a report conducted by the University of Pennsylvania, anywhere from 100,000 up to 300,000 American children at any given time may be at risk of exploitation due to factors such as drug use, homelessness, or other factors connected with increased risk for commercial sexual exploitation. However, the report emphasized, &quot;The numbers presented in these exhibits do not, therefore, reflect the actual number of cases of CSEC in the United States but, rather, what we estimate to be the number of children &#x27;at risk&#x27; of commercial sexual exploitation.&quot;

The 2010 Trafficking in Persons report described the United States as, &quot;a source, transit, and destination country for men, women, and children subjected to trafficking in persons, specifically forced labor, debt bondage, and forced prostitution&quot;. Sexual slavery in the United States may occur in multiple forms and in multiple venues. Sex trafficking in the United States may be present in Asian massage parlors, Mexican cantina bars, residential brothels, or street-based pimp-controlled prostitution. The anti-trafficking community in the United States is debating the extent of sexual slavery. Some groups argue that exploitation is inherent in the act of commercial sex, while other groups take a stricter approach to defining sexual slavery, considering an element of force, fraud or coercion to be necessary for sex slavery to exist.

The prostitutes in illegal massage parlors may be forced to work out of apartment complexes for many hours a day. Many clients may not realize that some of the women who work in these massage sex parlors have actually been forced into prostitution. The women may initially be lured into the US under false pretenses. In huge debt to their &#x27;owners&#x27;, they are forced to earn enough to eventually &quot;buy&quot; their freedom. In some cases women who have been sex trafficked may be forced to undergo plastic surgery or abortions. A chapter in &quot;The Slave Next Door&quot; (2009) reports that human trafficking and sexual enslavement are not limited to any specific location or social class. It concludes that individuals in society need to be alert to report suspicious behavior, because the psychological and physical abuse occurs which can often leave a victim unable to escape on their own.

In 2000 Congress created the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act with tougher punishments for sex traffickers. It provides for the possibility for former sex slaves to obtain a T-1 visa. To obtain the visa women must, &quot;prove they were enslaved by &#x27;force, fraud or coercion&#x27;.&quot; The visa allows former victims of sex trafficking to stay in the United States for 3 years and then apply for a green card.

The Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (FLDS) has been suspected of trafficking girls across state lines, as well as across the US–Canada and US–Mexico borders, for the purpose of sometimes involuntary plural marriage and sexual abuse. The FLDS is suspected by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police of having trafficked more than 30 under-age girls from Canada to the United States between the late 1990s and 2006 to be entered into polygamous marriages. RCMP spokesman Dan Moskaluk said of the FLDS&#x27;s activities: &quot;In essence, it&#x27;s human trafficking in connection with illicit sexual activity.&quot; According to the &quot;Vancouver Sun,&quot; it&#x27;s unclear whether or not Canada&#x27;s anti-human trafficking statute can be effectively applied against the FLDS&#x27;s pre-2005 activities, because the statute may not be able to be applied retroactively. An earlier three-year-long investigation by local authorities in British Columbia into allegations of sexual abuse, human trafficking, and forced marriages by the FLDS resulted in no charges, but did result in legislative change. Former FLDS members have also alleged that children belonging to the sect were forced to perform sexual acts as children upon older men while being unable to leave. This has been described by numerous former members as sexual slavery, and was reported as such by the &quot;Sydney Morning Herald&quot;. One former resident of Yearning for Zion, Kathleen Mackert, stated: &quot;I was required to perform oral sex on my father when I was seven, and it escalated from there.&quot;

===Asia===
====Central and West Asia====
The Trafficking in Persons Report of 2007 from the US Department of State says that sexual slavery exists in the Persian Gulf, where women and children may be trafficked from the post-Soviet states, Eastern Europe, Far East, Africa, South Asia or other parts Middle East. There are reports of Saudi royal family members sexually abusing people.

According to media reports from late 2014 the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) was selling Yazidis and Christian women as slaves. According to Haleh Esfandiari of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, after ISIL militants have captured an area &quot;[t]hey usually take the older women to a makeshift slave market and try to sell them.&quot; In mid-October 2014 the U.N. estimated that 5,000 to 7,000 Yazidi women and children were abducted by ISIL and sold into slavery.

In the digital magazine &quot;Dabiq&quot;, ISIL claimed religious justification for enslaving Yazidi women whom they consider to be from a heretical sect. ISIL claimed that the Yazidi are idol worshipers and their enslavement part of the old shariah practice of spoils of war. ISIL appealed to apocalyptic beliefs and &quot;claimed justification by a Hadith that they interpret as portraying the revival of slavery as a precursor to the end of the world.&quot; In late September 2014, 126 Islamic scholars from around the Muslim world signed an open letter to the Islamic State&#x27;s leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, rejecting his group&#x27;s interpretations of the Qur&#x27;an and hadith to justify its actions. The letter accuses the group of instigating fitna—sedition—by instituting slavery under its rule in contravention of the anti-slavery consensus of the Islamic scholarly community. In late 2014 ISIL released a pamphlet on the treatment of female slaves. In January 2015, further rules for sex slaves were announced.

Selling women and children still occurs in the Middle East. Yazidi women have also reported being raped and used as sexual slave by members of ISIS. In November 2015 it was reported that &quot;around 2,000 women and girls are still being bought and sold in ISIS-controlled areas. The young become sex slaves and older women are beaten and used as house slaves, according to survivors and accounts from ISIS militants&quot;.

Children have been used in the Persian Gulf as camel jockies. Most children are trafficked from Africa and South Asia. This practice has ceased in most areas though.

====South Asia====
In 2006 the Ministry of Women and Child Development estimated that there are around 2.8 million sex workers in India, with 35 percent of them entering the trade before the age of 18 years. The number of prostitutes has also doubled in the recent decade. One news article states that an estimated 200,000 Nepalese girls have been trafficked to red light areas of India. One report estimates that every year between 5,000 and 7,000 Nepalese girls are trafficked into the red-light districts in Indian cities, and that many of the girls may only be 9 or 10 years old.

In January 2010, the Supreme Court of India stated that India is &quot;becoming a hub&quot; for large-scale child prostitution rackets. It suggested setting up of a special investigating agency to tackle the growing problem. An article about the Rescue Foundation in &quot;New Internationalist&quot; magazine states that &quot;according to Save the Children India, clients now prefer 10- to 12-year-old girls&quot;. The same article attributes the rising number of prostitutes believed to have contracted HIV in India&#x27;s brothels as a factor in India becoming the country with the second-largest number of people living with HIV/AIDS in the world, behind South Africa.

In Pakistan, young girls have been sold by their families to big-city brothel owners. Often this happens due to poverty or debt, whereby the family has no other way to raise the money than to sell the young girl. Cases have also been reported where wives and sisters have been sold to brothels to raise money for gambling, drinking or drug addictions. Sex slaves are reportedly also bought by &#x27;agents&#x27; in Afghanistan who trick young girls into coming to Pakistan for well-paying jobs. Once in Pakistan they are taken to brothels (called &quot;kharabat&quot;) and forced into sexual slavery, some for many years. Beardless young boys in Afghanistan may be sold as bacha bazi for use in dancing and prostitution (pederasty), and are sometimes valued in tens of thousands of dollars.

====East and Southeast Asia====

In Thailand, the Health System Research Institute reported in 2005 that children in prostitution make up 40% of Thailand&#x27;s prostitutes. It said that a proportion of prostitutes over the age of 18, including foreign nationals mostly from Myanmar, China&#x27;s Yunnan province, Laos and Cambodia, are also in some state of forced sexual servitude. In 1996, the police in Bangkok estimated that there were at least 5,000 Russian prostitutes working in Thailand, many of whom had arrived through networks controlled by Russian gangs. The Tourism Police Bureau in 1997 stated that there were 500 Chinese and 200 European women in prostitution in Bangkok, many of whom entered Thailand illegally, often through Burma and Laos. Earlier reports, however, suggest different figures. (Police Colonel Sanit Meephan, deputy chief of Tourism Police Bureau, &quot;Thailand popular haunt for foreign prostitutes&quot;, &quot;The Nation&quot;, 15 January 1997)

Part of the challenge in quantifying and eliminating sexual slavery in Thailand and Asia generally is the high rate of police corruption in the region. There are documented cases where Thai and other area law enforcement officials worked with human traffickers, even to the extent of returning escaped child sex slaves to brothels.

Ethnic Rohingya women are kidnapped by Myanmar military and used as sex slaves. Many Rohingya women were detained at a human trafficking syndicate transit camp in Padang Besar, Thailand, and treated like sex slaves.

===Europe===

In the Netherlands, the Bureau of the Dutch Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings in 2005 estimated that there are from 1,000 to 7,000 trafficking victims a year. Most police investigations relate to legal sex businesses, with all sectors of prostitution being well represented, but with window brothels being particularly overrepresented. Dutch news site Expatica reported that in 2008, there were 809 registered trafficking victims in the Netherlands; out of those 763 were women and at least 60 percent of them were reportedly forced to work in the sex industry. Of reported victims, those from Hungary were all female and all forced into prostitution.

In Germany, the trafficking of women from Eastern Europe is often organized by people from that same region. German authorities identified 676 sex-trafficking victims in 2008, compared with 689 in 2007. The German Federal Police Office BKA reported in 2006 a total of 357 completed investigations of human trafficking, with 775 victims. Thirty-five percent of the suspects were Germans born in Germany and 8% were German citizens born outside Germany.

In Greece, according to NGO estimates in 2008, there may be a total 13,000–14,000 trafficking victims of all types in the country at any given time. Major countries of origin for trafficking victims brought into Greece include Nigeria, Ukraine, Russia, Bulgaria, Albania, Moldova, Romania and Belarus.

In Switzerland, the police estimated in 2006 that there may be between 1,500 and 3,000 victims of all types of human trafficking. The organizers and their victims generally come from Hungary, Slovakia, Romania, Ukraine, Moldova, Lithuania, Brazil, the Dominican Republic, Thailand and Cambodia, and, to a lesser extent, Africa.

In Belgium, in 2007, prosecutors handled a total of 418 trafficking cases, including 219 economic exploitation and 168 sexual exploitation cases. In the same year, the federal judicial police handled 196 trafficking files, compared with 184 in 2006. In 2007 the police arrested 342 persons for smuggling and trafficking-related crimes. A recent report by RiskMonitor foundation estimated that 70% of the prostitutes who work in Belgium are from Bulgaria.

In Austria, Vienna has the largest number of reported trafficking cases, although trafficking is also a problem in urban centers such as Graz, Linz, Salzburg, and Innsbruck. The NGO Lateinamerikanische Frauen in Oesterreich–Interventionsstelle fuer Betroffene des Frauenhandels (LEFOE-IBF) reported assisting 108 victims of all types of human trafficking in 2006, down from 151 in 2005.

In Spain, in 2007, officials identified 1,035 sex trafficking victims and 445 labor trafficking victims.

==See also==
* 1921 International Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Women and Children
* Kidnapping of Colleen Stan
* Kippumjo - Alleged sex slaves of North Korea&#x27;s ruler
* Sexual slavery recorded in the Bible

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
*


==Further reading==
* 
* Markon, Jerry, Washington Post. &quot;Human Trafficking Evokes Outrage, Little Evidence&quot; 23 September 2007
* Davies, Nick Guardian newspaper &quot;Inquiry fails to find single trafficker who forced anybody into prostitution&quot; 20 October 2009
* Davies, Nick Guardian newspaper &quot;Prostitution and trafficking – the anatomy of a moral panic&quot; 20 October 2009
* Ozimek, John The register &quot;UK gov prostitution proposals caught with pants down&quot; 22 October 2009:
* Dasgupta, Rajashri, and Murthy, Laxmi The hoot media: &quot;Human trafficking exaggerated numbers?&quot; January 2009
* Weitzer, Ronald - George Washington University report
* Waterfield, Bruno Spiked online &quot;Exposed: the myth of the World Cup sex slaves&quot; February 2007
* New York Times: &quot;The Face of Slavery&quot; By Kassie Bracken 4 January 2009
==External links==

* Diary of a Sex Slave – SFGate.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q875521" start="0" end="14" title="Sexual slavery" label="Sexual slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q875521" start="19" end="38" title="Sexual slavery" label="sexual exploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q780687" start="73" end="78" title="rights" label="right"/>
<link wikidata="Q325980" start="122" end="130" title="Coercion" label="coercing"/>
<link wikidata="Q608" start="170" end="187" title="Human sexual activity" label="sexual activities"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="203" end="215" title="forced labor" label="forced labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q231632" start="249" end="264" title="forced marriage" label="forced marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q21129531" start="269" end="284" title="sex trafficking" label="sex trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029421" start="298" end="328" title="Child prostitution" label="sexual trafficking of children"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="727" end="755" title="colonization of the Americas" label="colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="828" end="846" title="Indigenous peoples" label="Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="852" end="864" title="Forced labor" label="Forced labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q677769" start="1036" end="1051" title="Gilberto Freyre" label="Gilberto Freyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q188790" start="1288" end="1299" title="Concubinage" label="Concubinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q96197547" start="1409" end="1429" title="Concubinage in Islam" label="Concubinage in Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q686828" start="1546" end="1588" title="Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action" label="Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="1701" end="1713" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1792" end="1798" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q838958" start="1877" end="1896" title="Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court" label="Rome Statute (1998)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="1938" end="1966" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="2002" end="2025" title="Crime against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="2297" end="2306" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="2327" end="2345" title="Geneva Conventions" label="Geneva Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q429001" start="3140" end="3153" title="Mark Klamberg" label="Mark Klamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q181784" start="3327" end="3344" title="human trafficking" label="human trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="3708" end="3716" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q636107" start="3735" end="3740" title="United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime" label="UNODC"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="3825" end="3833" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029421" start="4162" end="4180" title="child prostitution" label="child prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4208342" start="4209" end="4226" title="child sex tourism" label="child sex tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q660567" start="4228" end="4245" title="child pornography" label="child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q325980" start="4374" end="4382" title="coercion" label="coercion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="4440" end="4447" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207629" start="4888" end="4930" title="commercial sexual exploitation of children" label="commercial sexual exploitation of children"/>
<link wikidata="Q12446115" start="5228" end="5267" title="Ministry of Women and Child Development" label="Ministry of Women and Child Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="5634" end="5642" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="6302" end="6310" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q291" start="6710" end="6727" title="Pornography" label="sexually explicit"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="6813" end="6831" title="child sexual abuse" label="child sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q93954828" start="7448" end="7468" title="cybersex trafficking" label="cybersex trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027665" start="7564" end="7578" title="live streaming" label="live streaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q29576" start="7796" end="7803" title="webcams" label="webcams"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="8850" end="8869" title="UN General Assembly" label="UN General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q773999" start="8882" end="8992" title="Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and of the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others" label="Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and of the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others"/>
<link wikidata="Q588982" start="9421" end="9427" title="UNAIDS" label="UNAIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="9429" end="9432" title="WHO" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="9434" end="9455" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="9457" end="9475" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q623036" start="9480" end="9485" title="UNFPA" label="UNFPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077789" start="9569" end="9586" title="HIV/AIDS epidemic" label="HIV/AIDS epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q765157" start="9913" end="9924" title="bride price" label="bride price"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="9929" end="9934" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q170538" start="9987" end="9996" title="virginity" label="virginity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433333" start="10004" end="10016" title="family honor" label="family honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="10323" end="10333" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="10338" end="10356" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q838958" start="10392" end="10404" title="Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court" label="Rome Statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="10467" end="10495" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="10508" end="10512" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467540" start="10551" end="10567" title="forced pregnancy" label="forced pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q706716" start="10569" end="10589" title="forced sterilization" label="forced sterilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="10665" end="10688" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="10792" end="10814" title="crime against humanity" label="crime against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="10824" end="10881" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="10918" end="10936" title="Geneva Conventions" label="Geneva Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q180333" start="11036" end="11040" title="Foča" label="Foča"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="11055" end="11077" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="11550" end="11607" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="11792" end="11849" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="11897" end="11904" title="Bosniak" label="Bosniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q180333" start="11985" end="11989" title="Foča" label="Foča"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="12051" end="12074" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="12079" end="12089" title="war crimes" label="war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378595" start="12543" end="12575" title="Slavery in 21st-century Islamism" label="Slavery in 21st-century Islamism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17351675" start="12601" end="12617" title="Priesthood in the Catholic Church" label="Catholic priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="12637" end="12640" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="12698" end="12702" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="12837" end="12845" title="marriage" label="marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q181339" start="13017" end="13028" title="patriarchy" label="patriarchal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="13043" end="13056" title="social stigma" label="social stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q378505" start="13103" end="13122" title="illegitimacy" label="illegitimate births"/>
<link wikidata="Q189970" start="13206" end="13219" title="social status" label="social status"/>
<link wikidata="Q765157" start="13553" end="13564" title="bride price" label="bride price"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="13592" end="13597" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408310" start="13972" end="13980" title="war rape" label="war rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q318296" start="14071" end="14081" title="kidnapping" label="kidnapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812388" start="14085" end="14094" title="elopement" label="elopement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="14099" end="14110" title="enslavement" label="enslavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="14145" end="14159" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="14160" end="14169" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="14225" end="14234" title="matrimony" label="matrimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341605" start="14282" end="14285" title="Canon law (Catholic Church)" label="CIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275904" start="14388" end="14404" title="Neolithic Europe" label="Neolithic Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q806348" start="14422" end="14444" title="Linear Pottery culture" label="Linear Pottery culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q661593" start="14453" end="14467" title="Asparn an der Zaya" label="Asparn-Schletz"/>
<link wikidata="Q558075" start="14730" end="14745" title="sexual violence" label="sexual violence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15316" end="15344" title="#During the Second World War" label="#During the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293896" start="15357" end="15370" title="Rape during the Bosnian War" label="War in Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15760" end="15791" title="Sexuality in ancient Rome#Rape and the law" label="ancient Rome&amp;#x27;s law on rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057923" start="15908" end="15926" title="Slavery in China" label="commonly practiced"/>
<link wikidata="Q403827" start="15956" end="15979" title="Vietnam under Chinese rule" label="Chinese rule of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q827040" start="15981" end="15987" title="Nanyue" label="Nanyue"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="16152" end="16158" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47097" start="16163" end="16170" title="Guizhou" label="Guizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q774615" start="16203" end="16215" title="Baiyue" label="Southern Yue"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="16399" end="16409" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6949127" start="16417" end="16423" title="lascar" label="lascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057910" start="16471" end="16487" title="slavery in Japan" label="slavery in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="16616" end="16621" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="16632" end="16651" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724951" start="16671" end="16683" title="Portuguese colonization of the Americas" label="the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="16712" end="16715" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="16719" end="16745" title="Portuguese India" label="Portuguese colony in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q216839" start="17021" end="17041" title="Taiwanese aborigines" label="Taiwanese aboriginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q697621" start="17237" end="17260" title="Siege of Fort Zeelandia" label="Siege of Fort Zeelandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="17278" end="17282" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q197615" start="17312" end="17319" title="Koxinga" label="Koxinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="17346" end="17370" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="17385" end="17391" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620416" start="17604" end="17621" title="Antonius Hambroek" label="Antonius Hambroek"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="17761" end="17770" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251010" start="17825" end="17847" title="Prostitution in Asia" label="trafficked across Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="17905" end="17910" title="British Raj" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="18021" end="18039" title="continental Europe" label="continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251040" start="18046" end="18065" title="Prostitution in India" label="trafficked to India"/>
<link wikidata="Q918153" start="18067" end="18073" title="British Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="18357" end="18366" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="18368" end="18382" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="18384" end="18391" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="18393" end="18409" title="Russian Far East" label="Russian Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="18412" end="18421" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="18427" end="18432" title="British Raj" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="18693" end="18699" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="18701" end="18708" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="20020" end="20027" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="20135" end="20147" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="20149" end="20163" title="Empire of Japan" label="Imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q713540" start="20205" end="20218" title="comfort women" label="comfort women"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="20237" end="20246" title="euphemism" label="euphemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="20379" end="20396" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Japanese military"/>
<link wikidata="Q11521611" start="21351" end="21367" title="Park Yu-ha" label="Park Yuha&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="22191" end="22201" title="Arab World" label="Arab World"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="22235" end="22253" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q146666" start="22268" end="22272" title="Zanj" label="Zanj"/>
<link wikidata="Q104778119" start="22287" end="22312" title="Trans-Saharan slave trade" label="Trans-Saharan slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q121749109" start="22314" end="22333" title="Red Sea slave trade" label="Red Sea slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q105322255" start="22338" end="22362" title="Indian Ocean slave trade" label="Indian Ocean slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q83971" start="22389" end="22396" title="Tartary" label="Tartars"/>
<link wikidata="Q123560189" start="22405" end="22424" title="Crimean slave trade" label="Crimean slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q15763" start="22451" end="22462" title="Circassians" label="Circassians"/>
<link wikidata="Q123560189" start="22471" end="22493" title="Circassian slave trade" label="Circassian slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q184211" start="22527" end="22535" title="monogamy" label="monogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q106318528" start="23006" end="23019" title="Abbasid harem" label="Abbasid harem"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="23027" end="23044" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q127861" start="23087" end="23103" title="Khedivate of Egypt" label="Khedive of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q125119209" start="23311" end="23337" title="Slavery in al-Andalus" label="Moorish Spain (al-Andalus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130250" start="23346" end="23364" title="Dublin slave trade" label="Dublin slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q165414" start="23383" end="23389" title="Hedeby" label="Hedeby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353949" start="23393" end="23399" title="Brännö" label="Brännö"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661187" start="23438" end="23455" title="Volga trade route" label="Volga trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q125310638" start="23519" end="23543" title="Khazar slave trade" label="via the Khazar Kaghanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q125427743" start="23555" end="23573" title="Volga Bulgarian slave trade" label="via Volga Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182647" start="23603" end="23611" title="Khwarazm" label="Khwarazm"/>
<link wikidata="Q124733224" start="23620" end="23640" title="Samanid slave trade" label="Samanid slave market"/>
<link wikidata="Q125130233" start="23681" end="23702" title="slavery in the Abbasid Caliphate" label="the Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="23823" end="23840" title="Caliph of Cordoba" label="Caliph of Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q741731" start="23887" end="23895" title="saqaliba" label="saqaliba"/>
<link wikidata="Q29000" start="24073" end="24088" title="Abd al-Rahman I" label="Abd al-Rahman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q123485426" start="24200" end="24218" title="Balkan slave trade" label="Balkan slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q123560189" start="24245" end="24266" title="Black Sea slave trade" label="Black Sea slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="24362" end="24376" title="Barbary pirate" label="Barbary pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859497" start="24788" end="24807" title="Barbary slave trade" label="Barbary slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q123560189" start="24837" end="24856" title="Crimean slave trade" label="Crimean slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242966" start="24937" end="24980" title="Crimean–Nogai slave raids in Eastern Europe" label="Crimean–Nogai slave raids in Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q123560189" start="25057" end="25076" title="Crimean slave trade" label="Crimean slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797528" start="25357" end="25379" title="Ottoman Imperial Harem" label="Ottoman Imperial Harem"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="25391" end="25397" title="Mamluk" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q491507" start="25413" end="25426" title="Ottoman Egypt" label="Ottoman Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="25632" end="25652" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4003538" start="26564" end="26573" title="Umm walad" label="Umm walad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="27208" end="27218" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Batuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q18408564" start="27324" end="27379" title="Annexation of the Crimean Khanate by the Russian Empire" label="Annexation of the Crimean Khanate by the Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q123560189" start="27393" end="27415" title="Circassian slave trade" label="Circassian slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121358" start="27429" end="27448" title="Circassian beauties" label="Circassian beauties"/>
<link wikidata="Q129376910" start="27993" end="28019" title="Firman of 1854" label="another &amp;quot;firman&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q18973" start="28060" end="28069" title="Georgians" label="Georgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q45301" start="28221" end="28230" title="Trabzon" label="Trapezunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q123560189" start="28521" end="28543" title="Circassian slave trade" label="Circassian slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q123560189" start="28565" end="28587" title="Circassian slave trade" label="Circassian slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="29197" end="29214" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q125876692" start="29248" end="29276" title="Temporary Slavery Commission" label="Temporary Slavery Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q125876730" start="29290" end="29321" title="Committee of Experts on Slavery" label="Committee of Experts on Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q125876743" start="29337" end="29377" title="Advisory Committee of Experts on Slavery" label="Advisory Committee of Experts on Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="29619" end="29633" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="29640" end="29677" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q126183065" start="29695" end="29722" title="Ad Hoc Committee on Slavery" label="Ad Hoc Committee on Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q113461204" start="29837" end="29860" title="Slavery in Saudi Arabia" label="Slavery in Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983979" start="29862" end="29878" title="slavery in Yemen" label="slavery in Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q114877098" start="29883" end="29899" title="slavery in Dubai" label="slavery in Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q113461440" start="29934" end="29949" title="slavery in Oman" label="slavery in Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q114887910" start="30159" end="30168" title="slavery in Kuwait" label="in Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q125876743" start="30188" end="30228" title="Advisory Committee of Experts on Slavery" label="Advisory Committee of Experts on Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517159" start="30241" end="30251" title="Hadhramaut" label="Hadhramaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951959" start="30316" end="30324" title="Mui tsai" label="Mui tsai"/>
<link wikidata="Q400961" start="30412" end="30427" title="Ahmad bin Yahya" label="Ahmad bin Yahya"/>
<link wikidata="Q879869" start="30509" end="30524" title="Said bin Taimur" label="Said bin Taimur"/>
<link wikidata="Q113461204" start="30960" end="30983" title="slavery in Saudi Arabia" label="slavery in Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q114877098" start="30985" end="31001" title="slavery in Dubai" label="slavery in Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q113461440" start="31006" end="31021" title="slavery in Oman" label="slavery in Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q96754266" start="31261" end="31275" title="concubinage in the Muslim world" label="women enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="31279" end="31290" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q165853" start="31294" end="31299" title="harem" label="harem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121358" start="31324" end="31343" title="Circassian beauties" label="Circassian beauties"/>
<link wikidata="Q123560189" start="31355" end="31368" title="Circassian slave trade" label="a slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q129376910" start="31737" end="31751" title="firman of 1854" label="firman of 1854"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578778" start="32383" end="32402" title="Circassian genocide" label="Circassian genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="32589" end="32609" title="New York Daily Times" label="New York Daily Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q123560189" start="33799" end="33821" title="Circassian slave trade" label="Circassian slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="34507" end="34516" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="34517" end="34524" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q288301" start="34549" end="34569" title="William Thomas Stead" label="William Thomas Stead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628706" start="34591" end="34608" title="Pall Mall Gazette" label="Pall Mall Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362096" start="34727" end="34747" title="Eliza Armstrong case" label="Eliza Armstrong case"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914277" start="34750" end="34761" title="Moral panic" label="Moral panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q110271191" start="34891" end="34915" title="White slave trade affair" label="White slave trade affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002641" start="35147" end="35178" title="Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885" label="1885 Criminal Law Amendment Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q327538" start="35192" end="35206" title="age of consent" label="age of consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="35488" end="35499" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean war"/>
<link wikidata="Q134509" start="35532" end="35541" title="Port Said" label="Port Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="35582" end="35592" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995692" start="35656" end="35673" title="white slave trade" label="white slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q124660513" start="35971" end="36022" title="International Association of Friends of Young Girls" label="International Association of Friends of Young Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979308" start="36304" end="36334" title="National Vigilance Association" label="National Vigilance Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q115781681" start="36356" end="36365" title="Vaksamhet" label="Vaksamhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q115762235" start="36397" end="36434" title="Anglo-Egyptian Slave Trade Convention" label="Anglo-Egyptian Slave Trade Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q108597946" start="36537" end="36553" title="slavery in Egypt" label="slavery in Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="36637" end="36645" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121358" start="36658" end="36669" title="Circassian beauty" label="Circassians"/>
<link wikidata="Q123560189" start="36678" end="36700" title="Circassian slave trade" label="Circassian slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q165853" start="36739" end="36744" title="harem" label="harem"/>
<link wikidata="Q96197547" start="36745" end="36755" title="concubinage in Islam" label="concubines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155605" start="36775" end="36786" title="upper class" label="upper class"/>
<link wikidata="Q124044411" start="36888" end="36965" title="International Bureau for the Suppression of the Traffic in Women and Children" label="International Bureau for the Suppression of the Traffic in Women and Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257613" start="37185" end="37255" title="International Agreement for the suppression of the White Slave Traffic" label="International Agreement for the suppression of the White Slave Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="37373" end="37380" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094335" start="37388" end="37401" title="U.S. attorney" label="U.S. attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q131295" start="37559" end="37566" title="brothel" label="brothel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914277" start="37591" end="37596" title="Moral panic" label="panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890568" start="37652" end="37675" title="Mann Act" label="White-Slave Traffic Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q202175" start="37893" end="37905" title="Ellis Island" label="Ellis Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983486" start="39833" end="39840" title="Plaçage" label="Plaçage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500267" start="39904" end="39924" title="free people of color" label="free people of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="41635" end="41643" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="41648" end="41662" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="other colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="41749" end="41759" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q920609" start="41934" end="41952" title="House of Burgesses" label="House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="42057" end="42062" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896875" start="42094" end="42117" title="partus sequitur ventrem" label="partus sequitur ventrem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="42392" end="42402" title="mixed-race" label="mixed-race"/>
<link wikidata="Q257464" start="42536" end="42549" title="Sally Hemings" label="Sally Hemings"/>
<link wikidata="Q238001" start="42619" end="42650" title="Martha Jefferson" label="Martha Wayles Skelton Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859631" start="42674" end="42685" title="John Wayles" label="John Wayles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="42788" end="42804" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263272" start="43089" end="43110" title="John Wayles Jefferson" label="John Wayles Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q440043" start="43571" end="43583" title="Mary Chesnut" label="Mary Chesnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q433397" start="43588" end="43600" title="Fanny Kemble" label="Fanny Kemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q220480" start="43859" end="43877" title="Zora Neale Hurston" label="Zora Neale Hurston"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="43927" end="43942" title="Anthropology" label="anthropological"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="43997" end="44004" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376349" start="44409" end="44422" title="Ruby McCollum" label="Ruby McCollum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155397" start="44474" end="44491" title="Live Oak, Florida" label="Live Oak, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339001" start="44650" end="44668" title="Pittsburgh Courier" label="Pittsburgh Courier"/>
<link wikidata="" start="44748" end="44799" title="You Belong to Me: Sex, Race and Murder in the South" label="You Belong to Me: Sex, Race and Murder in the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q646163" start="44820" end="44833" title="Tanka people" label="Tanka females"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="44849" end="44858" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="44955" end="44975" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="45380" end="45385" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="45567" end="45591" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q552801" start="45593" end="45605" title="Lagerbordell" label="Lagerbordell"/>
<link wikidata="Q159483" start="45665" end="45695" title="Ravensbrück concentration camp" label="Ravensbrück concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723122" start="45722" end="45739" title="Wehrmachtsbordell" label="Wehrmachtsbordell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="46042" end="46075" title="Sexually transmitted infection" label="sexually transmittable infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="46190" end="46202" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="46319" end="46345" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="46658" end="46664" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="46880" end="46888" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="46889" end="46900" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="army&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="46914" end="46926" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q696192" start="47247" end="47285" title="Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere" label="Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q696251" start="48145" end="48164" title="Occupied Japan" label="Japanese government"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="48186" end="48198" title="prostitution" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="48278" end="48290" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147936" start="48362" end="48367" title="Ōmori" label="Ōmori"/>
<link wikidata="Q471889" start="48701" end="48705" title="Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers" label="SCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="48799" end="48809" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49201" end="49211" title="Kim Kwi-ok" label="Kim Kwi-ok"/>
<link wikidata="Q19560241" start="49895" end="49913" title="Chunghee Sarah Soh" label="Chunghee Sarah Soh"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="50777" end="50817" title="International Organization for Migration" label="International Organization for Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="50841" end="50872" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="50895" end="50901" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="50981" end="50998" title="Abolitionism" label="abolished slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q784387" start="51100" end="51105" title="Mahdi" label="Mahdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q246643" start="51118" end="51123" title="History of Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="51321" end="51328" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="51330" end="51342" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="51353" end="51359" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="51361" end="51366" title="Democratic Republic of Congo" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="51368" end="51373" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="51378" end="51388" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="51393" end="51398" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="51400" end="51404" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="51409" end="51414" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413317" start="51426" end="51448" title="religious prostitution" label="religious prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455101" start="51485" end="51501" title="ritual servitude" label="ritual servitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q16725863" start="51690" end="51710" title="Chibok schoolgirls kidnapping" label="Boko Haram kidnapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095348" start="51736" end="51742" title="Chibok" label="Chibok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822101" start="51857" end="51872" title="Abubakar Shekau" label="Abubakar Shekau"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="51920" end="51953" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="52039" end="52046" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="52075" end="52098" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="52167" end="52180" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939160" start="52231" end="52264" title="Human trafficking in the United States" label="trafficked into the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="52308" end="52316" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="52434" end="52452" title="San Francisco Gate" label="San Francisco Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="52606" end="52615" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q901922" start="55274" end="55289" title="massage parlors" label="massage parlors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206714" start="55299" end="55306" title="cantina" label="cantina"/>
<link wikidata="Q43437" start="55351" end="55355" title="pimp" label="pimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="55537" end="55551" title="commercial sex" label="commercial sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q499224" start="57066" end="57124" title="Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints" label="Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459202" start="57288" end="57303" title="plural marriage" label="plural marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="57351" end="57380" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="Royal Canadian Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004274" start="57720" end="57733" title="Vancouver Sun" label="Vancouver Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q390216" start="58459" end="58480" title="Sydney Morning Herald" label="Sydney Morning Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045881" start="58511" end="58528" title="Yearning for Zion" label="Yearning for Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="58818" end="58830" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="58884" end="58902" title="post-Soviet states" label="post-Soviet states"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="58920" end="58928" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="58938" end="58948" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="58964" end="58975" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="59097" end="59133" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59145" end="59190" title="Slavery in 21st-century Islamism#By ISIS" label="selling Yazidis and Christian women as slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q872975" start="59229" end="59277" title="Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars" label="Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q18324560" start="59581" end="59586" title="Dabiq (magazine)" label="Dabiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q200885" start="59645" end="59651" title="Yazidi" label="Yazidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="59793" end="59800" title="shariah" label="shariah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408310" start="59813" end="59826" title="Wartime sexual violence" label="spoils of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073559" start="59845" end="59864" title="Islamic eschatology" label="apocalyptic beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q646754" start="60096" end="60107" title="open letter" label="open letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821724" start="60143" end="60163" title="Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi" label="Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="60215" end="60226" title="Quran" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="60231" end="60237" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q962828" start="60306" end="60311" title="fitna (word)" label="fitna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60383" end="60405" title="Islamic views on slavery#Modern interpretations" label="anti-slavery consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189459" start="60413" end="60440" title="ulama" label="Islamic scholarly community"/>
<link wikidata="Q12446115" start="61201" end="61240" title="Ministry of Women and Child Development" label="Ministry of Women and Child Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q852857" start="61285" end="61295" title="sex worker" label="sex worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="61493" end="61498" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="62260" end="62263" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="62844" end="62855" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q798023" start="63102" end="63112" title="bacha bazi" label="bacha bazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q211354" start="63150" end="63159" title="pederasty" label="pederasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="63496" end="63503" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="63518" end="63524" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="63535" end="63539" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q464529" start="64545" end="64553" title="Rohingya" label="Rohingya"/>
<link wikidata="Q837322" start="65325" end="65337" title="sex industry" label="sex industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="65472" end="65486" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q56030" start="65666" end="65669" title="Federal Criminal Police Office (Germany)" label="BKA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996333" start="67480" end="67566" title="1921 International Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Women and Children" label="1921 International Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Women and Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344816" start="67569" end="67595" title="Kidnapping of Colleen Stan" label="Kidnapping of Colleen Stan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061760" start="67598" end="67606" title="Kippumjo" label="Kippumjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="67631" end="67642" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67658" end="67694" title="The Bible and slavery#Sexual and conjugal slavery" label="Sexual slavery recorded in the Bible"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173637" wikidata="Q354496" url="?curid=173637" title="Stephen Stills">
<text>Stephen Arthur Stills (born January 3, 1945) is an American musician, singer, and songwriter best known for his work with Buffalo Springfield; Crosby, Stills &amp; Nash; Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp; Young; and Manassas. As both a solo act and member of three successful bands, Stills has combined record sales of over 35 million albums. He was ranked number 28 in &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s 2003 list of &quot;The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time&quot; and number 47 in the 2011 list. Stills became the first person to be inducted twice on the same night into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. According to Neil Young, &quot;Stephen is a genius&quot;.

Beginning his professional career with Buffalo Springfield, he composed &quot;For What It&#x27;s Worth&quot;, which became one of the most recognizable songs of the 1960s. Other notable songs he contributed to the band were &quot;Sit Down, I Think I Love You&quot;, &quot;Bluebird&quot;, and &quot;Rock &amp; Roll Woman&quot;. According to bandmate Richie Furay, Stills was &quot;the heart and soul of Buffalo Springfield&quot;.

After Buffalo Springfield disbanded, Stills began working with David Crosby and Graham Nash as the trio called Crosby, Stills &amp; Nash (CSN). In addition to writing many of the band&#x27;s songs, Stills played bass, guitar, and keyboards on their debut album. The album sold over four million copies and at that point had outsold anything from the three members&#x27; prior bands: the Byrds, Buffalo Springfield, and the Hollies. The album won the trio a Grammy Award for Best New Artist.

Stills&#x27; first solo album, &quot;Stephen Stills&quot;, earned a gold record and is the only album to feature both Jimi Hendrix and Eric Clapton. Its hit single &quot;Love the One You&#x27;re With&quot; became his biggest solo hit, peaking at number 14 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. Stills followed this with a string of solo albums, as well as starting a band with Chris Hillman called Manassas in 1972. In summer 1974, Young reunited with CSN after a four-year hiatus for a concert tour that was recorded and released in 2014 as &quot;CSNY 1974&quot;. It was one of the first stadium tours and the largest tour the band has done to date. CSN reunited in 1977 for its album &quot;CSN&quot;, which became the trio&#x27;s best-selling record. CSN and CSNY continued to have platinum albums through the 1980s.

==Early years==
Stills was born in Dallas, Texas, to Talitha Quintilla Collard (1919–1996) and William Arthur Stills (1915–1986). Raised in a military family, he moved around as a child and developed an interest in blues and folk music. He was also influenced by Latin music after spending his youth in Gainesville and Tampa, Florida, as well as Covington, Louisiana, Costa Rica, the Panama Canal Zone, and El Salvador. Stills attended H.B. Plant High School in Tampa, Florida, Admiral Farragut Academy in St. Petersburg, Florida and Saint Leo College Preparatory School in Saint Leo, Florida, before graduating from Lincoln High School in Costa Rica. He has two sisters, Talitha and Hannah.

When he was nine years old, he was diagnosed with partial hearing loss in one ear. The hearing loss increased as he got older.

Stills dropped out of Louisiana State University in the early 1960s. He played in a series of bands, including the Continentals, which then featured future Eagles guitarist Don Felder. Stills also sang as a solo artist at Gerde&#x27;s Folk City, a well-known coffeehouse in Greenwich Village. Stills eventually ended up in a nine-member vocal harmony ensemble, the house act at the Cafe au Go Go in New York City, called the Au Go Go Singers, which included his future Buffalo Springfield bandmate Richie Furay. This ensemble did some touring in the Catskills and in the South, released one album in 1964, and then broke up in 1965.

Stills later formed a folk-rock band called the Company with four other former members of the Au Go Go Singers. The Company embarked on a six-week tour of Canada, where Stills met guitarist Neil Young. On the VH1 &quot;CSNY Legends&quot; special, Stills said that Young was doing what he always wanted to do, &quot;play folk music in a rock band&quot;. The Company broke up in New York within four months; Stills did session work and went to various auditions. In 1966 he convinced a reluctant Furay, then living in Massachusetts, to move with him to California.

==Life and career==

=== Buffalo Springfield and Super Session (1966–1968) ===
Stills, Furay, and Young reunited in Los Angeles and formed the core of Buffalo Springfield. Legend has it that Stills and Furay recognized Young&#x27;s converted hearse and flagged him down, a meeting described in a recent solo track &quot;Round the Bend&quot;. Buffalo Springfield performed a mixture of folk, country, psychedelia, and rock. Its sound was lent a hard edge by the twin lead guitars of Stills and Young, and that combination helped make Buffalo Springfield a critical success. The band&#x27;s first record &quot;Buffalo Springfield&quot; (1966) sold well after Stills&#x27;s topical song &quot;For What It&#x27;s Worth&quot; became a top ten hit, reaching No. 7 on the US charts. According to &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and other sources, Buffalo Springfield helped create the genres of folk rock and country rock.

Distrust of their management along with the arrest and deportation of bassist Bruce Palmer worsened the already strained relations among the group members and led to Buffalo Springfield&#x27;s demise. A second album, &quot;Buffalo Springfield Again&quot;, was released in late 1967 and featured Stills songs &quot;Bluebird&quot; and &quot;Rock And Roll Woman&quot;. In May 1968, the band split up for good, but contractual obligations required the recording and release of a final studio album, &quot;Last Time Around&quot;. The album was primarily composed of tracks recorded earlier that year. A Stills song from their debut album, &quot;Sit Down, I Think I Love You&quot;, was a minor hit for The Mojo Men in 1967.

After the disintegration of Buffalo Springfield, Stills played on half of the &quot;Super Session&quot; album with Al Kooper in 1968, including a cover of Donovan&#x27;s &quot;Season of the Witch&quot; that received heavy radio play on progressive FM radio formats. Mike Bloomfield was slated to play on the other half of the album but failed to turn up for the second day of recording. The album sold well and charted at No. 12 on the US charts while being certified Gold in December 1970.

=== Joni Mitchell (1968–1972) ===
As a session musician, Stills featured on various albums recorded by fellow artist Joni Mitchell. He was invited by David Crosby to play on Mitchell&#x27;s 1968 debut album &quot;Song to a Seagull&quot;, on the track &quot;Night in the City&quot;. Throughout the years from 1968 to 1972, Stills played on a variety of Mitchell&#x27;s studio albums such as &quot;Song to a Seagull&quot;, &quot;Clouds&quot;, &quot;Ladies of the Canyon&quot;, &quot;Blue&quot;, and &quot;For the Roses&quot;. Mitchell used his bass playing for songs like &quot;Carey&quot;. Mitchell: &quot;That&#x27;s Stephen [Stills] on that one right? I like his bass playing on that track! I tried various bass players, and I usually took them off the tracks. They weighed things down, made it plodding, and didn&#x27;t make it swing.&quot; Stills himself recalled clearly &quot;understanding the underpinning in all those weird tunings.&quot;

Stills was an influence on Mitchell&#x27;s dulcimer sound, since she first discovered the instrument at Big Sur in 1969. Mitchell had observed Stills&#x27; aggressive, rhythmic style and transformed it into a unique rawness. She embraced her new sound, which can be heard on the 1970 album &quot;Blue&quot;. In 1972, Stills was credited as the rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll band in &quot;Blonde in the Bleachers&quot;. His multi-instrumentalist musicianship can be heard in these guest appearances on her albums. Stills&#x27; rendition with CS&amp;N of Mitchell&#x27;s &quot;Woodstock&quot; transformed her folk-based song into an electric rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll showpiece.

=== Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp; Young (1969–1970) ===

In late 1968, Stills joined forces with David Crosby (late of The Byrds) and Graham Nash (late of The Hollies) to form Crosby, Stills &amp; Nash. Several of Stills&#x27;s songs on the group&#x27;s debut album, including &quot;&quot; and &quot;You Don&#x27;t Have to Cry&quot;, were inspired by his on-again off-again relationship with singer Judy Collins. The album reached No. 6 on the US charts and was certified quadruple platinum.

Stills dominated the recording of the album. Crosby and Nash played guitar on their own songs respectively, while drummer Dallas Taylor played on four tracks and drummer Jim Gordon on a fifth. Stills played all the bass, organ, and lead guitar parts, as well as acoustic guitar on his own songs. &quot;The other guys won&#x27;t be offended when I say that one was my baby, and I kind of had the tracks in my head&quot;, Stills said.

Wanting to tour and needing additional musicians to fill out their sound, the band invited former Buffalo Springfield member Neil Young to join them for their first tour and second album to make the group the quartet Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp; Young (initialized as CSN&amp;Y). The first tour started in August 1969 and finished in January 1970, followed by the recording their debut album as a quartet, &quot;Déjà Vu&quot; (1970). The foursome quarrelled frequently throughout the recording sessions, in particular Stills and Young, who both fought for control. Stills composed the songs &quot;Carry On&quot; and &quot;4 + 20&quot; and co-wrote &quot;Everybody I Love You&quot; with Young. He also brought his version of Joni Mitchell&#x27;s song &quot;Woodstock&quot; for the band to cover. The album reached No. 1 on the US charts and was certified 7 times platinum there, selling over 8 million copies.

In May 1970, CSN&amp;Y recorded Young&#x27;s &quot;Ohio&quot; following the Kent State massacre on May 4. The single&#x27;s B-side was Stills&#x27;s &quot;Find the Cost Of Freedom&quot;. The single was rush-released by Atlantic Records at the same subsequent time as the group&#x27;s &quot;Teach Your Children&quot; was climbing the charts. After an extended second tour finishing in July 1970, the band split up acrimoniously. Stills moved to England and started recording his debut solo album.

In April 1971, CSN&amp;Y released &quot;4 Way Street&quot;, a double live album recorded in 1970. The album reached No. 1 in 1971 on the US charts and was certified quadruple platinum in the US.

Having played at the Monterey Pop Festival with Buffalo Springfield and both Woodstock and Altamont with CSN&amp;Y, Stills (along with Crosby) performed at three of the most iconic U.S. rock festivals of the 1960s. During CSN&amp;Y&#x27;s set at Altamont Free Concert, Stills was reported to have been repeatedly stabbed in the leg by a &quot;stoned-out&quot; Hells Angel, with a sharpened bicycle spoke. At the band&#x27;s request, their performance was not included in the subsequent film &quot;Gimme Shelter&quot; (1970).

=== Peak solo years (1970–71) ===
In the wake of CSNY&#x27;s success, all four members recorded high-profile solo albums. In 1970, Stills released his eponymous solo debut album featuring guests Eric Clapton, Jimi Hendrix, Cass Elliot, Booker T Jones and Ringo Starr (credited only as &quot;Richie&quot;) as well as Crosby, Nash, Rita Coolidge and CSN&amp;Y drummers Dallas Taylor and Johnny Barbata. It provided Stills with the US No. 14 hit single &quot;Love the One You&#x27;re With&quot;, and another US top 40 hit &quot;Sit Yourself Down&quot;, peaking at No. 37. The album peaked at No. 3 on the US charts, a solo career peak. At the time of release, Stills&#x27;s album was the highest selling solo album out of the four. It was recorded in the UK, where Stills bought a mansion in Surrey, England, previously owned by Starr. To promote the album, Stills appeared on the BBC television show &quot;Disco 2&quot; in January 1971.

The 1970 album cover was shot by photographer Henry Diltz in Colorado, in the early hours of the morning after the death of Jimi Hendrix. Hendrix&#x27;s untimely death affected Stills immensely. Ever since being first introduced to Hendrix at the Monterey Pop Festival in 1967, Stills was inspired by the guitarist and had befriended him. In 1969, Stills was invited to temporarily join the Jimi Hendrix Experience on tour as their bass player, but was held up by previous commitments with CSN&amp;Y. His biggest regret was not making a full album with Hendrix. In early 1971, on the French music show Pop 2, Stills talked about the influence that Hendrix had on him as a person and a musician:

Stills followed this first album with his second solo album, &quot;Stephen Stills 2&quot;, six months later. Recorded in Miami, the album included the singles &quot;Change Partners&quot; and &quot;Marianne&quot;, which reached Nos. 43 and 42 in the US. The album itself reached No. 8 on the chart and was certified US Gold a month after release. Even though &quot;Change Partners&quot; was written before CSN formed, Nash saw it as a metaphor for the many relationships in CSN&amp;Y. Stills initially recorded 23 songs and hoped to release them as a double album; this was ultimately rejected by Atlantic.

Stills embarked on his first solo US tour with an eight-piece band including the Memphis Horns, in which he sold out Madison Square Garden, The Philadelphia Spectrum, LA Forum and the Boston Garden, arguably at his solo commercial peak. Stills&#x27;s performance at Madison Square Garden occurred one day prior to George Harrison&#x27;s Concert For Bangladesh. Stills donated his stage, sound, lighting system and production manager in kind, but was later upset when Harrison &quot;neglected to invite him to perform, mention his name, or say thank you&quot;. Stills then spent the show drunk in Ringo Starr&#x27;s dressing room, &quot;barking at everyone&quot;. Stills&#x27;s Madison Square Garden show was professionally recorded and remains unreleased, except for a clip of &quot;Go Back Home&quot; that was broadcast in early 1972 on &quot;The Old Grey Whistle Test&quot;. Two additional acoustic tracks were released on Stills&#x27;s 2013 box set &quot;Carry On&quot;.

In 1971, &quot;Billboard&quot; magazine ranked him at No. 34 top singles artist, No. 44 top album artist, No. 14 top singles male vocalist, No. 12 top new singles vocalist, No. 17 top album male vocalists, No. 14 top new album artist, number 73 top producers, and ranked his debut album number 70 in the year end album charts. Additionally, &quot;Cashbox&quot; ranked &quot;Stephen Stills 2&quot; as the No. 51 album of 1971, and his debut as No. 52.

=== Manassas (1971–1973) ===
In late 1971, Stills teamed up with ex-Byrd Chris Hillman to form the band Manassas. Their self-titled double album was a mixture of rock, country, blues, bluegrass and Latin music divided into different sections and peaked at number 4 in the US. It was certified US Gold a month after release but did not yield any more top 40 hits, only &quot;It Doesn&#x27;t Matter&quot; reached 61 on the US charts. Stills spent the majority of 1972 playing live with Manassas on a world tour, which included headlining festivals in Australia, playing more arenas in the US including the Nassau Coliseum, and the Boston Garden. His concert at The Rainbow Theatre in London was recorded for a BBC TV special titled &quot;Stephen Stills Manassas: In Concert&quot;. He moved to Boulder, Colorado after this world tour finished and in March 1973 married French singer-songwriter Véronique Sanson in London, after having met while at a Manassas gig in France, 1972. In early 1972, Stills appeared in a UK documentary about himself called &quot;Sounding Out&quot;. &quot;Cashbox&quot; magazine ranked Stills as the number 52 top male vocalist of 1972. &quot;Billboard&quot; ranked Manassas as the number 53 album of 1972, and Stills as the number 75 album artist.

All of Stills&#x27; albums after Buffalo Springfield had gone either gold or platinum; the Manassas follow-up album the next year &quot;Down the Road&quot; was his first LP that did not, but still managed to reach 26 in the US charts. It was recorded less than a year after the debut double album, and encountered some issues with recording and not having enough Stills songs on the album. Also Atlantic were pushing for a far more commercially viable CSNY reunion. Which in June and July 1973, between the two 1973 Manassas tours at the start and end of the year, happened in Maui. As CSNY attempted to record an album tentatively called &quot;Human Highway&quot;. This album was never finished due to infighting. But after one final 1973 Manassas tour, during which CSN and CSNY reunited during the acoustic sections both at Winterland Arena concerts, a reunion was in the cards, and Manassas was over. Stills then sold his Surrey home and relocated to Colorado. The last date of the first 1973 Manassas tour was recorded for &quot;ABC In Concert&quot;. &quot;Cashbox&quot; magazine ranked Manassas as the number 58 group of 1973. Billboard ranked &quot;Down The Road&quot; as the number 36 of new album artists.

In 1972/73, Stills left the services of David Geffen and set up his own publishing company with Ken Weiss, called Gold Hill Publishing, named after his home in Boulder, Colorado.

=== Solo and CSNY tours (1974) ===

Stills spent early 1974 on a sold out East coast tour where he played well respected theatres, including Carnegie Hall. The 1975 live album &quot;Stephen Stills Live&quot; was made up of recordings from this tour. It was also during this tour that Stills announced the 1974 CSNY reunion concert tour. The CSNY reunion tour sold-out shows through July and August in both the US and the UK, with an average concert attendance of 80,000. Due to poor management, the tour made little money for the group, but album sales saw a boost: the CSNY compilation album &quot;So Far&quot; reached number 1 in the US and sold 6 million copies. After another aborted attempt at recording a CSNY album after the tour, Stills signed with Columbia Records in late 1974. In 1973–1974, Stills was recording another solo album called &quot;As I Come Of Age&quot;, which was put aside for the CSNY reunion tour. Many songs were used for the 1975 &quot;Stills&quot; album. In 1974, Stills played bass on, and helped mix his wife&#x27;s record &quot;Le Maudit&quot;. He also played bass for her at two concerts in Paris in October 1974.

=== Signing to Columbia Records and The Stills Young Band (1975–1976) ===

Stills signed to Columbia Records for three albums: &quot;Stills&quot; in 1975, &quot;Illegal Stills&quot; in 1976; and &quot;Thoroughfare Gap&quot; in 1978. &quot;Stills&quot; released in June 1975, was the highest-charting release of the three at number 22 on the US charts, and also the most critically successful of the three. Stills then spent the rest of year touring the US, doing a summer and winter tour playing to 10,000 seat arenas, including the LA Forum, and Red Rocks Amphitheatre. Stills played an acoustic set at the Bob Dylan-organised Night of the Hurricane Benefit at the Houston Astrodome in January 1976. He next released &quot;Illegal Stills&quot; in May 1976, which reached number 31 on the US charts, but was not critically well received, nor produced any charting singles. Around this time Stills played percussion on the Bee Gees&#x27; song &quot;You Should Be Dancing&quot; and wrote an unreleased song with Barry Gibb. In retrospect Stills has commented on his mid-70s solo period saying he &quot;short-circuited for a while, things were moving too fast. I got a little crazed. Too much drinking, too many drugs. What can I say.&quot; &quot;Cashbox&quot; magazine ranked Stills as the number 29 top male vocalist of 1975.

In 1976 after the release of &quot;Illegal Stills&quot;, Stills attempted a reunion with Neil Young. At one point, &quot;Long May You Run&quot; was slated to be a CSNY record, but when Crosby and Nash left to fulfill recording and touring obligations, they returned to find the other pair had wiped their vocals from the recordings, as Stills and Young decided to go on without them as the Stills–Young Band. However, Young would leave midway through the resulting tour due to an apparent throat infection. Stills was contractually bound to finish the tour, which he did for three dates before it was cancelled with Chris Hillman helping him, but upon returning home, his wife announced she wanted a divorce and wished to move back to France, although they temporarily reunited.

Stills went out on tour in November 1976 as a three-piece: Stills on guitar, vocals, and piano; George Perry on bass; and Joe Vitale on drums. He reunited with Crosby and Nash shortly afterwards, thanks to the efforts of Nash&#x27;s future wife Susan, who got Nash to forgive Stills for wiping the Crosby and Nash vocals from &quot;Long May You Run&quot;. Not before Atlantic Records released a compilation album from Stills first two solo albums, and the two Manassas albums in December 1976 called &quot;Still Stills: The Best Of Stephen Stills&quot;. &quot;Cashbox&quot; magazine ranked Stills at number 27 for the top male vocalist of 1976, and Stills and Young as the number 6 duo, number 3 new duo, and number 20 best new artist of 1976. Stills, as Gold Hill Publishing, was having hits publishing for the band Firefall and Joey Stec during this time, so much so that Billboard ranked him as the number 97 publisher of 1976.

=== CSN reunion and solo years (1977–1979) ===

Stills&#x27;s performances with Crosby and Nash in late 1976 and early 1977 led to the permanent reunion of Crosby, Stills, and Nash. They released the &quot;CSN&quot; album in 1977 and unsuccessfully attempted another album in 1978. The band toured major arenas including Madison Square Garden and the LA Forum in 1977 and 1978, and during the 1977 tour they visited President Jimmy Carter in the White House. Stills released his final album on Columbia Records entitled &quot;Thoroughfare Gap&quot; in October 1978. It was comparatively unsuccessful and reached number 84 on the US charts. In 1977 and 1978, Stills played only one solo engagement, at the Bread and Roses Festival in 1978.

After a four-day residency at the Roxy in January 1979 with original CSN bandmate Dallas Taylor on drums, Stills spent most of 1979 on tour in the US playing with his California Blues Band. One of these dates in early 1979 included a trip to Cuba to participate in the Havana Jam festival that took place between March 2 and 4, alongside Weather Report, the Trio of Doom, Fania All-Stars, Billy Swan, Bonnie Bramlett, Mike Finnigan, Kris Kristofferson, Rita Coolidge and Billy Joel, as well as an array of Cuban artists such as Irakere, with whom he toured the US after the Havana concerts. His performance is captured on Ernesto Juan Castellanos&#x27;s documentary &quot;Havana Jam &#x27;79&quot;.

In 1979, Stills recorded one of the first entirely digital albums; however, it remains unreleased, as the record company did not feel it was commercial enough. The songs recorded for this album include &quot;Spanish Suite&quot; and &quot;Cuba al Fin&quot; and the 1982 CSN hit &quot;Southern Cross&quot;. The album was produced by Barry Beckett and was slated for release in 1979 or 1980.

CSN played only two dates in 1979, both at Madison Square Garden for Musicians United for Safe Energy. Their performance was released on &quot;The Muse Concerts for a Non-Nuclear Future.&quot;

In 1979, Stills&#x27;s wife filed for divorce, which was finalized on July 12, 1980.

=== 1980s ===

After playing some European dates in 1980, and with Graham Nash joining him for the German dates supporting Angelo Branduardi, Stills and Nash decided to record a duo album together. The record company refused to release this album without David Crosby, so they added him and CSN&#x27;s &quot;Daylight Again&quot; was released in 1982, reaching number 8 in the US and was certified Platinum. The album featured the Stills-written top twenty hit &quot;Southern Cross&quot;. In 1983, the CSN live album &quot;Allies&quot;, was released featuring Stills&#x27;s number 45 hit song &quot;War Games&quot;. CSN toured yearly from 1982 to 1989, except during 1986, due to David Crosby&#x27;s prison sentence.

In 1984, Stills released his first solo album in six years, &quot;Right by You&quot; on Atlantic Records&quot;.&quot; This would be the final Stills album to make the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 album chart and featured Jimmy Page on guitar. It was his last solo release on a major label.

In 1985 CSN and CSNY played Live Aid.

In 1988, CSNY reunited for the album &quot;American Dream,&quot; which reached number 12 on the US charts and was certified platinum in the US. However no tour was taken in support of the album.

=== 1990s ===
In 1990, CSN released the album &quot;Live It Up&quot;, their first not to be certified in the US since their debut.

Stills toured with CSN, in 1990, 1994, 1996, 1997 and 1999.

Having spent most of 1990 playing acoustic with CSN and solo he released the solo album &quot;Stills Alone&quot; in 1991, with the aim of releasing a solo electric album in 1992. However this solo electric album was never released.

In 1994, CSN released the album &quot;After the Storm&quot;.

From 1993 to 1995, Stills part owned a restaurant in New Orleans, called Toucan Du. He married his third wife, Kristen Hathaway, on May 27, 1996.

In 1997, Stills became the first person to be inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame twice on the same night for his work with CSN and Buffalo Springfield. Fender Guitars Custom Shop crafted a guitar and presented it to Stills to commemorate the occasion, a Telecaster 1953 reissue guitar serial R2674 bearing an inscription on the neck plate; &quot;Stephen Stills R &amp; R Hall of Fame May 6, 1997 &quot;

In 1999, CSNY reunited to release the album &quot;Looking Forward&quot;; it reached number 26 on the US charts. Stills co-wrote (with Joe Vitale) &quot;Faith in Me,&quot; which was recorded in Ga Ga&#x27;s Room in Los Angeles, and which he also sang. He also wrote and sang &quot;Seen Enough,&quot; recorded at Conway Recording Studios in Hollywood, and &quot;No Tears Left,&quot; which was recorded with many other album tracks at Neil Young&#x27;s facility, Redwood Digital, in Woodside, California. &quot;Looking Forward&quot; was the eighth and final studio album by Crosby, Stills &amp; Nash, and their third and final with Neil Young.

=== 2000s ===
This CSNY reunion resulted in CSNY reunion tours 2000 CSNY2K, 2002 and 2006 reunion tours, their first since 1974. The CSNY2K tour of the United States and Canada with the reformed super quartet earned US$42.1 million, making it the eighth largest grossing tour of 2000. The 2006 CSNY tour was the Freedom Of Speech tour, which was released on the album &quot;Deja Vu Live&quot;.. Stills also toured with CSN in 2003, 2005, 2007, 2008 and 2009. The 2005 tour supported their Gold certified album &quot;Greatest Hits&quot;, their 2009 tour supported the CSN demos album &quot;Demos&quot;.

2005 saw Stills release &quot;Man Alive!&quot;, his first solo offering in 14 years. &quot;Man Alive!&quot; was released on the small English independent folk rock label Talking Elephant, and was not widely reviewed. The record did not chart on either side of the Atlantic, and was received lukewarmly by the few critics who did review it. It featured songs dating from the 1970s to the present, including &quot;Spanish Suite&quot;, originally recorded in the late 70s with Herbie Hancock.

Throughout 2006 and 2007, Stills toured regularly as a solo artist with &quot;the Quartet&quot;, which consisted of drummer Joe Vitale, either Mike Finnigan or session player Todd Caldwell on keyboards, and either Kevin McCormick or Kenny Passarelli on bass. On May 28, 2007, Stills sang the national anthem for Game 1 of the 2007 Stanley Cup Finals between the Anaheim Ducks and Ottawa Senators in Anaheim, California. On December 17, 2007, Graham Nash revealed on &quot;Larry King Live&quot; that Stills had been diagnosed with early stage prostate cancer and that his operation would take place on January 3, 2008, which is Stills&#x27;s birthday. Stills said later in January 2008 that he had come through the operation with &quot;flying colors.&quot;

In 2007 he released &quot;Just Roll Tape&quot;, a recently found tape of Stills singing demos of his unreleased songs in 1968 after the breakup of the Buffalo Springfield, during the last hour of a Judy Collins session.

Stills toured Europe as a solo artist for the first time during October 2008, resulted in the release of the 2009 live album and video &quot;Live At Shepherds Bush&quot;, recorded in London, England.

Also in 2009, he released his second archival release &quot;Pieces&quot; by Manassas, a selection of alternate takes and unreleased songs of Stills band recorded between 1971 and 1973. This was supposed to be the start in a series of archival releases, however none have appeared since.

=== Later years ===
Stills toured with CSN in 2010, 2012, 2014, 2015. The 2012 tour resulted in the release &quot;CSN 2012&quot;.

In 2011, Stills contributed a song, &quot;Low Barefoot Tolerance,&quot; to the soundtrack of a documentary produced by J. Ralph, &quot;Wretches &amp; Jabberers&quot;.

Also in 2010, Stills reunited with Neil Young and Richie Furay to reform Buffalo Springfield with Young for the Bridge School Benefit 2010. 
The band also played bonnaroo in 2011. This was supposed to be followed by a full tour in 2012 but this never materialized.

On August 27, 2013, Stills released the album, &quot;Can&#x27;t Get Enough&quot; with Kenny Wayne Shepherd and Barry Goldberg as the blues band the Rides. The band toured to support this release in 2013. They released a follow-up album called &quot;Pierced Arrow&quot; in 2016, this was followed by another tour to support this release in 2016 and 2017.

On August 12, 2014, Watsky released the album &quot;All You Can Do&quot;, featuring a song with Stills, &quot;Cannonball&quot;.

In 2016, CSN split up after over 30 years together, and in December 2016 Stills independently released a song called &quot;Look Each Other in the Eye&quot; on SoundCloud.

On September 22, 2017, Stills and Judy Collins released an album &quot;Everybody Knows&quot;, which entered the Billboard 200 chart at number 195 and peaked at 45. It was their first joint album and was followed by a 2017-2018 tour supporting the album.

In April 2021, Stills gave an interview indicating that he was retired. Since the pandemic, Stills returned to guest with Brandi Carlile at a tribute concert honoring Joni Mitchell, his first public performance since a benefit in December 2018. In February 2023, Stills announced his co-headlining appearance with Neil Young at a Light Up the Blues event, due to take place in April.

On January 30, 2025, Stills appeared at the FireAid benefit concert in Los Angeles where he and guitarist Mike Campbell joined Dawes on stage for a performance of &quot;For What It&#x27;s Worth&quot;. Stills and Dawes were then joined by Graham Nash and they performed &quot;Teach Your Children&quot;. It marked the first time since 2016 that Stills and Nash have performed together.

==Personal life==

=== Relationship with Judy Collins ===
Stills was involved with musician Judy Collins, from 1968 to 1969. Their brief relationship inspired a lifetime of songs and material. During his Buffalo Springfield years, he wrote the songs &quot;Bluebird&quot;, and &quot;Questions&quot;—equally about Collins and meeting Clapton at Whisky a Go-Go. Stills was a guitarist and session musician for Collins, appearing on her 1968 album &quot;Who Knows Where the Time Goes&quot; and was credited as &quot;Steven Stills&quot;. It was during these sessions, that he also recorded his demo album, &quot;Just Roll Tape&quot; on April 28, 1968 (finally released in 2007). The songs &quot;Change Partners&quot;, &quot;So Begins the Task&quot;, &quot;Judy&quot;, &quot;Helplessly Hoping&quot; and &quot;Suite: Judy Blue Eyes&quot; were originally recorded as demos, with only a stripped-back acoustic guitar and his wavering voice.

In 1969, Stills released the song &quot;&quot;, written in an attempt to win back her love. Collins: &quot;My centre was in New York and his in LA. He hated New York and he hated therapy. And I was in both.&quot; In the early 1970s, heartbroken, Stills recorded &quot;So Begins the Task&quot;, and &quot;Bluebird Revisited&quot;—an updated version of his Buffalo Springfield song. Stills and Collins communicated in bird metaphors, the imagery often appearing in their songs about each other.

In 2017, Stills and Collins reunited and released an album together entitled &quot;Everybody Knows&quot;.

=== Other relationships ===
He dated actress and singer-songwriter Nancy Priddy, who was the inspiration for the Buffalo Springfield song &quot;Pretty Girl Why&quot;. Stills also had a short-term relationship with Rita Coolidge, as had Graham Nash, which apparently led to the initial breakup of CSNY, in 1970.

=== Marriages and family ===
During a Manassas tour in France, Stills met his first wife, French singer-songwriter Véronique Sanson. They were married on March 14, 1973. Their son Chris Stills was born in 1974. They divorced in 1979. In 1988, he married American model Pamela Ann Jordan, with whom he had a daughter, Eleanor. His third wife is Kristen Hathaway, whom he married on May 27, 1996.

Stills&#x27; son Justin Stills was born in 1972 to Harriet Tunis. Justin was critically injured while snowboarding on Mt. Charleston, just outside Las Vegas, in 1997. An episode of Discovery Health&#x27;s documentary series &quot;&quot; featured his treatment and recovery. Another son, Henry, has been diagnosed with Asperger syndrome and is profiled in the 2007 documentary &quot;&quot;. Stills&#x27; daughter Eleanor is a photographer and graduate of Art Center College of Design in Pasadena. Since Eleanor&#x27;s graduation, she has been responsible for all recent Crosby, Stills &amp; Nash photography. Stills has another daughter, Alex, who attends Emerson College in Boston and currently plays in the rock band Stilljill. His son Chris and daughter Jennifer are both recording artists. His youngest son, Oliver Ragland, was born in 2004 and named in honor of Neil Young, whose maternal family name is Ragland.

=== Politics ===
Stills has long been involved in liberal causes and politics. In 2000, he served as a member of the Democratic Party credentials committee from Florida during the Democratic National Convention, and was a delegate in previous years. Stills performed with Billy Porter during the 2020 Democratic National Convention.

In December 2018, Stills received an Honorary Doctorate in Music from the University of Florida, Gainesville, where he was a speaker at the commencement ceremony.

== Health ==
In 1976, Stills told &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, &quot;My hearing has gotten to be a terrible problem. If I keep playing and touring the way I have been, I&#x27;ll go deaf.&quot;

==Style, musicianship, and sound==

Stills is a guitarist whose music draws from myriad genres that include rock and roll, blues, gospel, country and folk music. In addition, Latin music has played a key role in both his approach to percussion and guitar and he is also a multi-instrumentalist, capable of playing keyboards, bass, percussion, congas, clavinet, electric piano, piano, organ, banjo and drums.

Stills experimented with the guitar itself, including soaking strings in barbecue sauce or flipping pickups to mimic Hendrix playing a right-handed guitar left-handed. He is also known for using alternate guitar tunings, particularly when performing acoustically. Often a long acoustic solo section of the show would showcase agile fingerstyle playing in standard and altered tunings. His primary alternate tuning is usually D A D F♯ A D, or &quot;Palmer modal tuning which is &#x27;E E E E B E&#x27; &quot;, which can be heard in &quot;Suite: Judy Blue Eyes,&quot; &quot;Carry On,&quot; and &quot;4 + 20.&quot;

For the CSN debut album in 1969, Graham Nash commented that &quot;Stephen had a vision, and David and I let him run with it.&quot; Stills played every instrumental part on &quot;Crosby, Stills and Nash&quot; with the exception of some guitar by Crosby and Nash, and drums by Dallas Taylor.

==Discography==
::&quot;See also discographies for The Au Go Go Singers, Buffalo Springfield, Crosby Stills Nash &amp; Young.&quot;

=== Albums ===
===Singles===
=== Other appearances ===
=== Guest appearances ===
=== Filmography and TV appearances ===
== Tours ==

* Memphis Horns Tour 1971
* Manassas World Tour 1972
* Manassas North American Tour 1973
* 1974 Theater Tour
* 1975 Tour
* The Stills–Young Band Tour
* 1976 Tour
* 1979 California Blues Band Tour

==References==
==External links==

* Official Site
* CSN Official Site
* CSNY Official Site
* Five audio interview clips with Stephen Stills
* The Rides</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q354496" start="0" end="21" title="Stephen Stills" label="Stephen Arthur Stills"/>
<link wikidata="Q48992" start="122" end="141" title="Buffalo Springfield" label="Buffalo Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q10461933" start="143" end="202" title="Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp;amp; Young" label="Crosby, Stills &amp;amp; Nash; Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp;amp; Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537930" start="208" end="216" title="Manassas (band)" label="Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="368" end="381" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="566" end="592" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="607" end="617" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551974" start="731" end="755" title="For What It&amp;#x27;s Worth" label="For What It&amp;#x27;s Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17034992" start="883" end="911" title="Sit Down, I Think I Love You" label="Sit Down, I Think I Love You"/>
<link wikidata="Q48765446" start="925" end="933" title="Bluebird (Buffalo Springfield song)" label="Bluebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999" start="1002" end="1014" title="Richie Furay" label="Richie Furay"/>
<link wikidata="Q370560" start="1146" end="1158" title="David Crosby" label="David Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q357211" start="1163" end="1174" title="Graham Nash" label="Graham Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q869918" start="1332" end="1343" title="Crosby, Stills &amp;amp; Nash (album)" label="debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q211526" start="1466" end="1475" title="the Byrds" label="the Byrds"/>
<link wikidata="Q282925" start="1502" end="1513" title="the Hollies" label="the Hollies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453643" start="1540" end="1572" title="Grammy Award for Best New Artist" label="Grammy Award for Best New Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q914020" start="1612" end="1626" title="Stephen Stills (album)" label="Stephen Stills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="1693" end="1705" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="1710" end="1722" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692000" start="1745" end="1774" title="Love the One You&amp;#x27;re With" label="Love the One You&amp;#x27;re With"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="1838" end="1867" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q770668" start="1952" end="1965" title="Chris Hillman" label="Chris Hillman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537930" start="1973" end="1981" title="Manassas (band)" label="Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17320620" start="2123" end="2132" title="CSNY 1974" label="CSNY 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932009" start="2267" end="2270" title="CSN (album)" label="CSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="2430" end="2443" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q487999" start="2698" end="2709" title="Gainesville, Florida" label="Gainesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="2714" end="2728" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014171" start="2741" end="2761" title="Covington, Louisiana" label="Covington, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="2763" end="2773" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q498979" start="2779" end="2796" title="Panama Canal Zone" label="Panama Canal Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="2802" end="2813" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683679" start="2873" end="2897" title="Admiral Farragut Academy" label="Admiral Farragut Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49236" start="2901" end="2924" title="St. Petersburg, Florida" label="St. Petersburg, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q892503" start="2929" end="2965" title="Saint Leo University" label="Saint Leo College Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q892570" start="2969" end="2987" title="Saint Leo, Florida" label="Saint Leo, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521725" start="3238" end="3264" title="Louisiana State University" label="Louisiana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q189635" start="3372" end="3378" title="The Eagles" label="Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q704399" start="3389" end="3399" title="Don Felder" label="Don Felder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550513" start="3438" end="3460" title="Gerde&amp;#x27;s Folk City" label="Gerde&amp;#x27;s Folk City"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="3490" end="3507" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025504" start="3598" end="3611" title="Cafe au Go Go" label="Cafe au Go Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635037" start="3641" end="3657" title="Au Go Go Singers" label="Au Go Go Singers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48992" start="3685" end="3704" title="Buffalo Springfield" label="Buffalo Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999" start="3714" end="3726" title="Richie Furay" label="Richie Furay"/>
<link wikidata="Q630566" start="3766" end="3775" title="Catskills" label="Catskills"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="4040" end="4050" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="4059" end="4062" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="4267" end="4279" title="Session musician" label="session work"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="4366" end="4379" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="4401" end="4411" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q666011" start="4814" end="4825" title="psychedelia" label="psychedelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709490" start="5022" end="5041" title="Buffalo Springfield (album)" label="Buffalo Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551974" start="5104" end="5128" title="For What It&amp;#x27;s Worth" label="For What It&amp;#x27;s Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281146" start="5435" end="5447" title="Bruce Palmer" label="Bruce Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q851530" start="5580" end="5605" title="Buffalo Springfield Again" label="Buffalo Springfield Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q980121" start="5858" end="5874" title="Last Time Around" label="Last Time Around"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751911" start="6053" end="6065" title="The Mojo Men" label="The Mojo Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q509755" start="6160" end="6173" title="Super Session" label="Super Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q455605" start="6191" end="6200" title="Al Kooper" label="Al Kooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q317427" start="6231" end="6238" title="Donovan" label="Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441904" start="6252" end="6271" title="Season of the Witch (song)" label="Season of the Witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q919156" start="6342" end="6357" title="Mike Bloomfield" label="Mike Bloomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q205721" start="6685" end="6698" title="Joni Mitchell" label="Joni Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256372" start="6781" end="6798" title="Song to a Seagull" label="Song to a Seagull"/>
<link wikidata="Q781732" start="6995" end="7001" title="Clouds (Joni Mitchell album)" label="Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707551" start="7015" end="7035" title="Ladies of the Canyon (album)" label="Ladies of the Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q804554" start="7049" end="7053" title="Blue (Joni Mitchell album)" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256361" start="7071" end="7084" title="For the Roses" label="For the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437317" start="7144" end="7149" title="Carey (song)" label="Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q341663" start="7558" end="7566" title="dulcimer" label="dulcimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27016984" start="7619" end="7626" title="Big Sur Folk Festival" label="Big Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327329" start="7932" end="7953" title="multi-instrumentalist" label="multi-instrumentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993570" start="8084" end="8093" title="Woodstock (song)" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q211526" start="8305" end="8310" title="Byrds" label="Byrds"/>
<link wikidata="Q282925" start="8337" end="8348" title="The Hollies" label="The Hollies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10461933" start="8358" end="8383" title="Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp;amp; Young" label="Crosby, Stills &amp;amp; Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q869918" start="8436" end="8447" title="Crosby, Stills &amp;amp; Nash (album)" label="debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q254576" start="8581" end="8593" title="Judy Collins" label="Judy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012464" start="8797" end="8810" title="Dallas Taylor (drummer)" label="Dallas Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334162" start="8845" end="8855" title="Jim Gordon (musician)" label="Jim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q255471" start="9519" end="9526" title="Déjà Vu (Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp;amp; Young album)" label="Déjà Vu"/>
<link wikidata="Q80807703" start="9704" end="9712" title="Carry On (Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp;amp; Young song)" label="Carry On"/>
<link wikidata="Q96417517" start="9729" end="9735" title="4 + 20" label="4 + 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137506" start="10068" end="10072" title="Ohio (CSNY song)" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q482635" start="10093" end="10112" title="Kent State massacre" label="Kent State massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q238283" start="10554" end="10566" title="4 Way Street" label="4 Way Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q203159" start="10731" end="10752" title="Monterey Pop Festival" label="Monterey Pop Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q164815" start="10787" end="10796" title="Woodstock Festival" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q434319" start="10801" end="10809" title="Altamont Free Concert" label="Altamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q434319" start="10956" end="10977" title="Altamont Free Concert" label="Altamont Free Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q8879050" start="11207" end="11220" title="Gimme Shelter (1970 film)" label="Gimme Shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q914020" start="11387" end="11396" title="Stephen Stills (album)" label="eponymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="11431" end="11443" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="11445" end="11457" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q49734" start="11459" end="11470" title="Cass Elliot" label="Cass Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q703767" start="11472" end="11486" title="Booker T Jones" label="Booker T Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="11491" end="11502" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q268604" start="11566" end="11579" title="Rita Coolidge" label="Rita Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180994" start="11621" end="11635" title="Johnny Barbata" label="Johnny Barbata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692000" start="11692" end="11721" title="Love the One You&amp;#x27;re With" label="Love the One You&amp;#x27;re With"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988784" start="12140" end="12147" title="Disco 2 (TV series)" label="Disco 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132736" start="12218" end="12229" title="Henry Diltz" label="Henry Diltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023446" start="12935" end="12951" title="Stephen Stills 2" label="Stephen Stills 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="12989" end="12994" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288932" start="13552" end="13569" title="the Memphis Horns" label="the Memphis Horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="13592" end="13613" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085822" start="13615" end="13640" title="Spectrum (arena)" label="The Philadelphia Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q639129" start="13642" end="13650" title="The Forum (Inglewood, California)" label="LA Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q894567" start="13659" end="13672" title="Boston Garden" label="Boston Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="13789" end="13804" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164558" start="13812" end="13834" title="The Concert for Bangladesh" label="Concert For Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248663" start="14319" end="14344" title="The Old Grey Whistle Test" label="The Old Grey Whistle Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q16245276" start="14433" end="14441" title="Carry On (Stephen Stills album)" label="Carry On"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="14465" end="14474" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="14797" end="14804" title="Cashbox (magazine)" label="Cashbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q770668" start="14975" end="14988" title="Chris Hillman" label="Chris Hillman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537930" start="15006" end="15014" title="Manassas (band)" label="Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q254852" start="15022" end="15046" title="Manassas (album)" label="self-titled double album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048921" start="15506" end="15521" title="Nassau Coliseum" label="Nassau Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q469734" start="15793" end="15809" title="Véronique Sanson" label="Véronique Sanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="16246" end="16262" title="platinum album" label="gold or platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038312" start="16313" end="16326" title="Down the Road (Manassas album)" label="Down the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6009204" start="17211" end="17225" title="In Concert (American TV series)" label="ABC In Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="17714" end="17727" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866277" start="17755" end="17774" title="Stephen Stills Live" label="Stephen Stills Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282515" start="18172" end="18178" title="So Far (Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp;amp; Young album)" label="So Far"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="18330" end="18346" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="18815" end="18831" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617271" start="18856" end="18862" title="Stills (Stephen Stills album)" label="Stills"/>
<link wikidata="Q10534460" start="18884" end="18898" title="Illegal Stills" label="Illegal Stills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129892" start="18924" end="18940" title="Thoroughfare Gap" label="Thoroughfare Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617271" start="18962" end="18968" title="Stills (Stephen Stills album)" label="Stills"/>
<link wikidata="Q639129" start="19256" end="19264" title="The Forum (Inglewood, California)" label="LA Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182648" start="19270" end="19292" title="Red Rocks Amphitheatre" label="Red Rocks Amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10534460" start="19447" end="19461" title="Illegal Stills" label="Illegal Stills"/>
<link wikidata="Q133405" start="19645" end="19653" title="Bee Gees" label="Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563606" start="19671" end="19692" title="You Should Be Dancing" label="You Should Be Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q733048" start="20170" end="20186" title="Long May You Run" label="Long May You Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q733048" start="20435" end="20456" title="the Stills–Young Band" label="the Stills–Young Band"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21335" end="21375" title="Still Stills: The Best of Stephen Stills" label="Still Stills: The Best Of Stephen Stills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072838" start="21646" end="21654" title="Firefall" label="Firefall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6214574" start="21659" end="21668" title="Joey Stec" label="Joey Stec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932009" start="21967" end="21970" title="CSN (album)" label="CSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129892" start="22287" end="22303" title="Thoroughfare Gap" label="Thoroughfare Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="22743" end="22747" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683080" start="22770" end="22780" title="Havana Jam" label="Havana Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120697" start="22839" end="22853" title="Weather Report" label="Weather Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149442" start="22859" end="22871" title="Trio of Doom" label="Trio of Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q769803" start="22873" end="22888" title="Fania All-Stars" label="Fania All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q325562" start="22890" end="22900" title="Billy Swan" label="Billy Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296646" start="22902" end="22917" title="Bonnie Bramlett" label="Bonnie Bramlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846815" start="22919" end="22932" title="Mike Finnigan" label="Mike Finnigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208681" start="22934" end="22952" title="Kris Kristofferson" label="Kris Kristofferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q268604" start="22954" end="22967" title="Rita Coolidge" label="Rita Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q194333" start="22972" end="22982" title="Billy Joel" label="Billy Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672362" start="23029" end="23036" title="Irakere" label="Irakere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732447" start="23532" end="23545" title="Barry Beckett" label="Barry Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23734" end="23776" title="No Nukes: The Muse Concerts for a Non-Nuclear Future" label="The Muse Concerts for a Non-Nuclear Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q25153" start="23994" end="24011" title="Angelo Branduardi" label="Angelo Branduardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q821225" start="24179" end="24193" title="Daylight Again" label="Daylight Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732625" start="24393" end="24399" title="Allies (Crosby, Stills &amp;amp; Nash album)" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333603" start="24654" end="24666" title="Right by You" label="Right by You"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="24755" end="24780" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q193740" start="24904" end="24912" title="Live Aid" label="Live Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q45238" start="24958" end="24972" title="American Dream (Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp;amp; Young album)" label="American Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349713" start="25398" end="25410" title="Stills Alone" label="Stills Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q21933973" start="25710" end="25726" title="Kristen Stills" label="Kristen Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="25810" end="25836" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q175391" start="25908" end="25922" title="Fender Musical Instruments" label="Fender Guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q623103" start="26010" end="26020" title="Telecaster" label="Telecaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166721" start="26471" end="26495" title="Conway Recording Studios" label="Conway Recording Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320226" start="27176" end="27188" title="Déjà Vu Live" label="Deja Vu Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601100" start="27312" end="27337" title="Greatest Hits (Crosby, Stills &amp;amp; Nash album)" label="&amp;quot;Greatest Hits&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256350" start="27391" end="27396" title="Demos (Crosby, Stills &amp;amp; Nash album)" label="Demos"/>
<link wikidata="Q286589" start="27435" end="27445" title="Man Alive! (Stephen Stills album)" label="Man Alive!"/>
<link wikidata="Q286589" start="27496" end="27506" title="Man Alive! (Stephen Stills album)" label="Man Alive!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="27547" end="27558" title="independent record label" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q186472" start="27559" end="27568" title="folk rock" label="folk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q105875" start="27879" end="27893" title="Herbie Hancock" label="Herbie Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6212816" start="28020" end="28030" title="Joe Vitale (musician)" label="Joe Vitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846815" start="28039" end="28052" title="Mike Finnigan" label="Mike Finnigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="28056" end="28070" title="session musician" label="session player"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968224" start="28222" end="28245" title="2007 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2007 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q192751" start="28258" end="28271" title="Anaheim Ducks" label="Anaheim Ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="28276" end="28291" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q49247" start="28295" end="28302" title="Anaheim" label="Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423559" start="28368" end="28383" title="Larry King Live" label="Larry King Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="28438" end="28453" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316327" start="28679" end="28693" title="Just Roll Tape" label="Just Roll Tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382605" start="29135" end="29141" title="Pieces (Manassas album)" label="Pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537930" start="29151" end="29159" title="Manassas (band)" label="Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014201" start="29477" end="29485" title="CSN 2012" label="CSN 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038113" start="29629" end="29653" title="Wretches &amp;amp; Jabberers" label="Wretches &amp;amp; Jabberers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090897" start="29774" end="29795" title="Bridge School Benefit" label="Bridge School Benefit"/>
<link wikidata="Q708721" start="30014" end="30034" title="Kenny Wayne Shepherd" label="Kenny Wayne Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q809037" start="30039" end="30053" title="Barry Goldberg" label="Barry Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q18393721" start="30072" end="30081" title="the Rides" label="the Rides"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546073" start="30303" end="30309" title="Watsky" label="Watsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q48789434" start="30655" end="30670" title="Everybody Knows (Stills &amp;amp; Collins album)" label="Everybody Knows"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="30696" end="30705" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q164060" start="30961" end="30975" title="Brandi Carlile" label="Brandi Carlile"/>
<link wikidata="Q132001362" start="31268" end="31275" title="FireAid" label="FireAid"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="31295" end="31306" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335425" start="31330" end="31343" title="Mike Campbell (musician)" label="Mike Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q373954" start="31351" end="31356" title="Dawes (band)" label="Dawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q357211" start="31462" end="31473" title="Graham Nash" label="Graham Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691171" start="31499" end="31518" title="Teach Your Children" label="Teach Your Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q254576" start="31701" end="31713" title="Judy Collins" label="Judy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277567" start="31952" end="31966" title="Whisky a Go Go" label="Whisky a Go-Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997325" start="32053" end="32094" title="Who Knows Where the Time Goes (Judy Collins album)" label="&amp;quot;Who Knows Where the Time Goes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="32198" end="32202" title="Demo (music)" label="demo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316327" start="32216" end="32230" title="Just Roll Tape" label="Just Roll Tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378126" start="33210" end="33222" title="Nancy Priddy" label="Nancy Priddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q268604" start="33357" end="33370" title="Rita Coolidge" label="Rita Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q10461933" start="33439" end="33443" title="Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young" label="CSNY"/>
<link wikidata="Q469734" start="33570" end="33586" title="Véronique Sanson" label="Véronique Sanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966650" start="33635" end="33647" title="Chris Stills" label="Chris Stills"/>
<link wikidata="Q21933973" start="33799" end="33815" title="Kristen Stills" label="Kristen Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q978970" start="33969" end="33983" title="Mt. Charleston" label="Mt. Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="33998" end="34007" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q161790" start="34169" end="34186" title="Asperger syndrome" label="Asperger syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272069" start="34305" end="34333" title="Art Center College of Design" label="Art Center College of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="34337" end="34345" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335573" start="34506" end="34521" title="Emerson College" label="Emerson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="34525" end="34531" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177326" start="34607" end="34615" title="Jen Stills" label="Jennifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="34819" end="34826" title="Modern liberalism in the United States" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597313" start="34949" end="34979" title="2000 Democratic National Convention" label="Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913177" start="35041" end="35053" title="Billy Porter (entertainer)" label="Billy Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="35177" end="35211" title="University of Florida, Gainesville" label="University of Florida, Gainesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="35567" end="35580" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="35582" end="35587" title="blues music" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="35589" end="35595" title="gospel music" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="35597" end="35604" title="country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745458" start="35609" end="35619" title="American folk revival" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345375" start="35634" end="35645" title="Latin music (genre)" label="Latin music"/>
<link wikidata="Q807791" start="35941" end="35955" title="barbecue sauce" label="barbecue sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818058" start="36073" end="36087" title="guitar tunings" label="guitar tunings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140333" start="36200" end="36211" title="fingerstyle" label="fingerstyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281146" start="36316" end="36322" title="Bruce Palmer" label="Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80807703" start="36440" end="36448" title="Carry On (CSN&amp;amp;Y Song)" label="Carry On"/>
<link wikidata="Q96417517" start="36466" end="36472" title="4 + 20 (Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp;amp; Young song)" label="4 + 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q869918" start="36659" end="36682" title="Crosby, Stills &amp;amp; Nash (album)" label="Crosby, Stills and Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012464" start="36756" end="36769" title="Dallas Taylor (drummer)" label="Dallas Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635037" start="36823" end="36843" title="The Au Go Go Singers" label="The Au Go Go Singers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36845" end="36864" title="Buffalo Springfield#Discography" label="Buffalo Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188020" start="36866" end="36896" title="Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp;amp; Young discography" label="Crosby Stills Nash &amp;amp; Young"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37040" end="37063" title="Stephen Stills 2#Memphis Horns Tour" label="Memphis Horns Tour 1971"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37066" end="37090" title="Manassas (album)#Tour" label="Manassas World Tour 1972"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37093" end="37126" title="Down the Road (Manassas album)#Tour" label="Manassas North American Tour 1973"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37129" end="37146" title="Stephen Stills Live#Tour" label="1974 Theater Tour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37149" end="37158" title="Stills (Stephen Stills album)#Tour" label="1975 Tour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37161" end="37187" title="Long May You Run#Tour" label="The Stills–Young Band Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q354496" start="37190" end="37199" title="Stephen Stills 1976 Tour" label="1976 Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q354496" start="37202" end="37233" title="Stephen Stills California Blues Band Tour 1979" label="1979 California Blues Band Tour"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173647" wikidata="Q901455" url="?curid=173647" title="127 film">
<text>127 is a roll film format for still photography introduced by Kodak in 1912.

The film itself is 46 mm wide, placing it between 35 mm and 120 &quot;medium format&quot; films in terms of size. The image format normally used is a square 4 cm × 4 cm. However, rectangular 4 cm × 3 cm and 4 cm × 6 cm are also standard.

127 enjoyed mainstream popularity until its usage began to decline from the 1960s onwards in the face of newer, cartridge-based films. However, it survives as a niche format and is still in production.

==Technical details==
127 is a roll film, 46 mm wide. Frame number markings for the 4×4 and 4×6 image formats are printed on the backing paper, while 4×3 cameras typically have two frame counter windows, exposing the left and right halves of the 4×6 frame.

Using the square format, there are 12 exposures per roll; 4×3 and 4×6 give 16 and 8, respectively.

Less commonly, other frame sizes have been used. For its &quot;Alfax&quot; model (circa 1940), Kimura Kōgaku had 4 cm × 4.5 cm frames, spaced by markings on the wind knob. In addition, the manufacturer C. F. Foth &amp; Co. used an image format of 3.6 cm × 2.4 cm (the same size as is standard for 135) for initial versions of their 127-based &quot;Derby&quot; camera.

==History==
The format was introduced by Kodak in 1912, along with the Vest Pocket Kodak folding camera, as a compact alternative to larger portable cameras using 120 film. The folding &quot;127s&quot; were in fact smaller than most 35 mm cameras today. The 127 format made a comeback during the 1950s as the format of choice for small inexpensive cameras such as the Brownie and Satellite, and continued in wide use until surpassed by the 126 film and 110 film &quot;Instamatic&quot; cartridges (introduced in 1963 and 1972 respectively), and especially by 35 mm. 127 cameras from that era were often characterized by simple box-like construction. Slides shot on 127 slide film were often preferred over 35 mm for example for sets of slides sold at tourist gift shops, because of the larger photo area (hence the advertised name &quot;Superslides&quot;) and completely square dimensions of a 127 slide. The format was part of the ISO 732 standard until it was dropped in the third (1991) edition of that standard.

==Variations==
Not all 127 films were labelled as such. After 1913, many Kodak cameras included the Autographic feature, and Kodak&#x27;s 127 films which had Autographic backing were identified as &quot;A127&quot;. Other film manufacturers did not produce Autographic films, for which Kodak held a patent. Other camera manufacturers did make Vest Pocket-format cameras, however, and 127 film at the time was often labeled “Vest Pocket Film”.

==Uses==
The format was mainly used for amateur cameras like the Brownie or the Zeiss Ikon Kolibri, with the Exakta SLR, the “Baby” Rolleiflex, the Yashica 44 TLR, the Komaflex-S SLR and the Primo jr as possible exceptions.

127 color transparencies can be mounted in standard 2” square slide mounts, and projected in an ordinary 35 mm projector. Because of their much greater area, the projected image is larger and more brilliant than a 35 mm slide, and they are popularly called &quot;Superslides&quot;, a name once reserved for 40 × 40 mm slides cut down from 120 film.

==Production==
Kodak stopped producing 127 film in July 1995, with all but one manufacturer following suit shortly thereafter. Fotokemika of Samobor, Croatia, continued to make 127 film, which it sold under its own &quot;Efke&quot; brand, as well as custom-packaged for other sellers, until 2012. Macophoto UP100 and Jessops 200 were made and packaged by Fotokemika. &quot;Chromazone&quot; 127 film is also sold intermittently on eBay. In September 2006, Bluefire Laboratories of Calgary, Alberta, Canada, began packaging 127 color print film, cutting Kodak or Agfa film to size from bulk rolls, and assembling the rolls of film from their own components.

In July 2009, Rollei (Maco Photo Products, Hans O. Mahn GmbH &amp; Co. KG) introduced Rollei Retro 80S film, available in 127 format.

In August 2014, Maco announced that they will be selling black-and-white 127 film under the &quot;Rera Pan&quot; brand. This film is manufactured in Japan by EZOX Corporation, who are better known for manufacturing agricultural equipment and bicycles.

==See also==
* Film format
* List of color film systems
* List of photographic film formats

==References==
==External links==
*127 format cameras in the 21st century
*Requiem for a great format
*Film slitter - a device to trim 120 film to 127 format
*A kit that cuts 120 film and rolls it to 127 spool</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q901455" start="0" end="3" title="127 film" label="127"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599148" start="9" end="18" title="roll film" label="roll film"/>
<link wikidata="Q759853" start="19" end="25" title="film format" label="format"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="36" end="47" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="62" end="67" title="Kodak" label="Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051557" start="128" end="133" title="135 film" label="35 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077349" start="138" end="167" title="120 film" label="120 &amp;quot;medium format&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599148" start="551" end="560" title="roll film" label="roll film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051557" start="1175" end="1178" title="135 film" label="135"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="1288" end="1293" title="Kodak" label="Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352130" start="1318" end="1335" title="Vest Pocket Kodak" label="Vest Pocket Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q313685" start="1336" end="1350" title="folding camera" label="folding camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077349" start="1410" end="1418" title="120 film" label="120 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321314" start="1687" end="1695" title="126 film" label="126 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148317" start="1700" end="1708" title="110 film" label="110 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115238" start="2178" end="2185" title="ISO 732" label="ISO 732"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859290" start="2363" end="2374" title="Autographic" label="Autographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q455595" start="2746" end="2753" title="amateur" label="amateur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729831" start="2771" end="2778" title="Brownie (camera)" label="Brownie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068595" start="2786" end="2804" title="Zeiss Ikon Kolibri" label="Zeiss Ikon Kolibri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537638" start="2815" end="2821" title="Exakta" label="Exakta"/>
<link wikidata="Q196353" start="2822" end="2825" title="Single-lens reflex camera" label="SLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q699439" start="2838" end="2844" title="Rollei" label="Rollei"/>
<link wikidata="Q787183" start="2854" end="2861" title="Yashica" label="Yashica"/>
<link wikidata="Q209811" start="2865" end="2868" title="Twin-lens reflex camera" label="TLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q901455" start="3194" end="3204" title="Superslide (film)" label="Superslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="3431" end="3438" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q360806" start="3502" end="3506" title="Efke" label="Efke"/>
<link wikidata="Q699439" start="3952" end="3958" title="Rollei" label="Rollei"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724777" start="3960" end="3979" title="Maco Photo Products" label="Maco Photo Products"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724777" start="3981" end="4011" title="Hans O. Mahn GmbH &amp;amp; Co. KG" label="Hans O. Mahn GmbH &amp;amp; Co. KG"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724777" start="4089" end="4093" title="Maco (film company)" label="Maco"/>
<link wikidata="Q759853" start="4341" end="4352" title="Film format" label="Film format"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922334" start="4355" end="4381" title="List of color film systems" label="List of color film systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q115519494" start="4384" end="4417" title="List of photographic film formats" label="List of photographic film formats"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173648" wikidata="Q6979602" url="?curid=173648" title="National holiday">
<text>National holiday may refer to:
*General strike, a mass work stoppage as part of an industrial dispute
*National day, a day when a nation celebrates a very important event in its history, such as its establishment
*Public holiday, a holiday established by law, usually a day off for at least a portion of the workforce, such as public-sector employees

==See also==
* Fête nationale</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6979602" start="0" end="16" title="National holiday" label="National holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q49775" start="32" end="46" title="General strike" label="General strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q57598" start="103" end="115" title="National day" label="National day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197685" start="214" end="228" title="Public holiday" label="Public holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130269" start="367" end="381" title="Fête nationale" label="Fête nationale"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173649" wikidata="Q603782" url="?curid=173649" title="Sarah Knauss">
<text>Sarah DeRemer Knauss (; September 24, 1880 – December 30, 1999) was an American supercentenarian. She is the oldest person ever from the United States and, on April 16, 1998, became the world&#x27;s oldest living person. She is the third-oldest verified person ever, living to the age of 119 years and 97 days. Her birthdate has been independently verified through numerous census and other records.

==Early life==
Sarah DeRemer Clark was born on September 24, 1880, to Walter Clark and his wife Amelia, the daughter of German immigrants, in Hollywood, Pennsylvania, a small coal mining community in the Coal Region of Northeastern Pennsylvania. She was the third of her parents&#x27; seven children, but three of her brothers died in infancy and childhood.

Her family later moved to South Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, in the Lehigh Valley region of the state.

==Personal life==
In 1901, at roughly 21 years old, she married Abraham Lincoln Knauss (1878–1965). Abraham was a tanner who later became a prominent Republican leader and the recorder of deeds in Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, serving as the county&#x27;s recorder of deeds from 1937 until his retirement in 1951. Abraham died in 1965, at the age of 86. They had one child Kathryn (1903–2005) who lived to be 101. Through most of her life, Knauss acted as a housewife. She enjoyed knitting, crocheting, and sewing.

Before Knauss&#x27; death, there were six living generations in her family. In February 1999, &quot;Life&quot; magazine photographed Knauss with a member from each of these generations, up to her newborn great-great-great-grandchild.

==Health and lifestyle==
It was not until Knauss reached 111 years old that she took up residency at a nursing home in Allentown, Pennsylvania, due to her frailness and failing eyesight. In 1995, Knauss remarked that she enjoyed her life because she still had her health and could &quot;do things&quot;. At 117 years old, Knauss underwent a blood transfusion due to having low hemoglobin, and she continued to take heart medication for the rest of her life. Those around her believed her to be of sound mind up until her death. Within the last year of her life, she still had conversations with her daughter Kathryn. Eventually, she struggled to recognize her daughter; however, this may have been due to her failing hearing and eyesight rather than a failing mind.

When asked how she had survived to her great age, Knauss responded that one should “keep yourself busy, work hard, and not worry about how old you are.” She was a non-smoker and was never considered obese at any point in her life. She did have a fondness for sweets, however, and her great-granddaughter claimed that Knauss &quot;hated vegetables&quot;. A member of the staff at Knauss&#x27; nursing home claimed that she was the friendliest of all residents at the home, and her relatives failed to remember a point in her life that she scolded anyone or even appeared stressed.

==Death==
Knauss died of natural causes on December 30, 1999 in Allentown, Pennsylvania. An autopsy was performed on her body, but the results were never made public; however, she was not known to have been suffering from any illness at the time of her death. After her death, Ella Miller (1884–2000) became the world&#x27;s oldest living person.

Knauss remained the second oldest known validated person until Kane Tanaka outlived her by 10 days in April 2022.

==Longevity records and verification==
Knauss became the United States national longevity record holder after surpassing the final age of Delphia Welford (1875–1992) on November 30, 1997. On April 16, 1998, she became the world&#x27;s oldest person after 117-year-old French Canadian Marie-Louise Meilleur died. Knauss remains the oldest documented person from the United States, and is the third-oldest fully documented person ever, after French supercentenarian Jeanne Calment and Japanese supercentenarian Kane Tanaka, who lived 10 days longer than her. She was recognized as the world&#x27;s oldest living person by Guinness World Records from April 16, 1998, until her death the next year at the age of 119 years and 97 days.

Knauss&#x27; records have been heavily reviewed to ensure the claims surrounding her lifespan are legitimate. Many records have been found that verify her claim, including the record of the 1890 census, taken when Knauss was still in childhood.

==See also==
* List of the verified oldest people

==References==
==External links==
* Photo portrait—Sarah Knauss aged 117 in 1997 CBC News
* &quot;Allentown Morning Call&quot; collection of articles about her 1993–2000</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q603782" start="0" end="20" title="Sarah Knauss" label="Sarah DeRemer Knauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200828" start="80" end="96" title="supercentenarian" label="supercentenarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309504" start="109" end="150" title="List of supercentenarians from the United States" label="oldest person ever from the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q254917" start="199" end="219" title="oldest people" label="oldest living person"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="374" end="380" title="United States census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="521" end="527" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786318" start="543" end="566" title="Hollywood, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania" label="Hollywood, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="576" end="587" title="coal mining" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137767" start="605" end="616" title="Coal Region" label="Coal Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058048" start="620" end="645" title="Northeastern Pennsylvania" label="Northeastern Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566326" start="786" end="815" title="South Bethlehem Downtown Historic District" label="South Bethlehem, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q123202" start="824" end="837" title="Lehigh Valley" label="Lehigh Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q211578" start="974" end="980" title="tanner (occupation)" label="tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="1010" end="1020" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630069" start="1036" end="1053" title="recorder of deeds" label="recorder of deeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q494117" start="1057" end="1084" title="Lehigh County, Pennsylvania" label="Lehigh County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="1475" end="1479" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q142811" start="1729" end="1752" title="Allentown, Pennsylvania" label="Allentown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="1987" end="1997" title="hemoglobin" label="hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438541" start="2983" end="2997" title="Death by natural causes" label="natural causes"/>
<link wikidata="Q142811" start="3022" end="3045" title="Allentown, Pennsylvania" label="Allentown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q254917" start="3283" end="3303" title="oldest people" label="oldest living person"/>
<link wikidata="Q29441888" start="3369" end="3380" title="Kane Tanaka" label="Kane Tanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066907" start="3501" end="3510" title="longevity" label="longevity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3559" end="3574" title="List of American supercentenarians#Delphia Welford" label="Delphia Welford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445087" start="3705" end="3726" title="Marie-Louise Meilleur" label="Marie-Louise Meilleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q182260" start="3885" end="3899" title="Jeanne Calment" label="Jeanne Calment"/>
<link wikidata="Q29441888" start="3930" end="3941" title="Kane Tanaka" label="Kane Tanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q254917" start="4004" end="4037" title="oldest people" label="world&amp;#x27;s oldest living person"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="4041" end="4063" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095711" start="4343" end="4354" title="1890 United States census" label="1890 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479337" start="4414" end="4448" title="List of the verified oldest people" label="List of the verified oldest people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931014" start="4531" end="4539" title="CBC News" label="CBC News"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173650" wikidata="Q153886" url="?curid=173650" title="The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari">
<text>The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari () is a 1920 German silent horror film directed by Robert Wiene and written by Hans Janowitz and Carl Mayer. The quintessential work of early German Expressionist cinema, it tells the story of an insane hypnotist (Werner Krauss) who uses a brainwashed somnambulist (Conrad Veidt) to commit murders. The film features a dark, twisted visual style, with sharp-pointed forms; oblique, curving lines; structures and landscapes that lean and twist in unusual angles; and shadows and streaks of light painted directly onto the sets.

The script was inspired by various experiences from the lives of Janowitz and Mayer, both pacifists who were left distrustful of authority after their experiences with the military during World War I. The film makes use of a frame story, with a prologue and epilogue combined with a twist ending. Janowitz said this device was forced upon the writers against their will. The film&#x27;s design was handled by Hermann Warm, Walter Reimann and Walter Röhrig, who recommended a fantastic, graphic style over a naturalistic one.

The film thematises brutal and irrational authority. Writers and scholars have argued the film reflects a subconscious need in German society for a tyrant, and is an example of Germany&#x27;s obedience to authority and unwillingness to rebel against deranged authority. Some critics have interpreted Caligari as representing the German war government, with Cesare symbolic of the common man conditioned, like soldiers, to kill. Other themes of the film include the destabilised contrast between insanity and sanity, the subjective perception of reality, and the duality of human nature.

&quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari&quot; was released when foreign film industries were easing restrictions on the import of German films after World War I, so it was screened internationally. Accounts differ as to its financial and critical success upon release, but modern film critics and historians have largely praised it as a revolutionary film. The film was voted number 12 on the prestigious Brussels 12 list at the 1958 World Expo. Critic Roger Ebert called it arguably &quot;the first true horror film&quot;, and reviewer Danny Peary called it cinema&#x27;s first cult film and a precursor for arthouse films. The film helped draw worldwide attention to the artistic merit of German cinema, and had a major influence on American films, particularly in the genres of horror and film noir.

==Plot==

In what appears to be a park, Franzis sits on a bench with an older man who complains that spirits have driven him away from his family and home. When a dazed woman passes them, Franzis explains she is his &quot;fiancée&quot; Jane and that they have suffered a great ordeal. Most of the rest of the film is a flashback of Franzis&#x27; story, which takes place in Holstenwall, a shadowy village of twisted buildings and spiraling streets. 

Franzis and his friend Alan, who are good-naturedly competing for Jane&#x27;s affections, plan to visit the town fair. Meanwhile, a mysterious man named Dr. Caligari seeks a permit from the rude town clerk to present a spectacle at the fair, which features Cesare, a somnambulist. The clerk shouts at Caligari to wait, but ultimately approves the permit. That night, the clerk is stabbed to death in his bed.

The next morning, Franzis and Alan visit Caligari&#x27;s sideshow attraction, where he opens a coffin-like box to reveal the sleeping Cesare. On Caligari&#x27;s order, Cesare awakens and answers questions from the audience. Despite Franzis&#x27; protests, Alan asks, &quot;How long shall I live?&quot; To Alan&#x27;s horror, Cesare answers, &quot;Until dawn tomorrow.&quot; Later that night, a figure breaks into Alan&#x27;s home and stabs him to death in his bed. A grief-stricken Franzis investigates Alan&#x27;s murder with help from Jane and her father, Dr. Olsen, who obtains police authorisation to investigate the somnambulist. That night, the police apprehend a criminal in possession of a knife who is caught attempting to murder an elderly woman. When questioned by Franzis and Dr. Olsen, the criminal confesses he tried to kill the elderly woman, but denies any part in the two previous deaths; he was merely taking advantage of the situation to divert blame away from himself.

At night, Franzis spies on Caligari and observes what appears to be Cesare sleeping in his box. However, the real Cesare sneaks into Jane&#x27;s home as she sleeps. He raises a knife to stab her, but instead abducts her after a struggle, dragging her through the window onto the street. Chased by an angry mob, Cesare eventually drops Jane and flees; he soon collapses and dies of exhaustion. Franzis confirms that the criminal who confessed to the elderly woman&#x27;s murder is still locked away and could not have been Jane&#x27;s attacker. Franzis and the police investigate Caligari&#x27;s sideshow and discover that the &quot;Cesare&quot; sleeping in the box is only a dummy. Caligari escapes in the confusion. Franzis follows him and sees Caligari go into an insane asylum.

Upon further investigation, Franzis is shocked to learn that Caligari is the asylum&#x27;s director. With help from the asylum staff, Franzis studies the director&#x27;s records and diary while the director is sleeping. The writings reveal his obsession with the story of an 18th-century mystic named Caligari, who used a somnambulist named Cesare to commit murders in northern Italian towns. The director, attempting to understand the earlier Caligari, experiments on a somnambulist admitted to the asylum, who becomes his Cesare. The asylum director screams, &quot;I must become Caligari!&quot; After the flashback, Franzis and the doctors call the police to Caligari&#x27;s office, where they show him Cesare&#x27;s corpse. Caligari then attacks one of the staff. He is subdued, restrained in a straitjacket, and becomes an inmate in his own asylum.

The narrative returns to the present, where Franzis concludes his story. In a twist ending, Franzis is depicted as an asylum inmate. Jane and Cesare are patients as well; Jane believes that she is a queen, while Cesare is not a somnambulist but awake, quiet, and not visibly dangerous. The man Franzis refers to as &quot;Dr. Caligari&quot; is the asylum director. Franzis attacks him and is restrained in a straitjacket, then placed in the same cell where Caligari was confined in Franzis&#x27;s story. The asylum director announces that he now understands Franzis&#x27;s delusion, and that he is confident he can cure him.

==Cast==
* Werner Krauss as Dr. Caligari
* Conrad Veidt as Cesare
* Friedrich Feher as Franzis
* Lil Dagover as Jane
* Hans Heinrich von Twardowski as Alan
* Rudolf Lettinger as Dr. Olsen

==Production==
===Writing===
&quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari&quot; was written by Hans Janowitz and Carl Mayer, both of whom were pacifists by the time they met following World War I. Janowitz served as an officer during the war, but the experience left him embittered with the military, which affected his writing. Mayer feigned madness to avoid military service during the war, which led him to intense examinations from a military psychiatrist. The experience left him distrustful of authority, and the psychiatrist served as a model for the Caligari character. Janowitz and Mayer were introduced in June 1918 by a mutual friend, actor Ernst Deutsch. Both writers were penniless at the time. Gilda Langer, an actress with whom Mayer was in love, encouraged Janowitz and Mayer to write a film together. She later became the basis for the Jane character. Langer also encouraged Janowitz to visit a fortune teller, who predicted that Janowitz would survive his military service during the war, but Langer would die. This prediction proved true, as Langer died unexpectedly in 1920 at the age of 23, and Janowitz said it inspired the scene in which Cesare predicts Alan&#x27;s death at the fair.

Although neither had any associations with the film industry, Janowitz and Mayer wrote a script over six weeks during the winter of 1918–19. In describing their roles, Janowitz called himself &quot;the father who planted the seed, and Mayer the mother who conceived and ripened it&quot;. The Expressionist filmmaker Paul Wegener was among their influences. The story was partially inspired by a circus sideshow the two visited on Kantstrasse in Berlin, called &quot;Man or Machine?&quot;, in which a man performed feats of great strength after becoming hypnotised. They first visualised the story of &quot;Caligari&quot; the night of that show. Several of Janowitz&#x27;s past experiences influenced his writing, including memories of his hometown of Prague, and, as he put it, a mistrust of &quot;the authoritative power of an inhuman state gone mad&quot; due to his military service. Janowitz also believed he had witnessed a murder in 1913 near an amusement park on Hamburg&#x27;s Reeperbahn, beside the Holstenwall, which served as another inspiration for the script. According to Janowitz, he observed a woman disappear into some bushes, from which a respectable-looking man emerged a few moments later, and the next day Janowitz learned the girl was murdered. Holstenwall later became the name of the town setting in &quot;Caligari&quot;.
Janowitz and Mayer are said to have set out to write a story denouncing arbitrary authority as brutal and insane. Janowitz said it was only years after the film was released that he realised exposing the &quot;authoritative power of an inhuman state&quot; was the &quot;subconscious intention&quot; of the writers. Hermann Warm, who designed the film&#x27;s sets, said Mayer had no political intentions when he wrote the film. Film historian David Robinson noted that Janowitz did not refer to anti-authority intentions in the script until many decades after &quot;Caligari&quot; was released, and he suggested Janowitz&#x27;s recollection may have changed in response to later interpretations of the film.

The film they wrote was entitled &quot;Das Cabinet des Dr. Caligari&quot;, using the English spelling &quot;Cabinet&quot; rather than the German . The completed script contained 141 scenes. Janowitz has claimed the name &quot;Caligari&quot;, which was not settled upon until after the script was finished, was inspired by a rare book called &quot;Unknown Letters of Stendhal&quot;, which featured a letter from the French novelist Stendhal referring to a French officer named Caligari he met at the La Scala theatre in Milan. However, no record of any such letter exists, and film historian John D. Barlow suggested Janowitz may have fabricated the story. The physical appearance of Caligari was inspired by portraits of the German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer. The character&#x27;s name is spelled &quot;Calligaris&quot; in the only known surviving script, although in some instances the final &quot;s&quot; is removed. Other character names are also spelled differently from the final film: Cesare appears as &quot;Caesare&quot;, Alan is &quot;Allan&quot; or sometimes &quot;Alland&quot; and Dr. Olsen is &quot;Dr. Olfens&quot;. Likewise, unnamed characters in the final film have names in the script, including the town clerk (&quot;Dr. Lüders&quot;) and the house-breaker (&quot;Jakob Straat&quot;).

The story of &quot;Caligari&quot; is told abstractly, like a fairy tale, and includes little description about or attention toward the psychological motivations of the characters, which is more heavily emphasised in the film&#x27;s visual style. The original script shows few traces of the Expressionist influence prevalent in the film&#x27;s sets and costumes. Through film director Fritz Lang, Janowitz and Mayer met with Erich Pommer, head of production at the Decla-Film studio in Weissensee, on 19 April 1919, to discuss selling the script. According to Pommer, he attempted to get rid of them, but they persisted until he agreed to meet with them. Pommer reportedly asked the writers to leave the script with him, but they refused, and instead Mayer read it aloud to him. Pommer and his assistant, Julius Sternheim, were so impressed that he refused to let them leave until a contract was signed, and he purchased the script from them that night. The writers had originally sought no fewer than 10,000 marks, but were given 3,500, with the promise of another 2,000 once the film went into production and 500 if it was sold for foreign release, which the producers considered unlikely. The contract, today preserved at Berlin&#x27;s &quot;Bundesfilmarchiv&quot;, gave Pommer the right to make any changes to the script deemed appropriate. Pommer said he was drawn to the script because he believed it could be filmed inexpensively, and it bore similarities to films inspired by the macabre horror shows of the Grand Guignol theatre in Paris, which were popular at the time. Pommer later said: &quot;They saw in the script an &#x27;experiment&#x27;. I saw a relatively cheap film&quot;.

====Frame story====
&quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari&quot; makes use of a , or frame story; a prologue and epilogue establish the main body of the film as a delusional flashback, a novel technique. Lang has said that, during early discussions about his possible involvement with the film, he suggested the addition of an opening scene with a &quot;normal&quot; style, which would lead the public into the rest of the film without confusion. It remains unclear whether Lang suggested the frame story structure or simply gave advice on how to write a frame story that was already agreed, and some writers, like David Robinson, have questioned whether Lang&#x27;s recollection is correct. The director, Robert Wiene, was supportive of the changes. Janowitz has said he and Mayer were not privy to discussions about adding the frame story and strongly opposed its inclusion, believing it had deprived the film of its revolutionary and political significance; he wrote that it was &quot;an illicit violation, a raping of our work&quot; that turned the film &quot;into a cliché ... in which the symbolism was to be lost&quot;. Janowitz says the writers sought legal action to stop the change but failed. He also says they did not see the finished film with the frame story until a preview was shown to studio heads, after which the writers &quot;expressed our dissatisfaction in a storm of thunderous remonstrances&quot;. They had to be persuaded not to publicly protest against the film.

In his 1947 book &quot;From Caligari to Hitler&quot;, Siegfried Kracauer argued, based largely on an unpublished typescript written and provided by Janowitz, that the film originally included no frame story and started with the fair coming to town and ended with Caligari becoming institutionalised. Kracauer argued that the frame story glorified authority and was added to turn a &quot;revolutionary&quot; film into a &quot;conformistic&quot; one. No surviving copies of the script were believed to exist until the early 1950s when actor Werner Krauss revealed he still had his copy. He refused to part with it; only in 1978, two decades after his death, was it purchased by the German film archive Deutsche Kinemathek. It remained unavailable for public consumption until 1995, when a full transcript was published.

The script revealed that a frame story was part of the original &quot;Caligari&quot; screenplay, albeit a different one from that in the film. The original manuscript opens on an elegant terrace of a large villa, where Franzis and Jane are hosting a party and the guests insist that Franzis tell them a story that happened to him 20 years earlier. The conclusion to the frame story is missing from the script. Critics widely agree that the discovery of the screenplay strongly undermines Kracauer&#x27;s theory, with some, like the German film historian Stephen Brockmann, even arguing it disproves his claims altogether. Others, like John D. Barlow, argue that it does not settle the issue, as the original screenplay&#x27;s frame story simply serves to introduce the main plot, rather than subvert it as the final film&#x27;s version does.

===Development===
Many details about the making of &quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari&quot; are in dispute and will probably remain unsettled due to the large number of people involved in the making of the film, many of whom recalled it differently or dramatised their own contributions to its production. Production of the film was delayed about four or five months after the script was purchased. Pommer originally chose Lang as the director of &quot;Caligari&quot;, and Lang even went so far as to hold preparatory discussions about the script with Janowitz, but he became unavailable due to his involvement with the filming of &quot;The Spiders&quot;, so Wiene was selected instead. According to Janowitz, Wiene&#x27;s father, a successful theatre actor, had &quot;gone slightly mad when he could no longer appear on the stage&quot;, and Janowitz believed that experience helped Wiene bring an &quot;intimate understanding&quot; to the source material of &quot;Caligari&quot;.
Decla producer Rudolf Meinert introduced Hermann Warm to Wiene and provided Warm with the &quot;Caligari&quot; script, asking him to come up with proposals for the design. Warm believed &quot;films must be drawings brought to life&quot;, and felt a naturalistic set was wrong for the subject of the film, instead recommending a fantastic, graphic style, in which the images would be visionary, nightmarish and out of the ordinary. Warm brought to the project his two friends, painters and stage designers Walter Reimann and Walter Röhrig, both of whom were associated with the Berlin art and literary magazine &quot;Der Sturm&quot;. The trio spent a full day and part of the night reading the script, after which Reimann suggested an Expressionist style, a style often used in his own paintings. They also conceived the idea of painting forms and shadows directly onto the sets to ensure a dark and unreal look. According to Warm, the three approached Wiene with the idea and he immediately agreed, although Wiene has made claims that he conceived the film&#x27;s Expressionist style. Meinert agreed to the idea after one day&#x27;s consideration, telling Warm, Reimann and Röhrig to make the sets as &quot;crazy&quot; and &quot;eccentrically&quot; as possible. He embraced the idea for commercial, not aesthetic reasons: Expressionism was fashionable at the time, so he concluded even if the film received bad reviews, the artistic style would garner attention and make it profitable.

Wiene filmed a test scene to demonstrate Warm, Reimann and Röhrig&#x27;s theories, and it so impressed the producers that the artists were given free rein. Pommer later said he was responsible for placing Warm, Reimann and Röhrig in charge of the sets, but Warm has claimed that, although Pommer was in charge of production at Decla when &quot;Caligari&quot; was made, he was not actually a producer on the film itself. Instead, he says Meinert was the film&#x27;s true producer, and that it was he who gave Warm the manuscript. Warm claimed Meinert produced the film &quot;despite the opposition of a part of the management of Decla&quot;. Meinert said Pommer had &quot;not sanctioned&quot; the film&#x27;s abstract visual style. Nevertheless, Pommer claimed to have supervised &quot;Caligari&quot;, and that the film&#x27;s Expressionistic style was chosen in part to differentiate it from competing Hollywood films. The predominant attitude at the time was that artistic achievement led to success in exports to foreign film markets. The dominance of Hollywood at the time, coupled with a period of inflation and currency devaluation, forced German film studios to seek projects that could be made inexpensively, with a combination of realistic and artistic elements so the films would be accessible to American audiences, yet also distinctive from Hollywood films. Pommer has claimed while Mayer and Janowitz expressed a desire for artistic experimentation in the film, his decision to use painted canvases as scenery was primarily a commercial one, as they would be a significant financial saving over building sets.

Janowitz claims he attempted to commission the sets from designer and engraver Alfred Kubin, known for his heavy use of light and shadow to create a sense of chaos, but Kubin declined to participate in the project because he was too busy. In a conflicting story, however, Janowitz claimed he requested from Decla &quot;Kubin paintings&quot;, and that they misread his instructions as &quot;cubist painters&quot; and hired Reimann and Röhrig as a result. David Robinson argues this story was probably an embellishment stemming from Janowitz&#x27;s disdain for the two artists. Janowitz has claimed that he and Mayer conceived the idea of painting the sets on canvas, and that the shooting script included written directions that the scenery be designed in Kubin&#x27;s style. However, the later rediscovery of the original screenplay refutes this claim, as it includes no such directions about the sets. This was also disputed in a 1926 article by Barnet Braverman in &quot;Billboard&quot; magazine, which claimed the script included no mention of an unconventional visual style, and that Janowitz and Mayer in fact strongly opposed the stylisation. She claims Mayer later came to appreciate the visual style, but that Janowitz remained opposed to it years after the film&#x27;s release.

The set design, costumes and props took about two weeks to prepare. Warm worked primarily on the sets, while Röhrig handled the painting and Reimann was responsible for the costumes. Robinson noted the costumes in &quot;Caligari&quot; seem to resemble a wide variety of time periods. For example, Caligari and the fairground workers&#x27; costumes resemble the Biedermeier era, while Jane&#x27;s embody Romanticism. Additionally, Robinson wrote, Cesare&#x27;s costume and those of policemen in the film appear abstract, while many of the other characters&#x27; seem like ordinary German clothes from the 1920s. The collaborative nature of the film&#x27;s production highlights the importance that both screenwriters and set designers held in German cinema of the 1920s, although film critic Lotte H. Eisner said sets held more importance than anything else in German films at that time. &quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari&quot; was the first German Expressionist film, although Brockmann and film critic Mike Budd claim it was also influenced by German Romanticism; Budd notes the film&#x27;s themes of insanity and the outcry against authority are common among German Romanticism in literature, theatre and the visual arts. Film scholar Vincent LoBrutto said the theatre of Max Reinhardt and the artistic style of Die Brücke were additional influences on &quot;Caligari&quot;.

===Casting===

Janowitz originally intended the part of Cesare to go to his friend, actor Ernst Deutsch. Mayer wrote the part of Jane for Gilda Langer, but by the time the film was cast Langer&#x27;s interests had moved on from Janowitz and Mayer to director Paul Czinner, leaving the role to be played by Lil Dagover. Janowitz claimed he wrote the part of Caligari specifically for Werner Krauss, whom Deutsch had brought to his attention during rehearsals for a Max Reinhardt play; Janowitz said only Krauss or Paul Wegener could have played the part. The parts of Caligari and Cesare ultimately went to Krauss and Conrad Veidt, respectively, who enthusiastically took part in many aspects of the production. Krauss suggested changes to his own make-up and costumes, including the elements of a top hat, cape and walking stick with an ivory handle for his character. The actors in &quot;Caligari&quot; were conscious of the need to adapt their make-up, costumes and appearance to match the visual style of the film. Much of the acting in German silent films at the time was already Expressionistic, mimicking the pantomimic aspects of Expressionist theatre. The performances of Krauss and Veidt in &quot;Caligari&quot; were typical of this style, as they both had experience in Expressionist-influenced theatre, and as a result, John D. Barlow said they appear more comfortable in their surroundings in the film than the other actors. Prior to filming, Kraus and Veidt appeared on stage in the winter of 1918 in an Expressionist drama, &#x27;s &quot;Seeschlacht&quot;, at the Deutsches Theater. By contrast, Dagover had little experience in Expressionist theatre, and Barlow argues her acting is less harmonious with the film&#x27;s visual style.

Wiene asked the actors to make movements similar to dance, most prominently from Veidt, but also from Krauss, Dagover and Friedrich Feger, who played Franzis. Krauss and Veidt are the only actors whose performances fully match the stylisation of the sets, which they achieved by concentrating their movements and facial expressions. Barlow notes that &quot;Veidt moves along the wall as if it had &#x27;exuded&#x27; him ... more a part of a material world of objects than a human one&quot;, and Krauss &quot;moves with angular viciousness, his gestures seem broken or cracked by the obsessive force within him, a force that seems to emerge from a constant toxic state, a twisted authoritarianism of no human scruple and total insensibility&quot;. Most of the other actors besides Krauss and Veidt have a more naturalistic style. Alan, Jane and Franzis play the roles of an idyllically happy trio enjoying youth; Alan in particular represents the archetype of a sensitive 19th-century student. Mike Budd points out realist characters in stylised settings are a common characteristic in Expressionist theatre. However, David Robinson notes even the performances of the more naturalistic supporting roles in &quot;Caligari&quot; have Expressionist elements, like Hans-Heinz von Twardowski&#x27;s &quot;strange, tormented face&quot; as Alan. He also cites Feher&#x27;s &quot;large angular movements&quot;, especially in the scene where he searches the deserted fairground. Other minor roles are Expressionistic in nature, like two policemen who sit facing each other at their desks and move with exaggerated symmetry, and two servants who awaken and rise from their beds in perfect synchronisation. Vincent LoBrutto said of the acting in the film:

===Filming===
Shooting for &quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari&quot; began at the end of December 1919 and concluded at the end of January 1920. It was shot entirely in a studio without any exterior shots, which was unusual for films of the time, but dictated by the decision to give the film an Expressionist visual style. The extent to which Mayer and Janowitz participated during filming is disputed: Janowitz claims the duo repeatedly refused to allow any script changes during production, and Pommer claimed Mayer was on the set for every day of filming. Hermann Warm, however, claimed they were never present for any of the shooting or involved in any discussions during production.

&quot;Caligari&quot; was filmed in the Lixie-Film studio (formerly owned by Continental-Kunstfilm) at 9 Franz Joseph-Strasse (now Max Liebermannstraße), Weißensee, a north-eastern suburb of Berlin. Decla had been making films at the Lixie studio since October 1919, having previously released three titles, &quot;The Plague of Florence&quot; (&quot;Die Pest in Florenz&quot;) (1919) and the two parts of &quot;The Spiders&quot; (&quot;Die Spinnen&quot;). The relatively small size of the studio (built some five years earlier in 1914) meant most of the sets used in the film did not exceed in width and depth. Certain elements from the original script had to be cut from the film due to the limited space, including a procession of gypsies, a handcart pushed by Caligari, Jane&#x27;s carriage, and a chase scene involving horse-cabs. Likewise, the script called for a fairground scene with roundabouts, barrel organs, sideshow barkers, performers and menageries, none of which could be achieved in the restrictive space. Instead, the scenes use a painting of the Holstenwall town as a background; throngs of people walk around two spinning merry-go-round props, which creates the impression of a carnival. The script also made references to modern elements like telephones, telegrams and electric light, but they were eliminated during the filming, leaving the final film&#x27;s setting with no indication of a specific time period.
Several scenes from the script were cut during filming, most of which were brief time lapses or transitioning scenes, or title screens deemed unnecessary. One of the more substantial scenes to be cut involved the ghost of Alan at a cemetery. The scene with the town clerk berating Caligari deviated notably from the original script, which simply called for the clerk to be &quot;impatient&quot;. He is far more abusive in the scene as it was filmed, and is perched atop an exaggeratedly high bench that towers over Caligari. Another deviation from the script comes when Caligari first awakens Cesare, one of the most famous moments in the film. The script called for Cesare to gasp and struggle for air, then shake violently and collapse in Caligari&#x27;s arms. As it was filmed, there is no such physical struggling, and instead the camera zooms in on Cesare&#x27;s face as he gradually opens his eyes. The original title cards for &quot;Caligari&quot; featured stylised, misshapen lettering with excessive underlinings, exclamation points and occasionally archaic spellings. The bizarre style, which matches that of the film as a whole, mimics the lettering of Expressionistic posters at the time. The original title cards were tinted in green, steely-blue and brown. Many modern prints of the film do not preserve the original lettering.

Photography was provided by Willy Hameister, who went on to work with Wiene on several other films. The camerawork in &quot;Caligari&quot; is fairly simple and is used primarily to show the sets, mostly alternating between medium shots and straight-on angles, with occasionally abrupt close-ups to create a sense of shock. There are few long shots or panning movement within the cinematography. Likewise, there is very little interscene editing. Most scenes follow the other without intercutting, which gives &quot;Caligari&quot; more of a theatrical feel than a cinematic one. Heavy lighting is typically absent from the film, heightening the sense of darkness prevalent in the story. However, lighting is occasionally used to intensify the uneasiness created by the distortions of the sets. For example, when Cesare first awakens at the fair, a light is shone directly on a close-up of his heavily made-up face to create an unsettling glow. Additionally, lighting is used in a then-innovative way to cast a shadow against the wall during the scene in which Cesare kills Alan, so the viewer sees only the shadow and not the figures themselves. Lighting techniques like this became frequently used in later German films.

==Visual style==

The visual style of &quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari&quot; is dark, twisted and bizarre; radical and deliberate distortions in perspective, form, dimension and scale create a chaotic and unhinged appearance. The sets are dominated by sharp-pointed forms and oblique and curving lines, with narrow and spiraling streets, and structures and landscapes that lean and twist in unusual angles, giving the impression they could collapse or explode at any given moment. Film critic Roger Ebert described it as &quot;a jagged landscape of sharp angles and tilted walls and windows, staircases climbing crazy diagonals, trees with spiky leaves, grass that looks like knives&quot;. The sets are characterised by strokes of bold, black paint. The landscape of Holstenwall is painted on canvas, as opposed to a constructed set, and shadows and streaks of light are painted directly onto the sets, further distorting the viewer&#x27;s sense of perspective and three-dimensionality. Buildings are clustered and interconnected in a cubist-like architecture, surrounded by dark and twisted back alleys. Lotte H. Eisner, author of &quot;The Haunted Screen&quot;, writes that objects in the film appear as if they are coming alive and &quot;seem to vibrate with an extraordinary spirituality&quot;. , screenwriter and author of &quot;Expressionismus und Film&quot;, likewise wrote &quot;the dynamic force of objects howls their desire to be created&quot;. The rooms have radically offset windows with distorted frames, doors that are not squared, and chairs that are too tall. Strange designs and figures are painted on the walls of corridors and rooms, and trees outside have twisted branches that sometimes resemble tentacles.

German film professor wrote, &quot;The style of German Expressionism allowed the filmmakers to experiment with filmic technology and special effects and to explore the twisted realm of repressed desires, unconscious fears, and deranged fixations&quot;. The visual style of &quot;Caligari&quot; conveys a sense of anxiety and terror to the viewer, giving the impression of a nightmare or deranged sensibility, or a place transformed by evil, in a more effective way than realistic locations or conventional design concepts could. Siegfried Kracauer wrote that the settings &quot;amounted to a perfect transformation of material objects into emotional ornaments&quot;. The majority of the film&#x27;s story and scenes are memories recalled by an insane narrator, and as a result the distorted visual style takes on the quality of his mental breakdown, giving the viewers the impression that they are inside the mind of a madman. As with contemporary Expressionist paintings, the visual style of &quot;Caligari&quot; reflects an emotional reaction to the world, and the film&#x27;s characters represent an emotional response to the terror of society as embodied by Caligari and Cesare. Often in the film, set pieces are emblematic of the emotional state of the characters in the scene. For example, the courtyard of the insane asylum during the frame story is vastly out of proportion. The characters seem too big for the small building, and the courtyard floor features a bizarre pattern, all of which represent the patients&#x27; damaged frames of mind. Likewise, the scene with the criminal in a prison cell features a set with long vertical painted shadows resembling arrowheads, pointing down at the squatting prisoner in an oppressive effect that symbolises his broken-down state.

Stephen Brockmann argues the fact that &quot;Caligari&quot; was filmed entirely in a studio enhances the madness portrayed by the film&#x27;s visuals because &quot;there is no access to a natural world beyond the realm of the tortured human psyche&quot;. The sets occasionally feature circular images that reflect the chaos of the film, presenting patterns of movement that seem to be going nowhere, such as the merry-go-round at the fair, moving at a titled angle that makes it appear at risk of collapsing. Other elements of the film convey the same visual motifs as the sets, including the costumes and make-up design for Caligari and Cesare, both of which are highly exaggerated and grotesque. Even the hair of the characters is an Expressionistic design element, especially Cesare&#x27;s black, spiky, jagged locks. They are the only two characters in the film with Expressionistic make-up and costumes, making them appear as if they are the only ones who truly belong in this distorted world. Despite their apparent normalcy, however, Franzis and the other characters never appear disturbed by the madness around them reflected in the sets; they instead react as if they are parts of a normal background.

A select few scenes disrupt the Expressionistic style of the film, such as in Jane&#x27;s and Alan&#x27;s home, which include normal backgrounds and bourgeois furniture that convey a sense of security and tranquility otherwise absent from the film. Eisner called this a &quot;fatal&quot; continuity error, but John D. Barlow disagrees, arguing it is a common characteristic for dream narratives to have some normal elements in them, and that the normalcy of Jane&#x27;s house in particular could represent the feeling of comfort and refuge Franzis feels in her presence. Mike Budd argues while the Expressionistic visual style is jarring and off-putting at first, the characters start to blend more harmoniously as the film progresses, and the setting becomes more relegated into the background.

Robinson suggested &quot;Caligari&quot; is not a true example of Expressionism at all, but simply a conventional story with some elements of the art form applied to it. He argues the story itself is not Expressionistic, and the film could have easily been produced in a traditional style, but that Expressionist-inspired visuals were applied to it as decoration. Similarly, Budd has called the film a conventional, classical narrative, resembling a detective story in Franzis&#x27;s search to expose Alan&#x27;s killer, and said it is only the film&#x27;s Expressionist settings that make the film transgressive. Hans Janowitz has entertained similar thoughts as well: &quot;Was this particular style of painting only a garment in which to dress the drama? Was it only an accident? Would it not have been possible to change this garment, without injury to the deep effect of the drama? I do not know.&quot;

==Release==

Though often considered an art film by some modern critics and scholars, &quot;Caligari&quot; was produced and marketed the same way as a normal commercial production of its time period, able to target both the elite artistic market as well as a more commercial horror genre audience. The film was marketed extensively leading up to the release, and advertisements ran even before the film was finished. Many posters and newspaper advertisements included the enigmatic phrase featured in the film, &quot;, or &quot;You must become Caligari!&quot; &quot;Caligari&quot; premiered at the Marmorhaus theatre in Berlin on 26 February 1920, less than one month after it was completed. The filmmakers were so nervous about the release that Erich Pommer, on his way to the theatre, reportedly exclaimed, &quot;It will be a horrible failure for all of us!&quot; As with the making of the film, several urban legends surround the film&#x27;s premiere. One, offered by writers Roger Manvell and Heinrich Fraenkel in &quot;The German Cinema&quot;, suggests the film was shelved &quot;for lack of a suitable outlet&quot;, and was only shown at Marmorhaus because another film had fallen through. Another suggested the theatre pulled the film after only two performances because audiences demanded refunds and demonstrated against it so strongly. This story was told by Pommer, who claimed the Marmorhaus picked &quot;Caligari&quot; back up and ran it successfully for three months after he spent six months working on a publicity campaign for the film. David Robinson wrote that neither of these urban legends were true, and that the latter was fabricated by Pommer to increase his own reputation. On the contrary, Robinson said the premiere was highly successful, showing at the theatre for four weeks, an unusual amount for the time, and then returning two weeks later. He said it was so well received that women in the audience screamed when Cesare opened his eyes during his first scene, and fainted during the scene in which Cesare abducts Jane.

&quot;Caligari&quot; was released at a time when foreign film industries had just started easing restrictions on the import of German films following World War I. The film was acquired for American distribution by the Goldwyn Distributing Company, and had its American premiere at the Capitol Theatre in New York City on 3 April 1921. It was given a live theatrical prologue and epilogue, which was not unusual for film premieres at major theatres at the time. In the prologue, the film is introduced by a character called &quot;Cranford&quot;, who identifies himself as the man Franzis speaks with in the opening scene. In the epilogue, Cranford returns and exclaims that Franzis has fully recovered from his madness. Mike Budd believes these additions simplified the film and &quot;adjusted [it] for mass consumption&quot;, though Robinson argued it was simply a normal theatrical novelty for the time. Capitol Theatre manager Samuel Roxy Rothafel commissioned conductor Ernö Rapée to compile a musical accompaniment that included portions of songs by composers Johann Strauss III, Arnold Schoenberg, Claude Debussy, Igor Stravinsky and Sergei Prokofiev. Rotafel wanted the score to match the dark mood of the film, saying: &quot;The music had, as it were, to be made eligible for citizenship in a nightmare country&quot;.

&quot;Caligari&quot; had its Los Angeles premiere at Miller&#x27;s Theater on 7 May 1921, but the theatre was forced to pull it due to demonstrations by protestors. However, the protest was organised by the Hollywood branch of the American Legion due to fears of unemployment stemming from the import of German films into America, not over objections to the content of &quot;Caligari&quot; itself. After running in large commercial theatres, &quot;Caligari&quot; began to be shown in smaller theatres and film societies in major cities. Box office figures were not regularly published in the 1920s, so it has been difficult to assess the commercial success or failure of &quot;Caligari&quot; in the United States. Film historians Kristin Thompson and David B. Pratt separately studied trade publications from the time in an attempt to make a determination, but reached conflicting findings; Thompson concluded it was a box office success and Pratt concluded it was a failure. However, both agreed it was more commercially successful in major cities than in theatres in smaller communities, where tastes were considered more conservative.

&quot;Caligari&quot; did not immediately receive a wide distribution in France due to fears over the import of German films, but film director Louis Delluc organised a single screening of it on 14 November 1921, at the Colisée cinema in Paris as part of a benefit performance for the Spanish Red Cross. Afterward, the Cosmograph company bought the film&#x27;s distribution rights and premiered it at the Ciné-Opéra on 2 March 1922. &quot;Caligari&quot; played in one Paris theatre for seven consecutive years, a record that remained intact until the release of &quot;Emmanuelle&quot; (1974). According to Janowitz, &quot;Caligari&quot; was also shown in such European cities as London, Rome, Amsterdam, Stockholm, Brussels, Prague, Vienna, Budapest and Bucharest, as well as outside Europe in China, Japan, India and Turkey, and also in South American nations.

==Reception==
===Critical response===

There are differing accounts as to how &quot;Caligari&quot; was first received by audiences and critics immediately after its release. Stephen Brockmann, Anton Kaes and film theorist Kristin Thompson say it was popular with both the general public and well-respected by critics. Robinson wrote, &quot;The German critics, almost without exception, ranged from favourable to ecstatic&quot;. Kracauer said critics were &quot;unanimous in praising &quot;Caligari&quot; as the first work of art on the screen&quot;, but also said it was &quot;too high-brow to become popular in Germany&quot;. Barlow said it was often the subject of critical disapproval, which he believes is because early film reviewers attempted to assign fixed definitions to the young art of cinema, and thus had trouble accepting the bizarre and unusual elements of &quot;Caligari&quot;. Some critics felt it imitated a stage production too closely. Other commentators, like critic Herbert Ihering and novelist Blaise Cendrars, objected to the presentation of the story as a madman&#x27;s delusion because they felt it belittled Expressionism as an artform. Theatre critic Helmut Grosse condemned the film&#x27;s visual design as clichéd and derivative, calling it a &quot;cartoon and [a] reproduction of designs rather than from what actually took place on stage&quot;. Several reviewers, like Kurt Tucholsky and Blaise Cendrars, criticised the use of real actors in front of artificially-painted sets, saying it created an inconsistent level of stylisation. Critic Herbert Ihering echoed this point in a 1920 review: &quot;If actors are acting without energy and are playing within landscapes and rooms which are formally &#x27;excessive&#x27;, the continuity of the principle is missing&quot;.

While Robinson said the response from American critics was largely positive and enthusiastic, Kaes said American critics and audiences were divided: some praised its artistic value and others, particularly those distrustful of Germany following World War I, wished to ban it altogether. Some in the Hollywood film industry felt threatened by the potential rivalry and spoke out against &quot;Caligari&quot;&#x27;s release, condemning it as a &quot;foreign invasion&quot;. Nevertheless, the film remained popular in the United States. Several American reviewers compared it to an Edgar Allan Poe story, including in a 1921 review in &quot;Variety&quot; magazine, which praised the direction and &quot;perfect tempo&quot; of the film, as well as the sets that &quot;squeeze and turn and adjust the eye, and through the eye the mentality&quot;. A &quot;New York Times&quot; review likened it to modernist art, comparing the film&#x27;s sets to Marcel Duchamp&#x27;s &quot;Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2&quot;, and said the film &quot;gives dimensions and meaning to shape, making it an active part of the story, instead of merely the conventional and inert background&quot;, which was key to the film&#x27;s &quot;importance as a work of cinematography&quot;. Albert Lewin, a critic who eventually became a film director and screenwriter, called &quot;Caligari&quot; &quot;the only serious picture, exhibited in America so far, that in anything like the same degree has the authentic thrills and shock of art&quot;. A story in a November 1921 edition of &quot;Exceptional Photoplays&quot;, an independent publication issued by the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures, said it &quot;occupies the position of unique artistic merit&quot;, and said American films in comparison looked like they were made for &quot;a group of defective adults at the nine-year-old level&quot;.

&quot;Caligari&quot; was a critical success in France, but French filmmakers were divided in their opinions after its release. Abel Gance called it &quot;superb&quot; and wrote, &quot;What a lesson to all directors!&quot; and René Clair said it &quot;overthrew the realist dogma&quot; of filmmaking. Film critic and director Louis Delluc said the film has a compelling rhythm: &quot;At first slow, deliberately laborious, it attempts to irritate. Then when the zigzag motifs of the fairground start turning, the pace leaps forward, agitato, accelerando, and leaves off only at the word &#x27;End&#x27;, as abruptly as a slap in the face.&quot; Jean Epstein, however, called it &quot;a prize example of the abuse of décor in the cinema&quot; and said it &quot;represents a grave sickness of cinema&quot;. Likewise, Jean Cocteau called it &quot;the first step towards a grave error which consists of flat photography of eccentric decors, instead of obtaining surprise by means of the camera&quot;. French critic Frédéric-Philippe Amiguet wrote of the film: &quot;It has the odor of tainted food. It leaves a taste of cinders in the mouth.&quot; The Russian director Sergei Eisenstein especially disliked &quot;Caligari&quot;, calling it a &quot;combination of silent hysteria, partially coloured canvases, daubed flats, painted faces, and the unnatural broken gestures and action of monstrous chimaeras&quot;.

While early reviews were more divided, modern film critics and historians have largely praised &quot;Caligari&quot; as a revolutionary film. Film reviewer Roger Ebert called it arguably &quot;the first true horror film&quot;, and critic Danny Peary called it cinema&#x27;s first cult film and a precursor for arthouse films. In October 1958, &quot;Caligari&quot; was ranked as the twelfth-best film of all time during a poll organised at the Brussels World&#x27;s Fair. With input from 117 film critics, filmmakers and historians from around the world, it was the first universal film poll in history. American film historian Lewis Jacobs said &quot;its stylized rendition, brooding quality, lack of explanation, and distorted settings were new to the film world&quot;. Film historian and critic Paul Rotha wrote of it, &quot;For the first time in the history of the cinema, the director has worked &quot;through&quot; the camera and broken with realism on the screen; that a film could be effective dramatically when not photographic and finally, of the greatest possible importance, that the mind of the audience was brought into play psychologically&quot;. Likewise, Arthur Knight wrote in &quot;Rogue&quot;: &quot;More than any other film, (&quot;Caligari&quot;) convinced artists, critics and audiences that the movie was a medium for artistic expression&quot;. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; included &quot;Caligari&quot; in their 1994 &quot;Guide to the Greatest Movies Ever Made&quot;, calling it a &quot;landmark silent film&quot; and saying, &quot;No other film&#x27;s art direction has ever come up with so original a visualization of dementia&quot;.

The film holds an approval rating of 96% on Rotten Tomatoes based on 80 reviews, with a weighted average of 9.30/10. The site&#x27;s critics&#x27; consensus states: &quot;Arguably the first true horror film, &quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari&quot; set a brilliantly high bar for the genre – and remains terrifying nearly a century after it first stalked the screen.&quot;

Akira Kurosawa, the Japanese director, named this movie as one of his 100 favourite films.

===Legacy===
&quot;Caligari&quot; is the quintessential work of German Expressionist cinema, and by far the most famous example of it. It is considered a classic film, often shown in introductory film courses, film societies and museums, and is one of the most famous German films from the silent era. Film scholar Lewis Jacobs called it the &quot;most widely discussed film of the time&quot;. &quot;Caligari&quot; helped draw worldwide attention to the artistic merit of German cinema, while also bringing legitimacy to the cinema among literary intellectuals within Germany itself. Lotte Eisner has said it was in Expressionism, as epitomised in &quot;Caligari&quot;, that &quot;the German cinema found its true nature&quot;. The term &quot;caligarism&quot; was coined as a result, referring to a style of similar films that focus on such themes as bizarre madness and obsession, particularly through the use of visual distortion. Expressionism was late in coming to cinema, and by the time &quot;Caligari&quot; was released, many German critics felt the art form had become commercialised and trivialised; such well-known writers as Kasimir Edschmid, René Schickele, and Yvan Goll had already pronounced the Expressionist movement dead by the time &quot;Caligari&quot; arrived in theatres. Few other purely Expressionistic films were produced, and &quot;Caligari&quot; was the only one readily accessible for several decades. Among the few films to fully embrace the Expressionist style were &quot;Genuine&quot; (1920) and &quot;Raskolnikow&quot; (1923), both directed by Wiene, as well as &quot;From Morn to Midnight&quot; (1920), &quot;Torgus&quot; (1921), &quot;Das Haus zum Mond&quot; (1921), &quot;Haus ohne Tür und ohne Fenster&quot; (1921) and &quot;Waxworks&quot;.

While few other purely Expressionistic films were made, &quot;Caligari&quot; still had a major influence over other German directors, and many of the film&#x27;s Expressionist elements – particularly the use of setting, light and shadow to represent the specific psychology of its characters – became prevalent in German cinema. Among the films to use these elements were Murnau&#x27;s &quot;Nosferatu&quot; (1922) and &quot;The Last Laugh&quot; (1924), G. W. Pabst&#x27;s &quot;Secrets of a Soul&quot; (1926), and Lang&#x27;s &quot;Metropolis&quot; (1927) and &quot;M&quot; (1931). The success of &quot;Caligari&quot; also affected the way in which German films were produced during the 1920s. For example, the majority of major German films over the next few years moved away from location shooting and were fully filmed in studios, which assigned much more importance to designers in German cinema. Robinson argues this led to the rise of a large number of film designers – such as Hans Dreier, Rochus Gliese, Albin Grau, Otto Hunte, Alfred Junge, Erich Kettelhut and Paul Leni – and that effect was felt abroad as many of these talents later emigrated from Germany with the rise of the Nazi Party. Additionally, the success of &quot;Caligari&quot;&#x27;s collaborative effort – including its director, set designers and actors – influenced subsequent film production in Germany for many years, making teamwork a hallmark of German cinema in the Weimar Republic.

The effect of &quot;Caligari&quot; was felt not just in German cinema, but internationally as well. Both Rotha and film historian William K. Everson wrote that the film probably had as much of a long-term effect on Hollywood directors as &quot;Battleship Potemkin&quot; (1925). In his book &quot;The Film Til Now&quot;, Rotha wrote that &quot;Caligari&quot; and &quot;Potemkin&quot; were the &quot;two most momentous advances in the development of the cinema&quot;, and said &quot;Caligari&quot; &quot;served to attract to the cinema audience many people who had hitherto regarded the film as the low watermark of intelligence&quot;. &quot;Caligari&quot; influenced the style and content of Hollywood films in the 1920s and early 1930s, particularly in films such as &quot;The Bells&quot; (1926), &quot;The Man Who Laughs&quot; (1928) and &quot;Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; (1932), and had a major influence on American horror films of the 1930s, some of which featured an antagonist using Caligari-like supernatural abilities to control others, such as &quot;Dracula&quot; (1931), &quot;Svengali&quot; (1931) and &quot;The Mad Genius&quot; (1931). Kaes said both &quot;Caligari&quot;&#x27;s stylistic elements, and the Cesare character in particular, influenced the Universal Studios horror films of the 1930s, which often prominently featured some sort of monster, such as &quot;Frankenstein&quot; (1931), &quot;The Mummy&quot; (1932), &quot;The Black Cat&quot; (1934), and &quot;Bride of Frankenstein&quot; (1935). The Expressionism of &quot;Caligari&quot; also influenced American avant-garde film, particularly those that used fantastic settings to illustrate an inhuman environment overpowering an individual. Early examples include &quot;The Fall of the House of Usher&quot; (1928), &quot;The Last Moment&quot; (1928) and &quot;The Life and Death of 9413: a Hollywood Extra&quot; (1928). LoBrutto wrote, &quot;Few films throughout motion picture history have had more influence on the avant-garde, art, and student cinema than &quot;Caligari&quot;&quot;.

&quot;Caligari&quot; and German Expressionism heavily influenced the American film noir period of the 1940s and &#x27;50s, both in visual style and narrative tone. Noir films tended to portray everyone, even the innocent, as the object of suspicion, a common thread in &quot;Caligari&quot;. The genre also employs several Expressionistic elements in its dark and shadowy visual style, stylised and abstract photography, and distorted and expressive make-up and acting. &quot;Caligari&quot; also influenced films produced in the Soviet Union, such as &quot;Aelita&quot; (1924) and &quot;The Overcoat&quot; (1926). Observers have noted the black and white films of Ingmar Bergman bear a resemblance to the German films of the 1920s, and film historian Roy Armes has called him &quot;the true heir&quot; of &quot;Caligari&quot;. Bergman himself, however, has downplayed the influence of German Expressionism on his work. &quot;Caligari&quot; has also affected stage theatre. Siegfried Kracauer wrote that the film&#x27;s use of the iris shot has been mimicked in theatrical productions, with lighting used to single out a lone actor.

&quot;Caligari&quot; continues to be one of the most discussed and debated films from the Weimar Republic. Two major books have played a large part in shaping the perception of the film and its effect on cinema as a whole: Siegfried Kracauer&#x27;s &quot;From Caligari to Hitler&quot; (1947) and Lotte Eisner&#x27;s &quot;The Haunted Screen&quot; (1974). &quot;From Caligari to Hitler&quot; based its claims about the film largely on an unpublished typescript by Hans Janowitz called &quot;Caligari: The Story of a Famous Story&quot;, which gave Janowitz and Carl Mayer principal credit for the making of &quot;Caligari&quot;. Mike Budd wrote of Kracauer&#x27;s book: &quot;Perhaps no film or period has been so thoroughly understood through a particular interpretation as has &quot;Caligari&quot;, and Weimar cinema generally, through Kracauer&#x27;s social-psychological approach&quot;. Prior to the publication of &quot;From Caligari to Hitler&quot;, few critics had derived any symbolic political meaning from the film, but Kracauer&#x27;s argument that it symbolised German obedience toward authority and a premonition of the rise of Adolf Hitler drastically changed attitudes about &quot;Caligari&quot;. Many of his interpretations of the film are still embraced, even by those who have strongly disagreed with his general premise, and even as certain claims Kracauer made have been disproven, such as his statement that the original script included no frame story. Eisner&#x27;s book, meanwhile, placed &quot;Caligari&quot; into historical context by identifying how it influenced Expressionist features in other films of the 1920s.

Film historian David Robinson claimed Wiene, despite being the director of &quot;Caligari&quot;, is often given the least amount of credit for its production. He believes this is in part because Wiene died in 1938, closer to the release of the film than any other major collaborators, and was therefore unable to defend his involvement in the work while others took credit. In fact, Robinson argues &quot;Caligari&quot; ultimately hurt Wiene&#x27;s reputation because his subsequent films did not match its success, so he is often wrongly considered &quot;a one-film director&quot; for whom &quot;Caligari&quot; was &quot;a lucky fluke&quot;.

Japanese visual kei rock band Cali Gari derived their name from the film.

==Themes and interpretations==
===Authority and conformity===
&quot;Caligari&quot;, like a number of Weimar films that followed it, thematises brutal and irrational authority by making a violent and possibly insane authority figure its antagonist. Kracauer said Caligari was symbolic of the German war government and fatal tendencies inherent in the German system, saying the character &quot;stands for an unlimited authority that idolizes power as such, and, to satisfy its lust for domination, ruthlessly violates all human rights and values&quot;. Likewise, John D. Barlow described Caligari as an example of the tyrannical power and authority that had long plagued Germany, while Cesare represents the &quot;common man of unconditional obedience&quot;. Janowitz has claimed Cesare represents the common citizen who is conditioned to kill or be killed, just as soldiers are trained during their military service, and that Caligari is symbolic of the German government sending those soldiers off to die in the war. The control Caligari wields over the minds and actions of others results in chaos and both moral and social perversion. Cesare lacks any individuality and is simply a tool of his master; Barlow writes that he is so dependent on Caligari that he falls dead when he strays too far from the source of his sustenance, &quot;like a machine that has run out of fuel&quot;.

In his book &quot;From Caligari to Hitler&quot;, Kracauer argues the Caligari character is symptomatic of a subconscious need in German society for a tyrant, which he calls the German &quot;collective soul&quot;. Kracauer argues Caligari and Cesare are premonitions of Adolf Hitler and his rule over Germany, and that his control over the weak-willed, puppet-like somnambulist prefigures aspects of the mentality that allowed the Nazi Party to rise. He calls Caligari&#x27;s use of hypnotism to impose his will foreshadowing of Hitler&#x27;s &quot;manipulation of the soul&quot;. Kracauer described the film as an example of Germany&#x27;s obedience to authority and failure or unwillingness to rebel against deranged authority, and reflects a &quot;general retreat&quot; into a shell that occurred in post-war Germany. Cesare symbolises those who have no mind of their own and must follow the paths of others; Kracauer wrote he foreshadows a German future in which &quot;self-appointed Caligaris hypnotized innumerable Cesares into murder&quot;. Barlow rejects Kracauer&#x27;s claims that the film glorifies authority &quot;just because it has not made a preachy statement against it&quot;, and said the connection between Caligari and Hitler lies in the mood the film conveys, not an endorsement of such tyrant on the film&#x27;s part.

Everyday reality in &quot;Caligari&quot; is dominated by tyrannical aspects. Authorities sit atop high perches above the people they deal with and hold offices out of sight at the end of long, forbidding stairways. Most of the film&#x27;s characters are caricatures who fit neatly into prescribed social roles, such as the outraged citizens chasing a public enemy, the authoritarian police who are deferential to their superiors, the oft-harassed bureaucratic town clerk, and the asylum attendants who act like stereotypical &quot;little men in white suits&quot;. Only Caligari and Cesare are atypical of social roles, instead serving as, in Barlow&#x27;s words, &quot;abstractions of social fears, the incarnations of demonic forces of a nightmarish world the bourgeoisie was afraid to acknowledge, where self-assertion is pushed to willful and arbitrary power over others&quot;. Kracauer wrote the film demonstrates a contrast between the rigid control, represented by such characters as Caligari and the town clerk, and chaos, represented by the crowds of people at the fair and the seemingly never-ending spinning of the merry-go-rounds. He said the film leaves no room for middle ground between these two extremes, and that viewers are forced to embrace either insanity or authoritarian rigidity, leaving little space for human freedom. Kracauer writes: &quot;&quot;Caligari&quot; exposes the soul wavering between tyranny and chaos, and facing a desperate situation: any escape from tyranny seems to throw it into a state of utter confusion&quot;.

Caligari is not the only symbol of arrogant authority in the film. In fact, he is a victim of harsh authority himself during the scene with the dismissive town clerk, who brushes him off and ignores him to focus on his paperwork. Film historian Thomas Elsaesser argues that Caligari&#x27;s murderous rampage through Cesare can be seen as a rebellious, anti-authoritarian streak in response to such experiences as these, even in spite of his own authoritarianism. The Expressionistic set design in this scene further amplifies the power of the official and the weakness of his supplicant; the clerk towers in an excessively high chair over the small and humiliated Caligari. The scene represents class and status differences, and conveys the psychological experience of being simultaneously outraged and powerless in the face of a petty bureaucracy. Another common visual motif is the use of stairways to illustrate the hierarchy of authority figures, such as the multiple stairs leading up to police headquarters, and three staircases ascending to Caligari in the asylum.

Franzis expresses resentment of all forms of authority, particularly during the end of the frame story, when he feels he has been institutionalised because of the madness of the authorities, not because there is anything wrong with him. Franzis can be seen, at least within the main narrative, as a symbol of reason and enlightenment triumphing over the irrational tyrant and unmasking the absurdity of social authority. But Kracauer contended the frame story undermines that premise. He argues if not for the frame story, the tale of Franzis&#x27;s efforts against Caligari would have been a praiseworthy example of independence and rebellion against authority. However, with the addition of the frame story, which places the veracity of Franzis&#x27;s claims into question, Kracauer argues the film glorifies authority and turns a reactionary story into an authoritarian film: &quot;The result of these modifications was to falsify the action and to ultimately reduce it to the ravings of a madman.&quot; Kracauer believed these changes were not necessarily intentional, but rather an &quot;instinctive submission to the necessities of the screen&quot; because commercial films had to &quot;answer to mass desires&quot;. Fritz Lang disagreed with Kracauer&#x27;s argument, and instead believes the frame story makes the film&#x27;s revolutionary inclinations more convincing, not less. David Robinson said, as time passed, filmgoers have been less inclined to interpret the film as a vindication of authority because modern audiences have grown more skeptical of authority in general, and are more inclined to believe Franzis&#x27;s story and interpret the asylum director as wrongly committing Franzis to silence him.

===Point of view and perception of reality===
Another major theme of &quot;Caligari&quot; is, Stephen Brockmann writes, &quot;the destabilized contrast between insanity and sanity and hence the destabilization of the very notion of sanity itself&quot;. By the end of the film, according to Brockman, viewers realise the story they have been watching has been told from the perspective of an insane narrator, and therefore they cannot accept anything they have seen as reliable. The film&#x27;s unusual visual abstractions and other stylised elements serve to show the world as one experienced by a madman. Similarly, the film has been described as portraying the story as a nightmare and the frame story as the real world. John D. Barlow said the film exemplifies a common Expressionist theme that &quot;the ultimate perception of reality will appear distorted and insane to the healthy and practical mind&quot;. The film serves as a reminder that any story told through a flashback subjectivises the story from the perspective of the narrator. At the film&#x27;s conclusion, the asylum director shows no indication of ill will toward Franzis; in fact, he appears to genuinely care for his patients, at least from Barlow&#x27;s perspective. But Franzis still believes he is being persecuted, and thus, in his version of the story, Caligari assumes the role of persecutor.

However, the Expressionistic visual elements of the film are present not only in the main narrative, but also in the epilogue and prologue scenes of the frame story, which are supposed to be an objective account of reality. For example, the frame story scenes still have trees with tentacle-like branches and a high, foreboding wall in the background. Strange leaf and line patterns are seen on the bench Franzis sits upon, flame-like geometric designs can be seen on the walls, and his asylum cell has the same distorted shape as in the main narrative. If the primary story were strictly the delusions of a madman, the frame story would be completely devoid of those elements, but the fact they are present makes it unclear whether that perspective can be taken as reliable either. Instead, the film offers no true or normal world to oppose to that of the twisted and nightmarish world as described by Franzis. As a result, after the film&#x27;s closing scene, it can be seen as ambiguous whether Franzis or the asylum director is truly the insane one, or whether both are insane. Likewise, the final shot of the film, with an iris that fades to a close-up on the asylum director&#x27;s face, further creates doubt over whether the character is actually sane and trustworthy. In Brockman&#x27;s words, &quot;In the end, the film is not just about one unfortunate madman; it is about an entire world that is possibly out of balance&quot;. Mike Budd notes that, during the scene in which asylum doctors restrain Franzis, his movements closely mimic those of Caligari from a similar scene during the main story. Budd says this suggests a &quot;dream logic of repetition&quot; that throws further confusion on which perspective is reality.

Beyond Franzis&#x27;s individual circumstances, the use of the narrator&#x27;s perspective in &quot;Dr. Caligari&quot; can be seen as reflective of a worldview of the screenwriters. Mayer and Janowitz were pacifists opposed to what Eisner described as the willingness of Germans to commit themselves to the dark forces, such as demoniac magic and supernatural powers, that led to death on the battlefield. Although he does not think it possible to reduce the narrative or the film to the beliefs of its makers, Eisner claims Franzis can be seen as embodying the politics of Expressionism&#x27;s anti-naturalism, through which a protagonist does not see the world objectively, but has &quot;visions&quot; that are abstracted from individuality and psychology. The framing device of an insane asylum, for Eisner, has a broader connotation as a statement on social reality in the context of the &quot;state of exception&quot;. Here, Eisner claims, the militarist and imperialist tendency of monopoly capitalism is combined with what Sigmund Freud would later refer to as the longing for protection by a tyrannical father figure, or what Kracauer characterised as &quot;asocial authority&quot;.

===Double life===
Duality is another common theme in &quot;Caligari&quot;. Caligari is portrayed in the main narrative as an insane tyrant, and in the frame story as a respected authority and director of a mental institution. As a result of this duality, it is possible for the viewer to suspect a malevolent aspect of him at the conclusion of the film, even despite evidence indicating he is a kind and caring man. Even within the main narrative alone, Caligari lives a double life: holding a respectable position as the asylum director, but becoming a hypnotist and murderer at night. Additionally, the character is actually a double of the &quot;real&quot; Caligari, an 18th-century mystic whom the film character becomes so obsessed with that he desires to penetrate his innermost secrets and &quot;become Caligari&quot;. Franzis also takes on a double life of sorts, serving as the heroic protagonist in the main narrative and a patient in a mental institution in the frame story. Anton Kaes described the story Franzis tells as an act of transference with his psychiatrist, as well as a projection of his feelings that he is a victim under the spell of the all-powerful asylum director, just as Cesare is the hypnotised victim of Caligari. The Cesare character serves as both a persecutor and a victim, as he is both a murderer and the unwilling slave of an oppressive master.

Siegfried Kracauer said by coupling a fantasy in which Franzis overthrows a tyrannical authority with a reality in which authority triumphs over Franzis, &quot;Caligari&quot; reflects a double aspect of German life, suggesting they reconsider their traditional belief in authority even as they embrace it. A contrast between levels of reality exists not only in the characterisations, but in the presentation of some of the scenes as well. This, Barlow writes, &quot;reveals a contrast between external calm and internal chaos&quot;. For example, flashback scenes when Franzis reads Caligari&#x27;s diary, in which the doctor is shown growing obsessed with learning hypnotic powers, take place as Caligari is sleeping peacefully in the present. Another example is the fair, which on the surface appears to represent fun and escapism, but reveals a lurking sense of chaos and disaster in the form of Caligari and Cesare. The visual elements of the film also convey a sense of duality, particularly in the contrasts between black and white. This is especially prevalent in the sets, where black shadows are set against white walls, but also in other elements like the costumes and make-up. For instance, Caligari wears mostly black, but white streaks are present in his hair and on his gloves. Cesare&#x27;s face is a ghostly white, but the darks of his eyes are heavily outlined in black. Likewise, Jane&#x27;s white face contrasts with her deep, dark eyes.

===Reflection on post-World War I Germany===
Critics have suggested that &quot;Caligari&quot; highlights some of the neuroses prevalent in Germany and the Weimar Republic when the film was made, particularly in the shadow of World War I, at a time when extremism was rampant, reactionaries still controlled German institutions, and citizens feared the harm the Treaty of Versailles would have on the economy. Siegfried Kracauer wrote that the paranoia and fear portrayed in the film were signs of things to come in Germany, and that the film reflected a tendency in Germans to &quot;retreat into themselves&quot; and away from political engagement following the war. Vincent LoBrutto wrote that the film can be seen as a social or political analogy of &quot;the moral and physical breakdown of Germany at the time, with a madman on the loose wreaking havoc on a distorted and off-balanced society, a metaphor for a country in chaos&quot;.

Anton Kaes, who called &quot;Caligari&quot; &quot;an aggressive statement about war psychiatry, murder and deception&quot;, wrote that Alan&#x27;s question to Cesare, &quot;How long have I to live?&quot; reflected the trauma German citizens experienced during the war, as that question was often on the minds of soldiers and of family members back home concerned about their loved ones in the military. Franzis&#x27;s despair after Alan&#x27;s murder can likewise be compared to that of the many soldiers who survived the war but saw their friends die on the battlefield. Kaes noted other parallels between the film and war experiences, noting that Cesare attacked Alan at dawn, a common time for attacks during the war. Thomas Elsaesser called Caligari an &quot;outstanding example of how &#x27;fantastic&#x27; representations in German films from the early 1920s seem to bear the imprint of pressures from external events, to which they refer only through the violence with which they disguise and disfigure them&quot;.

==Sequels, remakes and musical works==
===Film===
Several unsuccessful attempts were made to produce sequels and remakes in the decades following &quot;Caligari&quot; release. Robert Wiene bought the rights to &quot;Caligari&quot; from Universum Film AG in 1934 with the intention of filming a sound remake, which never materialised before Wiene&#x27;s death in 1938. He intended to cast Jean Cocteau as Cesare, and a script, believed to be written by Wiene, indicated the Expressionist style would have been replaced with a French surrealist style. In 1944, Erich Pommer and Hans Janowitz each separately attempted to obtain the legal rights to the film, with hopes of a Hollywood remake. Pommer attempted to argue he had a better claim to the rights because the primary value of the original film came not from the writing, but &quot;in the revolutionary way the picture was produced&quot;. However, both Janowitz and Pommer ran into complications related to the invalidity of Nazi law in the United States, and uncertainty over the legal rights of sound and silent films. Janowitz wrote a treatment for a remake, and in January 1945 was offered a minimum guarantee of $16,000 against a five-percent royalty for his rights to the original film for a sequel to be directed by Fritz Lang, but the project never came to fruition. Later, Janowitz planned a sequel called &quot;Caligari II&quot;, and unsuccessfully attempted to sell the property to a Hollywood producer for $30,000.

Around 1947, Hollywood agent Paul Kohner and Hungarian filmmaker also planned a &quot;Caligari&quot; sequel; Matray and his wife Maria Solveg wrote a screenplay called &quot;The Return of Caligari&quot;. That script would have reimagined Caligari as a former Nazi officer and war criminal, but the film was never produced. In 1960, independent Hollywood producer Robert Lippert acquired the rights to &quot;Caligari&quot; from Matray and Universum Film AG for $50,000, and produced a film called &quot;The Cabinet of Caligari&quot;, which was released in 1962. Screenwriter Robert Bloch did not intend to write a &quot;Caligari&quot; remake, and in fact the title was forced upon his untitled screenplay by director Roger Kay. The film had few similarities to the original &quot;Caligari&quot; except for its title and a plot twist at the end, in which it is revealed the story was simply the delusion of the protagonist, who believed she was being held captive by a character named Caligari. Instead, he was her psychiatrist, and he cures her at the end of the film.

The 1983 film &quot;Caligari&#x27;s Cure&quot;, directed by avant-garde filmmaker Tom Palazzolo, was an experimental updating of &quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari&quot; that featured extensive clips from it. While &quot;Caligari&#x27;s Cure&quot; remains obscure, it was generally well-received.

A quasi-sequel, called &quot;Dr. Caligari&quot;, was released in 1989, directed by Stephen Sayadian and starring Madeleine Reynal as the granddaughter of the original Caligari, now running an asylum and performing bizarre hormonal experiments on its patients. The sex-driven story ultimately had little in common with the original film. In 1992, theatre director Peter Sellars released his only feature film, &quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Ramirez&quot;, an experimental film loosely based on &quot;Caligari&quot;. However, the storyline was created as the film was being made, so it has few similarities with the original film. The film was screened only at the 1992 Sundance Film Festival and never theatrically released. An independent film remake of &quot;Caligari&quot; edited, written and directed by David Lee Fisher was released in 2005, in which new actors were placed in front of the actual backdrops from the original film. The actors performed in front of a green screen, then their performances were superimposed in front of matte shots based on the original sets. Doug Jones played the role of Cesare.

===Music and stage===
Numerous musicians have composed scores to accompany the film.

* The Club Foot Orchestra premiered a score penned by ensemble founder and artistic director Richard Marriott in 1987.
* The Israeli Electronica group TaaPet composed a soundtrack for the film and performed it several times through Israel in 2000.
* The British composer and musician Geoff Smith composed a new soundtrack for the film in 2003.
* In 2013, the Dallas Chamber Symphony commissioned composer Brian Satterwhite to write an original musical score for the film, which was premiered during a concert screening at Moody Performance Hall on February 26, 2013 with Richard McKay conducting.
* The Dutch psychedelic band Monomyth composed a new score and performed it during a screening of &quot;Caligari&quot; at the Imagine Film Festival in the Netherlands in April 2016. Bertelsmann/BMG commissioned Timothy Brock to adapt his 1996 score for string orchestra for a 2014 restoration; Brock conducted the premiere in Brussels on 15 September 2014.
* In 2012, the Chatterbox Audio Theatre recorded a live soundtrack, including dialogue, sound effects, and music for &quot;Caligari&quot;, which was released on YouTube on 30 October 2013.
* Two new scores were recorded for a 2016 DVD release of &quot;Caligari&quot;: a traditional score by Timothy Brock performed by the Brussels Philharmonic, and an electroacoustic score by Edison Studio, a collective of composers.
* In 1981, Bill Nelson was asked by the Yorkshire Actors Company to create a soundtrack for a stage adaptation of the film. That music was later recorded for his 1982 album &quot;Das Kabinet (The Cabinet Of Doctor Caligari)&quot;.
* In 1983, the German TV station ZDF commissioned composer Peter Michael Hamel to create a new score for a restoration of the film, based on a 1921 print. The version with Hamel&#x27;s music premiered on ZDF in May 1983, and was subsequently broadcast during the 1980s and 1990s on TV stations in a number of European countries, including Spain and Poland.
* &quot;Caligari&quot; was adapted into an opera in 1997 by composer John Moran. It premiered at the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in a production by Robert McGrath.
* Joseph Kahn and Rob Zombie directed a music video for the 1999 single &quot;Living Dead Girl&quot; with imagery directly inspired by &quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari&quot;, with Zombie&#x27;s wife Sheri Moon Zombie playing the Cesare part.
* In 2015, Indian scenographer and director Deepan Sivaraman adapted the film into an hour-long mixed-media piece with the performance studies students at Ambedkar University Delhi as part of a course entitled &quot;Space and Spectatorship&quot;.
* Scottish Opera&#x27;s Connect Company commissioned composer Karen MacIver and librettist Allan Dunn to produce an opera based on &quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari&quot;, which was first performed in 2016. Though it shared the same story as the film, the setting was changed to Glasgow Green and Gartloch in Glasgow, Scotland.
* In 2020, Spanish post-rock band Toundra released their own soundtrack to the movie. It was released exactly 100 years after the original film premiere. The album consists of 7 songs, which match the film structure - opening title sequence, plus six film acts. The songs are also the same length as the acts, so the music can be synchronised to the film.
* In 2024, German musician and Ex-Kraftwerk member Karl Bartos released a new soundtrack for the movie. It premiered on February 17 at the Alte Oper in Frankfurt am Main.
* In 1998, an audio adaptation of &quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari&quot; written and directed by Yuri Rasovsky was released by Tangled Web Audio on audio cassette. The cast included John de Lancie, Kaitlin Hopkins, and Robertson Dean. The dramatisation won the Independent Publisher Book Award for Best Direct-to-Audio Production in 1998. In 2008, BBC Radio 3 broadcast an audio adaptation by Amanda Dalton entitled &quot;Caligari&quot;, starring Luke Treadaway, Tom Ferguson, Sarah McDonald Hughes, Terence Mann, and countertenor Robin Blaze as Cesare. Caligari was an entirely silent character in this adaptation.

==See also==
*List of cult films

==Notes==

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Wright, Willard Huntington, &quot;The Romance of the Third Dimension,&quot; &quot;Photoplay&quot;, September 1921, p. 41.
==External links==
* 
* &quot;From Caligari to Hitler&quot; – A philosophical analysis of &quot;The Cabinet of Dr Caligari&quot;, by Siegfried Kracauer
* 
* Lantern slide, with Goldwyn distributing the film (State University of New York; SUNY)
* &quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari&quot; Dossier on WeimarCinema.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="48" end="54" title="silent film" label="silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="55" end="66" title="horror film" label="horror film"/>
<link wikidata="Q76552" start="79" end="91" title="Robert Wiene" label="Robert Wiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q91803" start="107" end="120" title="Hans Janowitz" label="Hans Janowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q78758" start="125" end="135" title="Carl Mayer" label="Carl Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q160476" start="170" end="197" title="German Expressionist cinema" label="German Expressionist cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="231" end="240" title="Hypnosis" label="hypnotist"/>
<link wikidata="Q63051" start="242" end="255" title="Werner Krauss" label="Werner Krauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q388626" start="280" end="292" title="Sleepwalking" label="somnambulist"/>
<link wikidata="Q58801" start="294" end="306" title="Conrad Veidt" label="Conrad Veidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="646" end="654" title="pacifist" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="744" end="755" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505819" start="781" end="792" title="frame story" label="frame story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321123" start="839" end="851" title="Plot twist" label="twist ending"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123151" start="965" end="977" title="Hermann Warm" label="Hermann Warm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545913" start="979" end="993" title="Walter Reimann" label="Walter Reimann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546039" start="998" end="1011" title="Walter Röhrig" label="Walter Röhrig"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2069" end="2080" title="Expo 58#International film poll" label="Brussels 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="2117" end="2128" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q95830126" start="2154" end="2180" title="List of first horror films by country" label="the first true horror film"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220732" start="2201" end="2212" title="Danny Peary" label="Danny Peary"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="2243" end="2252" title="cult film" label="cult film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="2273" end="2287" title="Art film" label="arthouse films"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="2456" end="2465" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q473432" start="2787" end="2796" title="Flashback (narrative)" label="flashback"/>
<link wikidata="Q388626" start="3186" end="3198" title="Sleepwalking" label="somnambulist"/>
<link wikidata="Q231647" start="5899" end="5911" title="straitjacket" label="straitjacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321123" start="6033" end="6045" title="Plot twist" label="twist ending"/>
<link wikidata="Q63051" start="6591" end="6604" title="Werner Krauss" label="Werner Krauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q58801" start="6623" end="6635" title="Conrad Veidt" label="Conrad Veidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q87651" start="6648" end="6663" title="Friedrich Feher" label="Friedrich Feher"/>
<link wikidata="Q66115" start="6677" end="6688" title="Lil Dagover" label="Lil Dagover"/>
<link wikidata="Q88143" start="6699" end="6727" title="Hans Heinrich von Twardowski" label="Hans Heinrich von Twardowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q100338" start="6738" end="6754" title="Rudolf Lettinger" label="Rudolf Lettinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q91803" start="6853" end="6866" title="Hans Janowitz" label="Hans Janowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q78758" start="6871" end="6881" title="Carl Mayer" label="Carl Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6942" end="6953" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q86367" start="7410" end="7423" title="Ernst Deutsch" label="Ernst Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524192" start="7466" end="7478" title="Gilda Langer" label="Gilda Langer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="8259" end="8272" title="German Expressionism" label="Expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q66410" start="8283" end="8295" title="Paul Wegener" label="Paul Wegener"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="8718" end="8724" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="8936" end="8943" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976" start="8951" end="8961" title="Reeperbahn" label="Reeperbahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433126" start="8974" end="8985" title="Hamburg Wallring" label="Holstenwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123151" start="9627" end="9639" title="Hermann Warm" label="Hermann Warm"/>
<link wikidata="Q502" start="10451" end="10459" title="Stendhal" label="Stendhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471" start="10519" end="10527" title="La Scala" label="La Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="10539" end="10544" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="10764" end="10783" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Arthur Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19504" start="11712" end="11722" title="Fritz Lang" label="Fritz Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q61441" start="11752" end="11764" title="Erich Pommer" label="Erich Pommer"/>
<link wikidata="Q54709350" start="11792" end="11802" title="Decla-Film" label="Decla-Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q751317" start="12843" end="12856" title="Grand Guignol" label="Grand Guignol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505819" start="13100" end="13111" title="frame story" label="frame story"/>
<link wikidata="Q76552" start="13721" end="13733" title="Robert Wiene" label="Robert Wiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505379" start="14528" end="14551" title="From Caligari to Hitler" label="From Caligari to Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q76435" start="14559" end="14577" title="Siegfried Kracauer" label="Siegfried Kracauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q63051" start="15044" end="15057" title="Werner Krauss" label="Werner Krauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q876997" start="15205" end="15224" title="Deutsche Kinemathek" label="Deutsche Kinemathek"/>
<link wikidata="Q567536" start="16803" end="16814" title="The Spiders (film)" label="The Spiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q89255" start="17162" end="17176" title="Rudolf Meinert" label="Rudolf Meinert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545913" start="17652" end="17666" title="Walter Reimann" label="Walter Reimann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546039" start="17671" end="17684" title="Walter Röhrig" label="Walter Röhrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q221490" start="17763" end="17772" title="Der Sturm" label="Der Sturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="19536" end="19545" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q558054" start="20336" end="20348" title="Alfred Kubin" label="Alfred Kubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="20647" end="20653" title="cubism" label="cubist"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="21230" end="21239" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q154432" start="21906" end="21917" title="Biedermeier" label="Biedermeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="21948" end="21959" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q77740" start="22336" end="22351" title="Lotte H. Eisner" label="Lotte H. Eisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477112" start="22590" end="22608" title="German Romanticism" label="German Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q78639" start="22819" end="22832" title="Max Reinhardt" label="Max Reinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q152778" start="22859" end="22869" title="Die Brücke" label="Die Brücke"/>
<link wikidata="Q86367" start="23013" end="23026" title="Ernst Deutsch" label="Ernst Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q215036" start="23182" end="23194" title="Paul Czinner" label="Paul Czinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q66410" start="23436" end="23448" title="Paul Wegener" label="Paul Wegener"/>
<link wikidata="Q58801" start="23540" end="23552" title="Conrad Veidt" label="Conrad Veidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q674067" start="24038" end="24048" title="pantomimic" label="pantomimic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24475" end="24486" title="Seeschlacht" label="Seeschlacht"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27145" end="27162" title="Weissensee Studios#9-12 Franz Josef-Straße" label="Lixie-Film studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165225" start="27182" end="27203" title="Continental-Kunstfilm" label="Continental-Kunstfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q675164" start="27259" end="27268" title="Weissensee (Berlin)" label="Weißensee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215389" start="27419" end="27441" title="The Plague of Florence" label="The Plague of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q752638" start="28009" end="28021" title="barrel organ" label="barrel organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q245069" start="29457" end="29468" title="Intertitle" label="title cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q99376" start="29910" end="29925" title="Willy Hameister" label="Willy Hameister"/>
<link wikidata="Q585697" start="30365" end="30377" title="intercutting" label="intercutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="31598" end="31609" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q77740" start="32210" end="32225" title="Lotte H. Eisner" label="Lotte H. Eisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="33783" end="33805" title="Expressionist painting" label="Expressionist painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="37078" end="37093" title="Detective fiction" label="detective story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="37577" end="37585" title="art film" label="art film"/>
<link wikidata="Q707628" start="38516" end="38529" title="Roger Manvell" label="Roger Manvell"/>
<link wikidata="Q110733" start="38534" end="38551" title="Heinrich Fraenkel" label="Heinrich Fraenkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q179922" start="39807" end="39835" title="Goldwyn Pictures" label="Goldwyn Distributing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035943" start="39874" end="39889" title="Capitol Theatre (New York City)" label="Capitol Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q368274" start="40562" end="40572" title="Ernö Rapée" label="Ernö Rapée"/>
<link wikidata="Q28999" start="40653" end="40671" title="Johann Strauss III" label="Johann Strauss III"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="40673" end="40690" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="40692" end="40706" title="Claude Debussy" label="Claude Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="40708" end="40723" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q49481" start="40728" end="40744" title="Sergei Prokofiev" label="Sergei Prokofiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q468865" start="41146" end="41161" title="American Legion" label="American Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091635" start="42197" end="42209" title="Louis Delluc" label="Louis Delluc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5792382" start="42338" end="42355" title="Spanish Red Cross" label="Spanish Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313289" start="42621" end="42631" title="Emmanuelle (1974 film)" label="Emmanuelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="42891" end="42904" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6438202" start="43138" end="43154" title="Kristin Thompson" label="Kristin Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608503" start="43904" end="43919" title="Herbert Ihering" label="Herbert Ihering"/>
<link wikidata="Q123080" start="43933" end="43948" title="Blaise Cendrars" label="Blaise Cendrars"/>
<link wikidata="Q57386" start="44317" end="44331" title="Kurt Tucholsky" label="Kurt Tucholsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="45299" end="45314" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="45358" end="45365" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="45570" end="45584" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="45612" end="45625" title="Modern art" label="modernist art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912" start="45661" end="45675" title="Marcel Duchamp" label="Marcel Duchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q421716" start="45689" end="45723" title="Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2" label="Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q356913" start="45981" end="45993" title="Albert Lewin" label="Albert Lewin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133614" start="46352" end="46395" title="National Board of Review" label="National Board of Review of Motion Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q313572" start="46730" end="46740" title="Abel Gance" label="Abel Gance"/>
<link wikidata="Q55388" start="46829" end="46839" title="René Clair" label="René Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091635" start="46928" end="46940" title="Louis Delluc" label="Louis Delluc"/>
<link wikidata="Q456968" start="47247" end="47259" title="Jean Epstein" label="Jean Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q83158" start="47417" end="47429" title="Jean Cocteau" label="Jean Cocteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003" start="47767" end="47784" title="Sergei Eisenstein" label="Sergei Eisenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="48167" end="48178" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220732" start="48249" end="48260" title="Danny Peary" label="Danny Peary"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="48291" end="48300" title="cult film" label="cult film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="48321" end="48335" title="Art film" label="arthouse films"/>
<link wikidata="Q74035" start="48454" end="48480" title="Expo 58" label="Brussels World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861005" start="48808" end="48818" title="Paul Rotha" label="Paul Rotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359502" start="49211" end="49216" title="Rogue (magazine)" label="Rogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="49385" end="49405" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="49721" end="49736" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q729113" start="49765" end="49781" title="weighted arithmetic mean" label="weighted average"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006" start="50050" end="50064" title="Akira Kurosawa" label="Akira Kurosawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q69428" start="51278" end="51294" title="Kasimir Edschmid" label="Kasimir Edschmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q69322" start="51296" end="51310" title="René Schickele" label="René Schickele"/>
<link wikidata="Q527024" start="51316" end="51325" title="Yvan Goll" label="Yvan Goll"/>
<link wikidata="Q876693" start="51643" end="51650" title="Genuine (film)" label="Genuine"/>
<link wikidata="Q873302" start="51674" end="51685" title="Raskolnikow (film)" label="Raskolnikow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418179" start="51741" end="51762" title="From Morn to Midnight" label="From Morn to Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51783" end="51789" title="Torgus" label="Torgus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16548713" start="51810" end="51827" title="Das Haus zum Mond" label="Das Haus zum Mond"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51848" end="51878" title="Haus ohne Tür und ohne Fenster" label="Haus ohne Tür und ohne Fenster"/>
<link wikidata="Q566863" start="51902" end="51910" title="Waxworks (film)" label="Waxworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q151895" start="52311" end="52320" title="Nosferatu" label="Nosferatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q258830" start="52344" end="52358" title="The Last Laugh (1924 film)" label="The Last Laugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q55421" start="52373" end="52384" title="G. W. Pabst" label="G. W. Pabst"/>
<link wikidata="Q473920" start="52398" end="52415" title="Secrets of a Soul" label="Secrets of a Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q151599" start="52452" end="52462" title="Metropolis (1927 film)" label="Metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q127021" start="52486" end="52487" title="M (1931 film)" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="Q70495" start="52904" end="52915" title="Hans Dreier" label="Hans Dreier"/>
<link wikidata="Q126854" start="52917" end="52930" title="Rochus Gliese" label="Rochus Gliese"/>
<link wikidata="Q97413" start="52932" end="52942" title="Albin Grau" label="Albin Grau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039252" start="52944" end="52954" title="Otto Hunte" label="Otto Hunte"/>
<link wikidata="Q72595" start="52956" end="52968" title="Alfred Junge" label="Alfred Junge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352557" start="52970" end="52985" title="Erich Kettelhut" label="Erich Kettelhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q77465" start="52990" end="52999" title="Paul Leni" label="Paul Leni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="53109" end="53119" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013826" start="53516" end="53534" title="William K. Everson" label="William K. Everson"/>
<link wikidata="Q152350" start="53630" end="53649" title="Battleship Potemkin" label="Battleship Potemkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716444" start="54159" end="54168" title="The Bells (1926 film)" label="The Bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809883" start="54189" end="54207" title="The Man Who Laughs (1928 film)" label="The Man Who Laughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q202264" start="54231" end="54256" title="Murders in the Rue Morgue (1932 film)" label="Murders in the Rue Morgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q279378" start="54449" end="54456" title="Dracula (1931 English-language film)" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858039" start="54477" end="54485" title="Svengali (1931 film)" label="Svengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521718" start="54509" end="54523" title="The Mad Genius" label="The Mad Genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="54656" end="54673" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q546829" start="54770" end="54782" title="Frankenstein (1931 film)" label="Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q909071" start="54803" end="54812" title="The Mummy (1932 film)" label="The Mummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219330" start="54833" end="54846" title="The Black Cat (1934 film)" label="The Black Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q875904" start="54871" end="54892" title="Bride of Frankenstein" label="Bride of Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q790192" start="54974" end="54990" title="avant-garde film" label="avant-garde film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844413" start="55134" end="55164" title="The Fall of the House of Usher (1928 American film)" label="The Fall of the House of Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745897" start="55185" end="55200" title="The Last Moment (1928 film)" label="The Last Moment"/>
<link wikidata="" start="55224" end="55269" title="The Life and Death of 9413: a Hollywood Extra" label="The Life and Death of 9413: a Hollywood Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="55530" end="55539" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="55980" end="55992" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q380803" start="56008" end="56014" title="Aelita" label="Aelita"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007695" start="56038" end="56050" title="The Overcoat (1926 film)" label="The Overcoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546" start="56115" end="56129" title="Ingmar Bergman" label="Ingmar Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070407" start="56481" end="56490" title="iris shot" label="iris shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131425" start="58878" end="58888" title="visual kei" label="visual kei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934070" start="58899" end="58908" title="Cali Gari" label="Cali Gari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699337" start="59045" end="59057" title="Weimar culture" label="Weimar films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679820" start="59670" end="59693" title="unconditional obedience" label="unconditional obedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="60598" end="60610" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="60759" end="60769" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q95954" start="63468" end="63484" title="Thomas Elsaesser" label="Thomas Elsaesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q49447" start="69279" end="69288" title="worldview" label="worldview"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059014" start="70027" end="70045" title="state of exception" label="state of exception"/>
<link wikidata="Q20107624" start="70117" end="70136" title="monopoly capitalism" label="monopoly capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="70159" end="70172" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q334231" start="71365" end="71377" title="transference" label="transference"/>
<link wikidata="Q608353" start="71414" end="71424" title="Psychological projection" label="projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="73524" end="73544" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q41468" start="75362" end="75379" title="Universum Film AG" label="Universum Film AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q83158" start="75514" end="75526" title="Jean Cocteau" label="Jean Cocteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="75658" end="75668" title="Surrealism" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q19504" start="76403" end="76413" title="Fritz Lang" label="Fritz Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q86560" start="76637" end="76648" title="Paul Kohner" label="Paul Kohner"/>
<link wikidata="Q108306" start="76737" end="76749" title="Maria Solveg" label="Maria Solveg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346593" start="76971" end="76985" title="Robert Lippert" label="Robert Lippert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720891" start="77110" end="77133" title="The Cabinet of Caligari" label="The Cabinet of Caligari"/>
<link wikidata="Q355879" start="77182" end="77194" title="Robert Bloch" label="Robert Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77697" end="77717" title="Caligari&amp;#x27;s Cure" label="Caligari&amp;#x27;s Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q50738834" start="77759" end="77772" title="Tom Palazzolo" label="Tom Palazzolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304009" start="78003" end="78015" title="Dr. Caligari (film)" label="Dr. Caligari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610468" start="78057" end="78073" title="Stephen Sayadian" label="Stephen Sayadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867549" start="78337" end="78350" title="Peter Sellars" label="Peter Sellars"/>
<link wikidata="Q27733173" start="78389" end="78415" title="The Cabinet of Dr. Ramirez" label="The Cabinet of Dr. Ramirez"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="78636" end="78658" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720893" start="78695" end="78718" title="The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (2005 film)" label="independent film remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q262155" start="78938" end="78950" title="Chroma key" label="green screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662817" start="79006" end="79011" title="Matte (filmmaking)" label="matte"/>
<link wikidata="Q461309" start="79046" end="79056" title="Doug Jones (actor)" label="Doug Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607148" start="79177" end="79196" title="Club Foot Orchestra" label="Club Foot Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885780" start="79264" end="79280" title="Richard Marriott" label="Richard Marriott"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="79403" end="79409" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194339" start="79455" end="79466" title="Geoff Smith (British musician)" label="Geoff Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211282" start="79530" end="79553" title="Dallas Chamber Symphony" label="Dallas Chamber Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q131438182" start="79576" end="79593" title="Brian Satterwhite" label="Brian Satterwhite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123360" start="79693" end="79715" title="Moody Performance Hall" label="Moody Performance Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q130307649" start="79742" end="79755" title="Richard McKay" label="Richard McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344130" start="79894" end="79915" title="Imagine Film Festival" label="Imagine Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807076" start="79979" end="79992" title="Timothy Brock" label="Timothy Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="80286" end="80293" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q14622698" start="80447" end="80468" title="Brussels Philharmonic" label="Brussels Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326777" start="80477" end="80492" title="Electroacoustic music" label="electroacoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719226" start="80502" end="80515" title="Edison Studio" label="Edison Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272899" start="80555" end="80566" title="Bill Nelson (musician)" label="Bill Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989" start="80808" end="80811" title="ZDF" label="ZDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077045" start="80834" end="80853" title="Peter Michael Hamel" label="Peter Michael Hamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249334" start="81201" end="81211" title="John Moran (composer)" label="John Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113755" start="81233" end="81259" title="American Repertory Theater" label="American Repertory Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="81263" end="81287" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363428" start="81326" end="81337" title="Joseph Kahn (director)" label="Joseph Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q298255" start="81342" end="81352" title="Rob Zombie" label="Rob Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964937" start="81402" end="81418" title="Living Dead Girl (song)" label="Living Dead Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q238121" start="81524" end="81541" title="Sheri Moon Zombie" label="Sheri Moon Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17518850" start="81611" end="81627" title="Deepan Sivaraman" label="Deepan Sivaraman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741189" start="81722" end="81747" title="Ambedkar University Delhi" label="Ambedkar University Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972759" start="81816" end="81830" title="Scottish Opera" label="Scottish Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566834" start="82093" end="82106" title="Glasgow Green" label="Glasgow Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524413" start="82111" end="82119" title="Gartloch" label="Gartloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="82123" end="82130" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="82132" end="82140" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q44892" start="82532" end="82541" title="Kraftwerk" label="Kraftwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q60519" start="82549" end="82560" title="Karl Bartos" label="Karl Bartos"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061585" start="82767" end="82780" title="Yuri Rasovsky" label="Yuri Rasovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q550778" start="82852" end="82866" title="John de Lancie" label="John de Lancie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6348638" start="82868" end="82883" title="Kaitlin Hopkins" label="Kaitlin Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144096" start="82931" end="82963" title="Independent Publisher Book Awards" label="Independent Publisher Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q749608" start="83018" end="83029" title="BBC Radio 3" label="BBC Radio 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q129788" start="83117" end="83131" title="Luke Treadaway" label="Luke Treadaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q223166" start="83188" end="83200" title="countertenor" label="countertenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23638834" start="83201" end="83212" title="Robin Blaze" label="Robin Blaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614871" start="83301" end="83319" title="List of cult films" label="List of cult films"/>
<link wikidata="Q630454" start="83432" end="83458" title="S. S. Van Dine" label="Wright, Willard Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381612" start="83514" end="83523" title="Photoplay" label="Photoplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q76435" start="83687" end="83705" title="Siegfried Kracauer" label="Siegfried Kracauer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173651" wikidata="Q4860034" url="?curid=173651" title="Bard College at Simon's Rock">
<text>Bard College at Simon&#x27;s Rock (more commonly known as Simon&#x27;s Rock) is a private liberal arts college in Great Barrington, Massachusetts. It is part of Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, New York.

The school is an &quot;early college&quot;, designed for students to enroll immediately after completing the tenth or eleventh grade, rather than after graduating from high school. Simon&#x27;s Rock is the only accredited four-year early college to date and still the only college or university to take this approach with all of its students. It is one of a number of early college entrance programs that provide opportunities for students to enter college one or more years ahead of their traditional high school graduation date. A majority of students transfer to larger institutions after receiving an Associate of Arts degree after two years, although many stay for four to receive a Bachelor of Arts.

On November 19, 2024, Simon&#x27;s Rock provost John B. Weinstein announced that Simon&#x27;s Rock would relocate to Bard&#x27;s newly purchased Massena Campus, a property adjacent to the college&#x27;s main campus in Annandale-on-Hudson, New York, in Fall 2025.

==History==

The college&#x27;s founder, Elizabeth Blodgett Hall, had formerly been headmistress at Concord Academy, a private girls&#x27; school. She concluded from her experience, and that of her colleagues, that for many students the latter two years of high school are wasted on repetitious and overly constrained work. Many young students, she thought, are ready to pursue college-level academic work some time before the usual system asks it of them.
When envisioning the college in the early 1960s, Elizabeth Blodgett Hall deliberately named it nothing more than &quot;Simon&#x27;s Rock.&quot; Her reasoning for this was that even she did not know if it would be a high school, a college, or something else.
Simon&#x27;s Rock was officially founded in 1964. From 1964 to 1970, the buildings of the campus were built on Great Pine Farm, a farm that was owned by Hall&#x27;s family. These buildings were the college center, the library, the classroom buildings, three dormitories (now dormitories primarily for first-year students: Crosby, Dolliver, and Kendrick) and the dining hall. Some of the farm&#x27;s buildings, such as Hall&#x27;s own home, were incorporated into the college campus as well. Hall was the president of the college at its founding.

In 1966, the first class, all women, were admitted to Simon&#x27;s Rock. These women, along with some of the other early classes, went through a four-year program that resulted in the associate&#x27;s degree, at which point students desiring a further degree would have to transfer to another school. This differs from the current system, in which students receive an associate degree typically after two years, and a bachelor&#x27;s degree after four years of study.

The year 1970 saw both the first commencement ceremonies at Simon&#x27;s Rock as well as the first coeducational entering class.

Hall retired as Simon&#x27;s Rock&#x27;s president in 1972 after students organized a vote of no confidence, handing the post off to Baird W. Whitlock, whose presidency ended in 1977. Though only serving for five years, Whitlock was very influential to Simon&#x27;s Rock&#x27;s development. He oversaw a complete change in the associate&#x27;s program, which was condensed into two years, eliminating the high school components. He also oversaw the beginning of the bachelor&#x27;s degree program, which was accredited in 1974 by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges.

Samuel McGill was Simon&#x27;s Rock&#x27;s president from 1977 to 1979. That year, Bard College, based about 50 miles away in New York, took over Simon&#x27;s Rock, which was having difficulty expanding enrollment due to what the school perceived as a failure to grow acceptance of its experimental model and the prospect of funding drying up from the Blodgett family&#x27;s foundation. Leon Botstein, the president of Bard, oversaw the acquisition and became president of both institutions, a position he continues to hold as of 2024.

In 1981, with the help of various donors, Simon&#x27;s Rock purchased the Upper Campus, a former seminary three-quarters of a mile uphill from the original Simon&#x27;s Rock campus. This added a gymnasium, chapel and various forms of housing to Simon&#x27;s Rock&#x27;s assets.

In 1989, an arts and humanities building was built directly across Alford Road, near the college&#x27;s other arts buildings. In the same year, the student union was established in the lower level of the dining hall.

On December 14, 1992, a mass shooting occurred at Simon&#x27;s Rock College. At around 10:30 pm, Wayne Lo, a student at the school, shot and killed one student and one professor, and wounded three students and a security guard. His SKS rifle soon jammed and Lo later surrendered to authorities without further incident. The people killed in the shooting were 18-year-old Galen Gibson and 37-year-old Ñacuñán Saez.

In 1993, the then-unused chapel from upper campus was relocated to the main part of campus and renovated, becoming the college&#x27;s music building. That same year, a number of the campus&#x27;s arts and dormitory buildings were also renovated.

Since then, many buildings have been built or renovated. These include the Fisher Science and Academic Center (completed 1998), the Kilpatrick Athletic Center (completed 1999), the Daniel Arts Center (completed 2005), an apartment-like dormitory for upperclassmen (Pibly House, completed 2000), the Livingston Hall Student Union (completed 2006), and others.

In 2000, Simon&#x27;s Rock became the first college in the United States to officially recognize International Workers&#x27; Day.

In 2001, Simon&#x27;s Rock was instrumental in the founding of Bard High School Early College (BHSEC) in Manhattan. There are now seven Bard Early College programs located in New York, Newark, Cleveland, Baltimore, and New Orleans.

On April 11, 2006, part of Carriage House, a residence in upper campus, burned in an electrical fire in the early morning. No one was hurt in the incident, but some student possessions were partially or entirely destroyed. The remnants of the building were burnt down by the Great Barrington Fire Department in January 2009 in a training exercise.

In 2015, Simon&#x27;s Rock founded Bard Academy at Simon&#x27;s Rock, a two-year high school program leading into the Lower College program.

On November 19, 2024, Provost John B. Weinstein announced that Simon&#x27;s Rock would be relocated to Bard&#x27;s newly purchased Massena Campus in Annandale-on-Hudson, New York (the former site of the Unification Theological Seminary) beginning in Fall 2025. In an announcement on the website of Simon&#x27;s Rock, Weinstein cited declining enrollment revenue and a &quot;competitive market&quot; of early-college offerings as reasoning for the relocation.

==Location==
Until a planned 2025 relocation, Simon&#x27;s Rock is located on a 275-acre (1.1-km²) campus in Great Barrington, a small town (pop. 7,500) in the Berkshires region of Massachusetts. The town of Great Barrington is neighbored by the towns of Lee, Stockbridge and West Stockbridge to the north, Alford and Egremont to the west, Sheffield and New Marlborough to the south, and Monterey and Tyringham to the east.

Following the planned 2025 relocation, the campus of Simon’s Rock will be the former site of the Unification Theological Seminary in Barrytown, dubbed the Massena Campus.

==Academics==
Faculty at Bard College at Simon&#x27;s Rock are primarily appointed to one of the following four academic divisions: the Division of the Arts, the Division of Languages and Literature, the Division of Science, Mathematics and Computing, and the Division of Social Studies. Students may also hold one of several concentrations available under Interdivisional Studies.

Over 40 concentrations are available, including art history, Asian studies, chemistry, mathematics, physics, and theater. The school offers study abroad and independent study opportunities, as well as a 3/2 dual-degree program with Columbia University for those who wish to pursue engineering. Similar programs are available with Dartmouth College and Washington University in St. Louis. Students are encouraged to spend one or more terms at Lincoln College or St Catherine&#x27;s College in the University of Oxford, or at other institutions during their time as a Simon&#x27;s Rock enrollee.

While many students receive associate degrees after two years and transfer to other institutions, around half stay and moderate into the Simon&#x27;s Rock B.A. program. Those who wish to remain eligible for a bachelor&#x27;s degree must complete senior theses, which become professionally printed, archived, and remain available to the public in the Alumni Library.

Classes are discussion-oriented, with lecture based offerings. The system is predicated on the idea that the students bring as much value to the class as the professors. In fact, orientation for incoming students is a mandatory week-long writing and thinking workshop, designed to readjust students to pedagogical, cooperative bidirectional learning.

It is a school policy that teachers are referred to on a first-name basis. For example, students do not refer to the former dean as &quot;Dr. Bernard Rodgers,&quot; but instead call him &quot;Bernie.&quot; Professors never receive tenure as a matter of policy.

There are only about 400 students (though due to its small size, large fluctuations in class enrollment and admissions are common), resulting in a very low student-to-faculty ratio, around 8:1. Few classes have more than 15 students; none have more than 30. Some classes have as few as three students, and independent study or tutorial courses in which one student works closely with a professor are common.

==Student life==

===Athletics===
The llama is the mascot of Bard College at Simon&#x27;s Rock, due to the proximity of the college soccer fields to Seekonk Veterinary Hospital, a veterinary clinic that, at one time, had a llama pasture. Interscholastic sports offered at the school include soccer, basketball, and swimming.

All students at Simon&#x27;s Rock are required to fulfill athletic requirements through the Active Community Engagement (ACE) Program. ACE courses include traditional gym classes, such as martial arts, swimming lessons, weight training, and so on, but extend to things like bowling, dodgeball, hackeysack, gardening, and scuba diving.

===Housing===
The vast majority of students at Simon&#x27;s Rock live on-campus, and all students (except those with local families) are required to live on-campus during their first two years, with some exceptions.

Nine dormitories are currently used to house students.

* Crosby House is a women&#x27;s dormitory.
* Dolliver House is a men&#x27;s dormitory.
* Kendrick House is a coeducational dormitory. Crosby, Dolliver and Kendrick are known as the &quot;Tri- Dorms.&quot; They are predominantly for first-year students.
* Hill House is a coeducational dormitory for sophomores, juniors, and seniors. A portion of Hill house is used to home the students of Bard Academy. 
Pibly House, Carriage House, and The Cottage are on Upper Campus, a portion of the campus that is about uphill from the main section of the campus. Other buildings on Upper Campus include the provost&#x27;s house and the Annex (a small building that houses staff). 
* Carriage House is a relatively new dormitory, built in 2009 on the site where the former Carriage House stood. The majority of Carriage House was destroyed in a fire in 2005, and the remains stood until 2009. The remnants of the building were burnt down by the Great Barrington Fire Department as a training exercise. The new dormitory is primarily used for sophomores and some upperclassmen.
* Pibly House is a coeducational dormitory, consisting of eight two- or three-bedroom apartments for juniors and seniors.
*The Annex has a single coeducational four-bedroom apartment for juniors and seniors. It was used as student housing in 2008-2009 and opened to students again starting in 2015.
* The Owl&#x27;s Nest, formerly a gathering space for students belonging to minority identity groups or organizations, came into use to house students in the Fall 2016 semester due to high housing demand.
* The Cottage has been used as coeducational housing for three to five non-first-year students since 2007. Before 2007, it was mainly used for staff members.

Several dormitories are no longer in use as student housing, and Simon&#x27;s Rock has used many other buildings as student housing over the years. 
* The Foster Houses (colloquially known as &quot;The Mods&quot;) are a set of 12 townhouses, each built to house four non-first-year students. After the 2010–2011 academic year the Foster Houses were closed for long-term renovation, The Mods reopened for students housing in the fall of 2017. 
* The Orchard Houses can each house five to seven non-first-years. Of the three that were built, two currently house staff members and their families. Orchard 3, is currently used to house upperclassmen students. 
* Red Brick House and Checker Chance are two dorms that housed small numbers of non-first year students in house style during 2008–2009. They are located across the street from the main section of campus, on Hurlburt road. Use of these houses was discontinued during the 2009–2010 school year. 
* During the Fall 2008 semester the College also provided overflow student housing at the nearby Days Inn hotel.

==Name==

The name &quot;Simon&#x27;s Rock&quot; comes from a large rock, a glacial erratic, in the woods on the campus, a short walk from the main part of the campus. At the time that Simon&#x27;s Rock earned its name (in the early 1920s), the woods that now surround it were part of the vast area of land called Great Pine Farm. The rock was a favorite spot for people who lived nearby, especially children. One neighborhood child, a little girl named Simon, claimed the rock as her own. Throughout its short history, the college has gone through names such as Simon&#x27;s Rock, Simon&#x27;s Rock Early College, Simon&#x27;s Rock of Bard College for a period after 1979, when it was acquired by Bard College and Simon&#x27;s Rock College of Bard. In August 2007, it changed to its current name. Vice President and Provost Mary Marcy said that the reasons for the change include an effort &quot;to be more clear about identity&quot; and &quot;to be very clear about the Bard College system.&quot;

==Notable alumni and faculty==

===Alumni===
*Henry Alford, writer
*Loren AliKhan, attorney, judge on the District Court for the District of Columbia
*Solange Ashby, egyptologist
*Amanda Baggs, activist
*Alison Bechdel, creator of the comic &quot;Dykes To Watch Out For&quot; and graphic novel &quot;Fun Home&quot;
*Veronica Chambers, writer
*Joel and Ethan Coen, Academy Award-winning filmmakers
*Brenda Cullerton, writer
*Martin Dosh, musician
*Mike Doughty, singer/songwriter, founder of the band Soul Coughing
*Daisy Eagan, actress
*Maia Falconi-Sachs, lawyer and producer
*Ronan Farrow, journalist (son of Mia Farrow and Woody Allen)
*Henry Ferrini, documentary filmmaker
*Annie Finch, poet
*Tom Ford, fashion designer, filmmaker
*Abby Franquemont, writer, revivalist of the art of hand spinning with the spindle
*Nat Gertler, writer
*Maria Giese, film director and screenwriter
*Ben Goertzel, artificial intelligence researcher
*Meg Hutchinson, singer-songwriter
*Julie Introcaso née Johnson, NH Circuit Court Judge
*Tokata Iron Eyes, Native American activist
*Jasmine Krotkov, retired postal worker and member of the Montana House of Representatives
*Michael S. Kurth, better known as Curse
*Mark Leiter, Chief Strategy Officer at Nielsen
*Jah Levi, musician
*Roman Mars, radio producer of the podcast 99% Invisible
*Zachary Mason, writer, known for his debut work &quot;The Lost Books of the Odyssey&quot;.
*John McWhorter, linguist and social commentator
*Raj Mukherji, NJ state legislator and technology entrepreneur
*Ada Palmer, novelist, historian and University of Chicago professor
*Eli Pariser, executive director, MoveOn.org Political Action
*Susan May Pratt, actress
*Ann Reid, scientist and science education advocate.
*Claire Rosen, artist
*Jan Staller, photographer
*Lee Stranahan, writer for Russian state media
*Kazys Varnelis, historian of architecture

===Faculty===
*Karen Allen, adjunct Faculty in the Arts, actress
*Nancy Bonvillain, professor of Anthropology and Linguistics, specializes in Native American cultures and languages
*Edgar Chamorro, former Professor of Spanish and Latin, former leader of the Nicaraguan Contras
*Emmanuel Dongala, professor of Chemistry and Richard B. Fisher Chair in Natural Sciences, novelist
*Peter Filkins, literary translator and poet
*David LaBerge, former adjunct faculty in psychology and biology 
*Okey Ndibe, novelist
*David Spadafora, former professor of history

== References ==
==External links==

*Bard College at Simon&#x27;s Rock
*The Llama Ledger, Simon&#x27;s Rock&#x27;s student newspaper </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4860034" start="0" end="33" title="Bard College at Simon&amp;#x27;s Rock" label="Bard College at Simon&amp;#x27;s Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860034" start="58" end="75" title="Bard College at Simon&amp;#x27;s Rock" label="Simon&amp;#x27;s Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="82" end="89" title="Private college" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540832" start="90" end="110" title="Liberal arts colleges in the United States" label="liberal arts college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144518" start="114" end="145" title="Great Barrington, Massachusetts" label="Great Barrington, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49109" start="161" end="173" title="Bard College" label="Bard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767923" start="177" end="206" title="Annandale-on-Hudson, New York" label="Annandale-on-Hudson, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007152" start="420" end="430" title="NEASC" label="accredited"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326801" start="577" end="607" title="early college entrance program" label="early college entrance program"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="814" end="838" title="associate&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Associate of Arts degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="897" end="913" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362432" start="1221" end="1244" title="Elizabeth Blodgett Hall" label="Elizabeth Blodgett Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158770" start="1280" end="1295" title="Concord Academy" label="Concord Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660535" start="2472" end="2477" title="women&amp;#x27;s college" label="women"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="2626" end="2649" title="associate&amp;#x27;s degree" label="associate&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="2860" end="2882" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="3010" end="3023" title="coeducational" label="coeducational"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007152" start="3575" end="3622" title="New England Association of Schools and Colleges" label="New England Association of Schools and Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q49109" start="3708" end="3720" title="Bard College" label="Bard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905309" start="4012" end="4025" title="Leon Botstein" label="Leon Botstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="4259" end="4267" title="seminary" label="seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553093" start="4681" end="4696" title="1992 Bard College at Simon&amp;#x27;s Rock shooting" label="a mass shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q482594" start="4891" end="4894" title="SKS" label="SKS"/>
<link wikidata="Q47499" start="5778" end="5809" title="International Workers&amp;#x27; Day" label="International Workers&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860040" start="5875" end="5905" title="Bard High School Early College" label="Bard High School Early College"/>
<link wikidata="Q56278378" start="6429" end="6462" title="Bard Academy at Simon&amp;#x27;s Rock" label="Bard Academy at Simon&amp;#x27;s Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454907" start="6739" end="6771" title="Unification Theological Seminary" label="Unification Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144518" start="7105" end="7121" title="Great Barrington, Massachusetts" label="Great Barrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q820961" start="7156" end="7166" title="Berkshires" label="Berkshires"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="7177" end="7190" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427080" start="7251" end="7254" title="Lee, Massachusetts" label="Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q222705" start="7256" end="7267" title="Stockbridge, Massachusetts" label="Stockbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431309" start="7272" end="7288" title="West Stockbridge, Massachusetts" label="West Stockbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431901" start="7303" end="7309" title="Alford, Massachusetts" label="Alford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431621" start="7314" end="7322" title="Egremont, Massachusetts" label="Egremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306176" start="7336" end="7345" title="Sheffield, Massachusetts" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536854" start="7350" end="7365" title="New Marlborough, Massachusetts" label="New Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887479" start="7384" end="7392" title="Monterey, Massachusetts" label="Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431755" start="7397" end="7406" title="Tyringham, Massachusetts" label="Tyringham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454907" start="7518" end="7550" title="Unification Theological Seminary" label="Unification Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864950" start="7554" end="7563" title="Barrytown, New York" label="Barrytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="8208" end="8227" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="8306" end="8323" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="8328" end="8362" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81153" start="8418" end="8433" title="Lincoln College, Oxford" label="Lincoln College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706734" start="8437" end="8464" title="St Catherine&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="St Catherine&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="8472" end="8492" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q42569" start="9999" end="10004" title="llama" label="llama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="10093" end="10099" title="association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177899" start="10561" end="10568" title="bowling" label="bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q473719" start="10570" end="10579" title="dodgeball" label="dodgeball"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="10845" end="10856" title="dormitories" label="dormitories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144518" start="11830" end="11846" title="Great Barrington, Massachusetts" label="Great Barrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498663" start="11847" end="11862" title="Fire Department" label="Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q372934" start="13767" end="13782" title="glacial erratic" label="glacial erratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49109" start="14389" end="14401" title="Bard College" label="Bard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5717210" start="14737" end="14749" title="Henry Alford (writer)" label="Henry Alford"/>
<link wikidata="Q108756998" start="14759" end="14772" title="Loren AliKhan" label="Loren AliKhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889769" start="14797" end="14840" title="United States District Court for the District of Columbia" label="District Court for the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96575992" start="14842" end="14855" title="Solange Ashby" label="Solange Ashby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4080459" start="14871" end="14883" title="Amanda Baggs" label="Amanda Baggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q435032" start="14895" end="14909" title="Alison Bechdel" label="Alison Bechdel"/>
<link wikidata="Q689591" start="14938" end="14960" title="Dykes To Watch Out For" label="Dykes To Watch Out For"/>
<link wikidata="Q428680" start="14991" end="14999" title="Fun Home" label="Fun Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q29385491" start="15007" end="15024" title="Veronica Chambers" label="Veronica Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="15034" end="15053" title="Joel and Ethan Coen" label="Joel and Ethan Coen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22003796" start="15089" end="15105" title="Brenda Cullerton" label="Brenda Cullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037324" start="15115" end="15126" title="Martin Dosh" label="Martin Dosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q359457" start="15138" end="15150" title="Mike Doughty" label="Mike Doughty"/>
<link wikidata="Q973818" start="15191" end="15204" title="Soul Coughing" label="Soul Coughing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209708" start="15206" end="15217" title="Daisy Eagan" label="Daisy Eagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365461" start="15269" end="15281" title="Ronan Farrow" label="Ronan Farrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q202725" start="15302" end="15312" title="Mia Farrow" label="Mia Farrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="15317" end="15328" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485834" start="15331" end="15344" title="Henry Ferrini" label="Henry Ferrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769281" start="15369" end="15380" title="Annie Finch" label="Annie Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q318149" start="15388" end="15396" title="Tom Ford" label="Tom Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q60808631" start="15427" end="15443" title="Abby Franquemont" label="Abby Franquemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4140198" start="15478" end="15491" title="hand spinning" label="hand spinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q213761" start="15501" end="15508" title="spindle (textiles)" label="spindle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15459271" start="15510" end="15521" title="Nat Gertler" label="Nat Gertler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11988191" start="15531" end="15542" title="Maria Giese" label="Maria Giese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027185" start="15576" end="15588" title="Ben Goertzel" label="Ben Goertzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807989" start="15626" end="15640" title="Meg Hutchinson" label="Meg Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q106518591" start="15661" end="15688" title="Julie Introcaso" label="Julie Introcaso née Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q98442713" start="15714" end="15730" title="Tokata Iron Eyes" label="Tokata Iron Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q64010878" start="15758" end="15773" title="Jasmine Krotkov" label="Jasmine Krotkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257237" start="15815" end="15847" title="Montana House of Representatives" label="Montana House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q76542" start="15883" end="15888" title="Curse (rapper)" label="Curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768548" start="15890" end="15901" title="Mark Leiter (US Businessman)" label="Mark Leiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q540891" start="15929" end="15936" title="Nielsen N.V." label="Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42336657" start="15938" end="15946" title="Jah Levi" label="Jah Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17388690" start="15958" end="15968" title="Roman Mars" label="Roman Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001236" start="16000" end="16013" title="99% Invisible" label="99% Invisible"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063976" start="16015" end="16028" title="Zachary Mason" label="Zachary Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748544" start="16069" end="16098" title="The Lost Books of the Odyssey" label="The Lost Books of the Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468338" start="16107" end="16121" title="John McWhorter" label="John McWhorter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285326" start="16156" end="16168" title="Raj Mukherji" label="Raj Mukherji"/>
<link wikidata="Q29649607" start="16219" end="16229" title="Ada Palmer" label="Ada Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="16255" end="16276" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328841" start="16288" end="16299" title="Eli Pariser" label="Eli Pariser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633547" start="16321" end="16331" title="MoveOn" label="MoveOn.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q435666" start="16350" end="16365" title="Susan May Pratt" label="Susan May Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q88473761" start="16376" end="16384" title="Ann Reid" label="Ann Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q26844421" start="16429" end="16441" title="Claire Rosen" label="Claire Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151983" start="16451" end="16462" title="Jan Staller" label="Jan Staller"/>
<link wikidata="Q28078312" start="16478" end="16491" title="Lee Stranahan" label="Lee Stranahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197354" start="16525" end="16539" title="Kazys Varnelis (historian)" label="Kazys Varnelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q229137" start="16583" end="16594" title="Karen Allen" label="Karen Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15092380" start="16634" end="16650" title="Nancy Bonvillain" label="Nancy Bonvillain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337167" start="16750" end="16764" title="Edgar Chamorro" label="Edgar Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="16826" end="16835" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="16837" end="16844" title="Contra (guerrillas)" label="Contras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707390" start="16846" end="16862" title="Emmanuel Dongala" label="Emmanuel Dongala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323849" start="16891" end="16908" title="Richard B. Fisher" label="Richard B. Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173978" start="16946" end="16959" title="Peter Filkins" label="Peter Filkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236268" start="16991" end="17004" title="David LaBerge" label="David LaBerge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081956" start="17057" end="17067" title="Okey Ndibe" label="Okey Ndibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239968" start="17079" end="17094" title="David Spadafora" label="David Spadafora"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173652" wikidata="Q41478" url="?curid=173652" title="Hemorrhoid">
<text>Hemorrhoids (or haemorrhoids), also known as piles, are vascular structures in the anal canal. In their normal state, they are cushions that help with stool control. They become a disease when swollen or inflamed; the unqualified term &quot;hemorrhoid&quot; is often used to refer to the disease. The signs and symptoms of hemorrhoids depend on the type present. Internal hemorrhoids often result in painless, bright red rectal bleeding when defecating. External hemorrhoids often result in pain and swelling in the area of the anus. If bleeding occurs, it is usually darker. Symptoms frequently get better after a few days. A skin tag may remain after the healing of an external hemorrhoid.
While the exact cause of hemorrhoids remains unknown, a number of factors that increase pressure in the abdomen are believed to be involved. This may include constipation, diarrhea, and sitting on the toilet for long periods. Hemorrhoids are also more common during pregnancy. Diagnosis is made by looking at the area. Many people incorrectly refer to any symptom occurring around the anal area as hemorrhoids, and serious causes of the symptoms should not be ruled out. Colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy is reasonable to confirm the diagnosis and rule out more serious causes.
Often, no specific treatment is needed. Initial measures consist of increasing fiber intake, drinking fluids to maintain hydration, NSAIDs to help with pain, and rest. Medicated creams may be applied to the area, but their effectiveness is poorly supported by evidence. A number of minor procedures may be performed if symptoms are severe or do not improve with conservative management. Hemorrhoidal artery embolization (HAE) is a safe and effective minimally invasive procedure that can be performed and is typically better tolerated than traditional therapies. Surgery is reserved for those who fail to improve following these measures.
Approximately 50% to 66% of people have problems with hemorrhoids at some point in their lives. Males and females are both affected with about equal frequency. Hemorrhoids affect people most often between 45 and 65 years of age, and they are more common among the wealthy, although this may reflect differences in healthcare access rather than true prevalence. Outcomes are usually good.

The first known mention of the disease is from a 1700 BC Egyptian papyrus.
==Signs and symptoms==
In about 40% of people with pathological hemorrhoids, there are no significant symptoms. Internal and external hemorrhoids may present differently; however, many people may have a combination of the two. Bleeding enough to cause anemia is rare, and life-threatening bleeding is even more uncommon. Many people feel embarrassed when facing the problem and often seek medical care only when the case is advanced.

===External===
If not thrombosed, external hemorrhoids may cause few problems. However, when thrombosed, hemorrhoids may be very painful. Nevertheless, this pain typically resolves in two to three days. The swelling may, however, take a few weeks to disappear. A skin tag may remain after healing. If hemorrhoids are large and cause issues with hygiene, they may produce irritation of the surrounding skin, and thus itchiness around the anus.

===Internal===
Internal hemorrhoids usually present with painless, bright red rectal bleeding during or following a bowel movement. The blood typically covers the stool (a condition known as hematochezia), is on the toilet paper, or drips into the toilet bowl. The stool itself is usually normally coloured. Other symptoms may include mucous discharge, a perianal mass if they prolapse through the anus, itchiness, and fecal incontinence. Internal hemorrhoids are usually painful only if they become thrombosed or necrotic.

==Causes==
The exact cause of symptomatic hemorrhoids is unknown. A number of factors are believed to play a role, including irregular bowel habits (constipation or diarrhea), lack of exercise, nutritional factors (low-fiber diets), increased intra-abdominal pressure (prolonged straining, ascites, an intra-abdominal mass, or pregnancy), genetics, an absence of valves within the hemorrhoidal veins, and aging. Other factors believed to increase risk include obesity, prolonged sitting, a chronic cough, and pelvic floor dysfunction. Squatting while defecating may also increase the risk of severe hemorrhoids. Evidence for these associations, however, is poor. Being a receptive partner in anal intercourse has been listed as a cause.

During pregnancy, pressure from the fetus on the abdomen and hormonal changes cause the hemorrhoidal vessels to enlarge. The birth of the baby also leads to increased intra-abdominal pressures. Pregnant women rarely need surgical treatment, as symptoms usually resolve after delivery.

==Pathophysiology==

Hemorrhoid cushions are a part of normal human anatomy and become a pathological disease only when they experience abnormal changes. There are three main cushions present in the normal anal canal. These are located classically at left lateral, right anterior, and right posterior positions. They are composed of neither arteries nor veins, but blood vessels called sinusoids, connective tissue, and smooth muscle. Sinusoids do not have muscle tissue in their walls, as veins do. This set of blood vessels is known as the hemorrhoidal plexus.

Hemorrhoid cushions are important for continence. They contribute to 15–20% of anal closure pressure at rest and protect the internal and external anal sphincter muscles during the passage of stool. When a person bears down, the intra-abdominal pressure grows, and hemorrhoid cushions increase in size, helping maintain anal closure. Hemorrhoid symptoms are believed to result when these vascular structures slide downwards or when venous pressure is excessively increased. Increased internal and external anal sphincter pressure may also be involved in hemorrhoid symptoms. Two types of hemorrhoids occur: internals from the superior hemorrhoidal plexus and externals from the inferior hemorrhoidal plexus. The pectinate line divides the two regions.

==Diagnosis==

Hemorrhoids are typically diagnosed by physical examination. A visual examination of the anus and surrounding area may diagnose external or prolapsed hemorrhoids. Visual confirmation of internal hemorrhoids, on the other hand, may require anoscopy, insertion of a hollow tube device with a light attached at one end. A digital rectal exam (DRE) can also be performed to detect possible rectal tumors, polyps, an enlarged prostate, or abscesses. This examination may not be possible without appropriate sedation because of pain, although most internal hemorrhoids are not associated with pain. If pain is present, the condition is more likely to be an anal fissure or external hemorrhoid rather than internal hemorrhoid.

===Internal===
Internal hemorrhoids originate above the pectinate line. They are covered by columnar epithelium, which lacks pain receptors. They were classified in 1985 into four grades based on the degree of prolapse:

* Grade I: No prolapse, just prominent blood vessels
* Grade II: Prolapse upon bearing down, but spontaneous reduction
* Grade III: Prolapse upon bearing down requiring manual reduction
* Grade IV: Prolapse with inability to be manually reduced.

===External===
External hemorrhoids occur below the dentate (or pectinate) line. They are covered proximally by anoderm and distally by skin, both of which are sensitive to pain and temperature.

===Differential===
Many anorectal problems, including fissures, fistulae, abscesses, colorectal cancer, rectal varices, and itching have similar symptoms and may be incorrectly referred to as hemorrhoids. Rectal bleeding may also occur owing to colorectal cancer, colitis including inflammatory bowel disease, diverticular disease, and angiodysplasia. If anemia is present, other potential causes should be considered.

Other conditions that produce an anal mass include skin tags, anal warts, rectal prolapse, polyps, and enlarged anal papillae. Anorectal varices due to portal hypertension (blood pressure in the portal venous system) may present similar to hemorrhoids but are a different condition. Portal hypertension does not increase the risk of hemorrhoids.

==Prevention==
A number of preventative measures are recommended, including avoiding straining while attempting to defecate, avoiding constipation and diarrhea either by eating a high-fiber diet and drinking plenty of fluid or by taking fiber supplements and getting sufficient exercise. Spending less time attempting to defecate, avoiding reading while on the toilet, and losing weight for overweight persons and avoiding heavy lifting are also recommended.

==Management==
===Conservative===
Conservative treatment typically consists of foods rich in dietary fiber, intake of oral fluids to maintain hydration, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, sitz baths, and rest. Increased fiber intake has been shown to improve outcomes and may be achieved by dietary alterations or the consumption of fiber supplements. Evidence for benefits from sitz baths during any point in treatment, however, is lacking. If they are used, they should be limited to 15 minutes at a time. Decreasing time spent on the toilet and not straining is also recommended.

While many topical agents and suppositories are available for the treatment of hemorrhoids, little evidence supports their use. As such, they are not recommended by the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons. Steroid-containing agents should not be used for more than 14 days, as they may cause thinning of the skin. Most agents include a combination of active ingredients. These may include a barrier cream such as petroleum jelly or zinc oxide, an analgesic agent such as lidocaine, and a vasoconstrictor such as epinephrine. Some contain Balsam of Peru to which certain people may be allergic.

Flavonoids are of questionable benefit, with potential side effects. Symptoms usually resolve following pregnancy; thus active treatment is often delayed until after delivery. Evidence does not support the use of traditional Chinese herbal treatment.

The use of phlebotonics has been investigated in the treatment of low-grade hemorrhoids, although these drugs are not approved for such use in the United States or Germany. The use of phlebotonics for the treatment of chronic venous diseases is restricted in Spain.

===Procedures===
A number of office-based procedures may be performed. While generally safe, rare serious side effects such as perianal sepsis may occur.

# Rubber band ligation is typically recommended as the first-line treatment in those with grade I to III disease. It is a procedure in which elastic bands are applied onto internal hemorrhoid at least 1 cm above the pectinate line to cut off its blood supply. Within 5–7 days, the withered hemorrhoid falls off. If the band is placed too close to the pectinate line, intense pain results immediately afterwards. The cure rate has been found to be about 87%, with a complication rate of up to 3%.
# Sclerotherapy involves the injection of a sclerosing agent, such as phenol, into the hemorrhoid. This causes the vein walls to collapse and the hemorrhoids to shrivel up. The success rate four years after treatment is about 70%.
# A number of cauterization methods have been shown to be effective for hemorrhoids, but are usually used only when other methods fail. This procedure can be done using electrocautery, infrared radiation, laser surgery, or cryosurgery. Infrared cauterization may be an option for grade I or II disease. In those with grade III or IV disease, reoccurrence rates are high.
Hemorrhoidal artery embolization (HAE) is an additional minimally invasive procedure performed by an interventional radiologist. HAE involves the blockage of abnormal blood flow to the rectal (hemorrhoidal) arteries using microcoils and/or microparticles to decrease the size of the hemorrhoids and improve hemorrhoid related symptoms, especially bleeding. HAE is very effective at stopping bleeding related symptom with success rate of approximately 90%.

===Surgery===
A number of surgical techniques may be used if conservative management and simple procedures fail. All surgical treatments are associated with some degree of complications, including bleeding, infection, anal strictures, and urinary retention, due to the close proximity of the rectum to the nerves that supply the bladder. Also, a small risk of fecal incontinence occurs, particularly of liquid, with rates reported between 0% and 28%. Mucosal ectropion is another condition which may occur after hemorrhoidectomy (often together with anal stenosis). This is where the anal mucosa becomes everted from the anus, similar to a very mild form of rectal prolapse.
# Excisional hemorrhoidectomy is a surgical excision of the hemorrhoid used primarily only in severe cases. It is associated with significant postoperative pain and usually requires two to four weeks for recovery. However, the long-term benefit is greater in those with grade III hemorrhoids as compared to rubber band ligation. It is the recommended treatment in those with a thrombosed external hemorrhoid if carried out within 24–72 hours. Evidence to support this is weak, however. Glyceryl trinitrate ointment after the procedure helps both with pain and with healing.
# Doppler-guided transanal hemorrhoidal dearterialization is a minimally invasive treatment using an ultrasound Doppler to accurately locate the arterial blood inflow. These arteries are then &quot;tied off&quot; and the prolapsed tissue is sutured back to its normal position. It has a slightly higher recurrence rate but fewer complications compared to a hemorrhoidectomy.
# Stapled hemorrhoidectomy, also known as stapled hemorrhoidopexy, involves the removal of much of the abnormally enlarged hemorrhoidal tissue, followed by a repositioning of the remaining hemorrhoidal tissue back to its normal anatomical position. It is generally less painful and is associated with faster healing compared to complete removal of hemorrhoids. However, the chance of symptomatic hemorrhoids returning is greater than for conventional hemorrhoidectomy, so it is typically recommended only for grade II or III disease.

==Epidemiology==
It is difficult to determine how common hemorrhoids are as many people with the condition do not see a healthcare provider. However, symptomatic hemorrhoids are thought to affect at least 50% of the US population at some time during their lives, and around 5% of the population is affected at any given time. Both sexes experience about the same incidence of the condition, with rates peaking between 45 and 65 years. Some studies have found that they are common in people of higher socioeconomic status, however this may reflect differences in healthcare access rather than true prevalence.

Long-term outcomes are generally good, though some people may have recurrent symptomatic episodes. Only a small proportion of persons end up needing surgery.

==History==
The first known mention of this disease is from a 1700 BC Egyptian papyrus, which advises: &quot;Thou shouldest give a recipe, an ointment of great protection; acacia leaves, ground, titurated and cooked together. Smear a strip of fine linen there-with and place in the anus, that he recovers immediately.&quot; In 460 BC, the Hippocratic corpus discusses a treatment similar to modern rubber band ligation: &quot;And hemorrhoids in like manner you may treat by transfixing them with a needle and tying them with very thick and woolen thread, for application, and do not foment until they drop off, and always leave one behind; and when the patient recovers, let him be put on a course of Hellebore.&quot; Hemorrhoids may have been described in the Bible, with earlier English translations using the now-obsolete spelling &quot;emerods&quot;.

Celsus (25 BC – 14 AD) described ligation and excision procedures and discussed the possible complications. Galen advocated severing the connection of the arteries to veins, claiming it reduced both pain and the spread of gangrene. The Susruta Samhita (4th–5th century BC) is similar to the words of Hippocrates, but emphasizes wound cleanliness. In the 13th century, European surgeons such as Lanfranc of Milan, Guy de Chauliac, Henri de Mondeville, and John of Ardene made great progress and development of the surgical techniques.

In medieval times, hemorrhoids were also known as Saint Fiacre&#x27;s curse after a sixth-century saint who developed them following tilling the soil. The first use of the word &quot;hemorrhoid&quot; in English occurs in 1398, derived from the Old French &quot;emorroides&quot;, from Latin &quot;hæmorrhoida&quot;, in turn from the Greek αἱμορροΐς (&quot;haimorrhois&quot;), &quot;liable to discharge blood&quot;, from αἷμα (&quot;haima&quot;), &quot;blood&quot; and ῥόος (&quot;rhoos&quot;), &quot;stream, flow, current&quot;, itself from ῥέω (&quot;rheo&quot;), &quot;to flow, to stream&quot;.

==Notable cases==
* Hall-of-Fame baseball player George Brett was removed from a game in the 1980 World Series due to hemorrhoid pain. After undergoing minor surgery, Brett returned to play in the next game, quipping, &quot;My problems are all behind me&quot;. Brett underwent further hemorrhoid surgery the following spring.
* Conservative political commentator Glenn Beck underwent surgery for hemorrhoids, subsequently describing his unpleasant experience in a widely viewed 2008 YouTube video.
* Former U.S. President Jimmy Carter had surgery for hemorrhoids in 1984.
* Cricketers Matthew Hayden and Viv Richards have suffered the condition.
*During World War II, US Army Lieutenant Colonel Harold Cohen was selected by General George S. Patton to organize a raid to rescue Patton&#x27;s son-in-law from a German prison camp; Cohen was prevented from leading the raid due to hemorrhoids. Patton personally examined Cohen and remarked, &quot;that is some sorry ass&quot;.
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41478" start="0" end="11" title="Hemorrhoid" label="Hemorrhoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q41478" start="16" end="28" title="Hemorrhoid" label="haemorrhoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q41478" start="45" end="50" title="Hemorrhoid" label="piles"/>
<link wikidata="Q103142" start="56" end="64" title="sinusoid (blood vessel)" label="vascular"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465231" start="83" end="93" title="anal canal" label="anal canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174392" start="151" end="156" title="Human feces" label="stool"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="193" end="200" title="swelling (medical)" label="swollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="204" end="212" title="inflammation" label="inflamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642049" start="421" end="436" title="hematochezia" label="rectal bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q204015" start="442" end="452" title="defecation" label="defecating"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258546" start="528" end="532" title="Human anus" label="anus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179593" start="627" end="635" title="skin tag" label="skin tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="850" end="862" title="constipation" label="constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="864" end="872" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857" start="893" end="899" title="toilet" label="toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="958" end="967" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q840387" start="1163" end="1174" title="Colonoscopy" label="Colonoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q941169" start="1178" end="1191" title="sigmoidoscopy" label="sigmoidoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215210" start="1344" end="1349" title="dietary fiber" label="fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q188724" start="1397" end="1403" title="Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug" label="NSAIDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q128218182" start="1652" end="1690" title="Hemorrhoidal artery embolization" label="Hemorrhoidal artery embolization (HAE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755504" start="1715" end="1743" title="minimally invasive procedure" label="minimally invasive procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="2359" end="2366" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="2620" end="2626" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q261327" start="2825" end="2835" title="Thrombosis" label="thrombosed"/>
<link wikidata="Q41478" start="2837" end="2857" title="external hemorrhoids" label="external hemorrhoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179593" start="3066" end="3074" title="Acrochordon" label="skin tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422583" start="3325" end="3340" title="rectal bleeding" label="rectal bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642049" start="3438" end="3450" title="hematochezia" label="hematochezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112703" start="3624" end="3632" title="prolapse" label="prolapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633590" start="3651" end="3660" title="Pruritus ani" label="itchiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147182" start="3666" end="3684" title="fecal incontinence" label="fecal incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q178069" start="3761" end="3769" title="necrosis" label="necrotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="3921" end="3933" title="constipation" label="constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="3937" end="3945" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q193889" start="4062" end="4069" title="ascites" label="ascites"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="4099" end="4108" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="4232" end="4239" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q383126" start="4262" end="4269" title="chronic condition" label="chronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35805" start="4270" end="4275" title="cough" label="cough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161799" start="4281" end="4305" title="pelvic floor dysfunction" label="pelvic floor dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8398" start="4464" end="4480" title="Anal sex" label="anal intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="4546" end="4551" title="fetus" label="fetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465231" start="5002" end="5012" title="anal canal" label="anal canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9655" start="5137" end="5145" title="arteries" label="arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9609" start="5150" end="5155" title="veins" label="veins"/>
<link wikidata="Q103142" start="5182" end="5191" title="sinusoids" label="sinusoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q25615" start="5193" end="5210" title="connective tissue" label="connective tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q208453" start="5216" end="5229" title="smooth muscle" label="smooth muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="5253" end="5266" title="muscle tissue" label="muscle tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115552" start="5338" end="5357" title="hemorrhoidal plexus" label="hemorrhoidal plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147182" start="5398" end="5408" title="fecal incontinence" label="continence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601133" start="5485" end="5493" title="internal anal sphincter" label="internal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379958" start="5498" end="5521" title="external anal sphincter" label="external anal sphincter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601133" start="5844" end="5852" title="internal anal sphincter" label="internal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379958" start="5857" end="5880" title="external anal sphincter" label="external anal sphincter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643672" start="5986" end="6014" title="superior hemorrhoidal plexus" label="superior hemorrhoidal plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640867" start="6072" end="6086" title="pectinate line" label="pectinate line"/>
<link wikidata="Q567813" start="6367" end="6375" title="anoscopy" label="anoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q594341" start="6447" end="6466" title="digital rectal exam" label="digital rectal exam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="6521" end="6526" title="tumor" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q657665" start="6529" end="6535" title="polyp (medicine)" label="polyps"/>
<link wikidata="Q9625" start="6549" end="6557" title="prostate" label="prostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q164655" start="6562" end="6569" title="abscess" label="abscess"/>
<link wikidata="Q574801" start="6630" end="6638" title="sedation" label="sedation"/>
<link wikidata="Q484797" start="6779" end="6791" title="anal fissure" label="anal fissure"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="6941" end="6960" title="columnar epithelium" label="columnar epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142126" start="6979" end="6988" title="sensory receptor" label="receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112703" start="7059" end="7067" title="prolapse" label="prolapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324103" start="7332" end="7352" title="Perianal hematoma" label="External hemorrhoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q497" start="7429" end="7436" title="anoderm" label="anoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q484797" start="7567" end="7575" title="anal fissure" label="fissures"/>
<link wikidata="Q484765" start="7577" end="7585" title="anal fistula" label="fistulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q188874" start="7598" end="7615" title="colorectal cancer" label="colorectal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770165" start="7617" end="7631" title="anorectal varices" label="rectal varices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633590" start="7637" end="7644" title="pruritus ani" label="itching"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422583" start="7718" end="7733" title="Rectal bleeding" label="Rectal bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453464" start="7777" end="7784" title="colitis" label="colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q917447" start="7795" end="7821" title="inflammatory bowel disease" label="inflammatory bowel disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324086" start="7823" end="7843" title="diverticular disease" label="diverticular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q539491" start="7849" end="7863" title="angiodysplasia" label="angiodysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="7868" end="7874" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179593" start="7984" end="7993" title="acrochordon" label="skin tags"/>
<link wikidata="Q208726" start="7995" end="8005" title="anal warts" label="anal warts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062483" start="8007" end="8022" title="rectal prolapse" label="rectal prolapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q657665" start="8024" end="8030" title="polyp (medicine)" label="polyps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770165" start="8060" end="8077" title="Anorectal varices" label="Anorectal varices"/>
<link wikidata="Q124604" start="8085" end="8104" title="portal hypertension" label="portal hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394016" start="8128" end="8148" title="portal venous system" label="portal venous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q204015" start="8601" end="8609" title="defecate" label="defecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q215210" start="8833" end="8846" title="dietary fiber" label="dietary fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q188724" start="8893" end="8928" title="nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug" label="nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532190" start="8931" end="8940" title="sitz bath" label="sitz bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446429" start="9076" end="9093" title="fibre supplements" label="fiber supplements"/>
<link wikidata="Q420054" start="9338" end="9351" title="topical agent" label="topical agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q180799" start="9357" end="9370" title="suppositories" label="suppositories"/>
<link wikidata="Q30296958" start="9496" end="9541" title="American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons" label="American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q177911" start="9543" end="9550" title="Steroid" label="Steroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q457239" start="9750" end="9765" title="petroleum jelly" label="petroleum jelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q190077" start="9769" end="9779" title="zinc oxide" label="zinc oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q216935" start="9808" end="9817" title="lidocaine" label="lidocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067506" start="9825" end="9840" title="vasoconstrictor" label="vasoconstrictor"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="9849" end="9860" title="epinephrine" label="epinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q120424" start="9875" end="9889" title="Balsam of Peru" label="Balsam of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561192" start="9932" end="9942" title="Flavonoids" label="Flavonoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="10145" end="10181" title="Traditional Chinese medicine" label="traditional Chinese herbal treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607865" start="10195" end="10207" title="phlebotonics" label="phlebotonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="10578" end="10593" title="sepsis" label="perianal sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554452" start="10608" end="10628" title="Rubber band ligation" label="Rubber band ligation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6298197" start="11104" end="11117" title="Sclerotherapy" label="Sclerotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6298197" start="11146" end="11156" title="sclerosing" label="sclerosing"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336" start="11172" end="11178" title="phenol" label="phenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136347" start="11347" end="11360" title="cauterization" label="cauterization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136347" start="11502" end="11516" title="electrocautery" label="electrocautery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="11518" end="11536" title="infrared radiation" label="infrared radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q847796" start="11538" end="11551" title="laser surgery" label="laser surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705075" start="11556" end="11567" title="cryosurgery" label="cryosurgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q128218182" start="11704" end="11742" title="Hemorrhoidal artery embolization" label="Hemorrhoidal artery embolization (HAE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q426449" start="11805" end="11831" title="Interventional radiology" label="interventional radiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q61186" start="11944" end="11957" title="microparticle" label="microparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41091" start="12379" end="12393" title="anal stricture" label="anal stricture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366695" start="12400" end="12417" title="urinary retention" label="urinary retention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147182" start="12521" end="12539" title="fecal incontinence" label="fecal incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q662298" start="12620" end="12629" title="ectropion" label="ectropion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062483" start="12819" end="12834" title="rectal prolapse" label="rectal prolapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324103" start="13213" end="13243" title="perianal hematoma" label="thrombosed external hemorrhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221044" start="13322" end="13341" title="Glyceryl trinitrate (pharmacology)" label="Glyceryl trinitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045034" start="13427" end="13467" title="transanal hemorrhoidal dearterialization" label="transanal hemorrhoidal dearterialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550393" start="13827" end="13850" title="stapled hemorrhoidopexy" label="stapled hemorrhoidopexy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515895" start="14820" end="14840" title="socioeconomic status" label="socioeconomic status"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="15168" end="15175" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81666" start="15261" end="15267" title="acacia" label="acacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135155" start="15428" end="15446" title="Hippocratic corpus" label="Hippocratic corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q147289" start="15790" end="15799" title="Hellebore" label="Hellebore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="15850" end="15855" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905579" start="15929" end="15936" title="emerods" label="emerods"/>
<link wikidata="Q312420" start="15945" end="15951" title="Aulus Cornelius Celsus" label="Celsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="16053" end="16058" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995239" start="16181" end="16196" title="Susruta Samhita" label="Susruta Samhita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804838" start="16339" end="16356" title="Lanfranc of Milan" label="Lanfranc of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q469362" start="16358" end="16373" title="Guy de Chauliac" label="Guy de Chauliac"/>
<link wikidata="Q712736" start="16375" end="16394" title="Henri de Mondeville" label="Henri de Mondeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q953927" start="16530" end="16542" title="Saint Fiacre" label="Saint Fiacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="16724" end="16734" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="16764" end="16769" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152442" start="17126" end="17138" title="George Brett (baseball)" label="George Brett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538028" start="17170" end="17187" title="1980 World Series" label="1980 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q310618" start="17440" end="17450" title="Glenn Beck" label="Glenn Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="17560" end="17567" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="17599" end="17611" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q981493" start="17662" end="17676" title="Matthew Hayden" label="Matthew Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q738016" start="17681" end="17693" title="Viv Richards" label="Viv Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q116611092" start="17772" end="17784" title="Harold Cohen (soldier)" label="Harold Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q186492" start="17809" end="17825" title="George S. Patton" label="George S. Patton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173654" wikidata="Q2032881" url="?curid=173654" title="Ron Fricke">
<text>Ron Fricke (born February 24, 1953) is an American film director and cinematographer specializing in time-lapse and large-format cinematography, known for his non-narrative feature films.

==Career==
After serving as director of photography for &quot;Koyaanisqatsi&quot; (1982, directed by Godfrey Reggio), Fricke directed the IMAX films &quot;Chronos&quot; (1985) and &quot;Sacred Site&quot; (1986).

He directed the purely cinematic non-verbal non-narrative &quot;Baraka&quot; (1992), designing his own 65 mm camera equipment for the feature, and earning broad critical acclaim. 

Fricke worked as a cinematographer for parts of the 2005 Star Wars film &quot;Revenge of the Sith&quot;, shooting the eruption of Mount Etna in Sicily for scenes of the volcanic planet Mustafar.

His film &quot;Samsara&quot; premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival in September 2011, then screened in the U.S. the following year. Fricke described the film as an evolution of his work: &quot;Both technically and philosophically, I am ready to delve even deeper into my favorite theme: humanity&#x27;s relationship to the eternal.&quot;

==Filmography==
==References==
==External links==
* Spirit of &quot;Baraka&quot;: non-verbal films
* Official site for &quot;Samsara&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2032881" start="0" end="10" title="Ron Fricke" label="Ron Fricke"/>
<link wikidata="Q222344" start="69" end="84" title="cinematographer" label="cinematographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q186563" start="101" end="111" title="time-lapse photography" label="time-lapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q590870" start="129" end="143" title="cinematography" label="cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q222344" start="217" end="240" title="director of photography" label="director of photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127828" start="251" end="264" title="Koyaanisqatsi" label="Koyaanisqatsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348531" start="290" end="304" title="Godfrey Reggio" label="Godfrey Reggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q188575" start="327" end="331" title="IMAX" label="IMAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967311" start="344" end="351" title="Chronos (film)" label="Chronos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="375" end="386" title="Sacred Site" label="Sacred Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q514170" start="466" end="472" title="Baraka (film)" label="Baraka"/>
<link wikidata="Q261242" start="505" end="510" title="70 mm film" label="65 mm"/>
<link wikidata="" start="661" end="680" title="Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith" label="Revenge of the Sith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="713" end="723" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="727" end="733" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294199" start="768" end="776" title="Mustafar" label="Mustafar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150366" start="794" end="801" title="Samsara (2011 film)" label="Samsara"/>
<link wikidata="Q390018" start="825" end="860" title="Toronto International Film Festival" label="Toronto International Film Festival"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173655" wikidata="Q6698786" url="?curid=173655" title="Ludic">
<text>Ludic may refer to:
*Games, structured play
*Ludic language, spoken in Russia

==See also== 
*Ludic fallacy, the misuse of games as models
*Ludic interface, in computing
*Ludic linguistics
*Ludology, or game studies</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6698786" start="0" end="5" title="Ludic" label="Ludic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11410" start="21" end="25" title="Game" label="Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q33918" start="45" end="59" title="Ludic language" label="Ludic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900742" start="94" end="107" title="Ludic fallacy" label="Ludic fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698788" start="140" end="155" title="Ludic interface" label="Ludic interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q471550" start="171" end="188" title="Ludic linguistics" label="Ludic linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q675281" start="190" end="198" title="Ludology" label="Ludology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173656" wikidata="Q1321314" url="?curid=173656" title="126 film">
<text>126 film is a cartridge-based film format used in still photography. It was introduced by Kodak in 1963, and is associated mainly with low-end point-and-shoot cameras, particularly Kodak&#x27;s own Instamatic series of cameras.

Although 126 was once very popular, it is no longer manufactured, and few photofinishers will process it.

== Technical details ==
In 1963, Kodak introduced a new film, encased in a plastic cartridge, for which they re-introduced the &quot;126&quot; designation. (The number was originally used for the unrelated 126 roll film format from 1906 to 1949). The term &quot;126&quot; was intended to show that 26 mm square images were recorded, using Kodak&#x27;s common 1xx film numbering system. However the image size is actually 28×28 mm, which usually was reduced to approximately 26.5×26.5 mm by masking during printing or mounting. At the nominal 28 mm square size, the image diagonal is  mm, which is close to the  mm diagonal of a 135 film frame (24×36 mm); the crop factor or equivalent focal length multiplier is based on the diagonal measurements.

The 126 film cartridge and format were defined in ISO 3029, which has since been withdrawn.

Like the 120 format, there is a continuous backing paper, and the frame number is visible through a small window at the rear of the cartridge. Cameras for this type of film are equipped with a large rectangular window in the back door, through which is visible not only the frame number, but also a portion of the label showing the film type and speed. The cartridge has a captive take-up spool, but no supply spool: the film and backing paper are simply coiled tightly and placed in the supply end of the cartridge. The positioning of the image is fixed by the cartridge. The film is 35 mm wide, but unlike 135 film, it is unperforated, except for one registration hole per image, similar to the earlier 828 film. The camera is equipped with a sensing pin which falls into this hole when the film is fully advanced to the next frame, at which point the winding knob or lever is locked, so as to prevent winding past the pre-exposed frame lines.
The top edge of the cartridge above the film gate has a square notch in a specific position that signaled the film speed. Some of the higher-end cameras used this notch to determine the correct exposure, or to set the light meter, if so equipped. Although the actual films manufactured in 126 cartridge format had speeds varying between ISO 64/19° and ISO 400/27°, the standard defined 20 different speeds, spanning from ISO 20/14° to ISO 1600/33°.
The film was originally available in 12 and 20 image lengths; at the time regular production stopped it was only available in 24 exposure cartridges. The exposed film is stored on the take-up spool and does not need to be rewound, making the cameras very simple to load and unload. Kodak published instructions for assembling a simple pinhole camera using a 126 cartridge with typical household materials.

==History==
The format was introduced in 1963 by Kodak under the brand name &quot;Kodapak&quot;, together with the Instamatic camera line. Although the Instamatic name is sometimes treated as synonymous with the 126 format, Kodak also used it on similar film cartridge-based camera lines, including its later &quot;Pocket Instamatic&quot; cameras using 110-format cartridges (1972), and on its &quot;Instamatic M&quot; series movie cameras using Super 8 film (1965).

Around ten million cameras were made by Kodak and other companies. With a few exceptions, the format was mainly used for fairly simple amateur cameras; some of the few high-end models were manufactured by companies included Kodak, Minolta, Rollei, Yashica and Zeiss Ikon. The 126 cartridge also was used as the basis for a pinhole camera that could be built using household supplies. Kodak officially discontinued the format on 31 December 1999. Unused, outdated 126 films continue to show up at thrift stores, estate sales, and online auctions. Unless they have been stored frozen, they are probably deteriorated and are suitable only for experimenting.
=== Current availability and usage ===

Ferrania in Italy was the last factory producing 126 film. They marketed an ISO 200 color print film under their &quot;Solaris&quot; brand. The last scheduled production run took place in April 2007, but an unscheduled production run in late 2007 surprised industry observers and raised hopes that it had not actually been discontinued. Ferrania&#x27;s subsequent bankruptcy meant that there was no longer any large-scale factory source for 126 film.

Some photographers reuse the plastic cartridge from outdated 126 films and reload them with fresh 35mm film. The process is not difficult, but it is not entirely practical since the process must be carried out in the dark, as the 35mm film must be removed from the cartridge. In addition, the two films have significantly different perforation schemes. 126 cameras have a film-advance mechanism that relies on one edge perforation per image, and 35mm camera film has eight perforations per image, on both edges of the film. The photographer must use the film-advance mechanism several times between images, and one edge of each image will have visible perforations. An adapter is available for photographers without access to 126 cartridges, but the adapter does not fit all cameras.

Because it is 35 mm wide and is developed in industry-standard C-41 process chemistry, processing of most 126 films is readily available, as long as the photofinisher knows that it is standard, 35 mm-wide, C-41 film. Printing the photos can present problems, because modern film processing equipment often cannot handle the square format of 126 film. Some specialist photographic printers can correctly handle it. Standard flatbed scanners that have a light source for scanning film can be used to scan 126 negatives, perhaps using a mask made with black paper. Note that older film may require uncommon film processing such as C-22.

== See also ==

* Category: Film formats
* Film format
* List of color film systems
* List of film formats

== References ==

== External links ==

* Pictures of 126 film labels
* Exploded view of a 126 cartridge
* 3D-printed adapter for 135 format films in 126 cameras</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1321314" start="0" end="8" title="126 film" label="126 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q759853" start="30" end="41" title="film format" label="film format"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="56" end="67" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="90" end="95" title="Kodak" label="Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q209935" start="143" end="165" title="point-and-shoot camera" label="point-and-shoot camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558535" start="198" end="208" title="Instamatic" label="Instamatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="369" end="374" title="Kodak" label="Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q115519494" start="542" end="555" title="126 film (roll format)" label="126 roll film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196193" start="995" end="1006" title="crop factor" label="crop factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389960" start="1010" end="1033" title="equivalent focal length" label="equivalent focal length"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1135" end="1138" title="ISO standard#International standards and other publications" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077349" start="1187" end="1190" title="120 film" label="120"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051557" start="1786" end="1794" title="135 film" label="135 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644622" start="1883" end="1891" title="828 film" label="828 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q24613" start="2234" end="2244" title="film speed" label="film speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q607093" start="2342" end="2353" title="light meter" label="light meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q313742" start="2908" end="2922" title="pinhole camera" label="pinhole camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558535" start="3095" end="3105" title="Instamatic" label="Instamatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148317" start="3333" end="3336" title="110 film" label="110"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412320" start="3426" end="3438" title="Super 8 film" label="Super 8 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q455595" start="3583" end="3590" title="amateur" label="amateur"/>
<link wikidata="Q354578" start="3679" end="3686" title="Minolta" label="Minolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q699439" start="3688" end="3694" title="Rollei" label="Rollei"/>
<link wikidata="Q787183" start="3696" end="3703" title="Yashica" label="Yashica"/>
<link wikidata="Q282186" start="3708" end="3718" title="Zeiss Ikon" label="Zeiss Ikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313742" start="3771" end="3785" title="pinhole camera" label="pinhole camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q637383" start="4143" end="4151" title="Ferrania" label="Ferrania"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="4155" end="4160" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24613" start="4219" end="4226" title="Film speed" label="ISO 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="4507" end="4517" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051557" start="5394" end="5404" title="35mm format" label="35 mm wide"/>
<link wikidata="Q172852" start="5443" end="5455" title="C-41 process" label="C-41 process"/>
<link wikidata="Q595597" start="5887" end="5896" title="Negative (photography)" label="negatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005854" start="6008" end="6012" title="C-22 process" label="C-22"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6033" end="6055" title=":Category:Film formats" label="Category: Film formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q759853" start="6058" end="6069" title="Film format" label="Film format"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922334" start="6072" end="6098" title="List of color film systems" label="List of color film systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q21067571" start="6101" end="6121" title="List of film formats" label="List of film formats"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173658" wikidata="Q1148317" url="?curid=173658" title="110 film">
<text>110 is a cartridge-based film format used in still photography. It was introduced by Kodak in 1972. 110 is essentially a miniaturized version of Kodak&#x27;s earlier 126 film format. Each frame is , with one registration hole. Cartridges with 12, 20, or 24 frames are available on-line. Production variations sometimes have allowed for an additional image.

The film is fully housed in a plastic cartridge, which also registers the image when the film is advanced. There is a continuous backing paper, and the frame number is visible through a window at the rear of the cartridge. The film does not need to be rewound and is very simple to load and unload. The film is usually pre-exposed with frame lines and numbers, a feature intended to make it easier and more efficient for photo finishers to print.

Unlike later competing formats, such as disc and APS film, processed 110 negatives are returned in strips, without the original cartridge.
==History==

The 110 cartridge was introduced by Kodak in 1972 with Kodak Pocket Instamatic cameras with Kodachrome-X, Ektachrome-X, Kodacolor II, and Verichrome Pan film. The new pocket-sized cameras became immediately popular, and soon displaced competing subminiature cameras, such as the Minolta 16 series, from the market. The 110 film width is 16 mm. A four-frame strip measures 111 mm.

The 16 mm film width allowed Kodachrome film in 110 size to be processed on the existing processing machines that processed movie films in the Standard 8 mm film and 16 mm film sizes.

Fujifilm stopped manufacturing 110 format film in September 2009. 
Lomography re-commenced 110 film production in 2011. As of 2024, they offer 110 Black and White, Color Negative, and a variety of experimental stocks such as Lomochrome Purple and Metropolis. 

Estes Industries has long marketed several model rockets, the most notable being the Astrocam, with a simple 110 camera in the nose; the shutter is triggered when the nose cone separates from the rocket body.

Tyco (in their Spy Tech line of toys) made two toy spy cameras in the early 1990s that utilized 110 film, called the Hidden Camera and Reese&#x27;s Camera. The Reese&#x27;s Camera was meant to resemble two Reese&#x27;s two packs stuck together (it used a generic, likely pre-existing mold, it was just molded in orange and had Reese&#x27;s stickers on it), while the Hidden Camera came with a removable cardboard cover sleeve with small cutouts for the trigger button and front lens that made it resemble a Good &amp; Plenty candy box. The Hidden Camera had a periscope-like attachment that used a mirror for taking pictures around corners or behind objects. The Hidden Camera&#x27;s shape and size is similar to that of the Minox B.

The only new 110 film available on the market is currently produced by Austrian analogue photography company, Lomography.

==Design and technical issues==


Although the format is most closely associated with cheaply produced, low-cost cameras, Canon, Minolta, Minox, Pentax, Rollei, Voigtländer, and others, as well as Kodak, offered sophisticated, expensive 110 cameras, with excellent multi-element focusing lenses and precise, electronically controlled exposure systems. Such cameras are capable of making high-quality images on 110 film. Some of these cameras are quite small and still hold appeal to subminiature-photography enthusiasts.

The small negative size of 110 film makes it difficult to enlarge successfully. For these reasons, the 110 format is associated with prints that are often rather grainy and unsharp. This has led to the misconception that the cartridge itself is incapable of holding film flat enough for making high-quality negatives.

The 110 cartridge, as specified by Kodak, has a plastic tab on one end. Camera designers had the option of using this tab to sense film speed, enabling sophisticated cameras to switch between high- and low-speed film. A short tab indicated high-speed film, and a long tab indicated low-speed film. Kodak left it to the film manufacturer to decide which film speeds were high or low. Only a few cameras took advantage of this feature: Rollei A110, Canon 110 ED 20, Minolta 110 Zoom SLR Mark I/II, Minox 110S, Voigtlander Vitoret 110 EL, Pentax Auto 110 and the Kodak Ektralite 10.

Some manufacturers would vary the low speed ASA setting and then change it in later models. For example, Minox 110S low speed was 64 ASA (Kodachrome then being made for 110) and high 400 ASA: but Canon 110 ED has 80 ASA only, with the 110 ED 20 having 80 and 400 ASA. 

The last 110 film that Kodak produced was ISO 400 speed packed in a cartridge that senses as &quot;low&quot; speed. As shown in the photograph to the right, these cartridges can be modified by hand so that they signal the proper speed to the camera.

==Film types==


Although the format is commonly associated with print film, Kodak also produced Kodachrome 64 slide film in 110 cartridges until 1982.
In 2012 Lomography re-introduced slide film for 110 with their Peacock 200 ASA model. However, since not all 110 cameras have a settable ASA dial (low or high, depending on presence of a notch in the cassette), a neutral-density filter has to be used over the lens or the exposure compensation dial has to be used where available. Otherwise, over-exposure by a factor of x2 will result, leading to over-exposed images.

Along with standard-sized slides that fit into standard projectors, 110 slide film could also be processed into smaller format slides. The latter requires special &quot;Pocket Carousel&quot; projectors, or the Leica 110 projector.

Kodak&#x27;s Verichrome Pan was the only 110 black and white film produced until 2012, when Lomography manufactured their &quot;Orca&quot; Black and White film at 100 ISO speed. This speed is supported by most 110 cameras. Lomography went on to launch color, redscale, and slide film cartridges which, along with black and white, are the only 110 film types in production as of 2022.

== See also ==

* Category: Film formats
* Film format
* List of color film systems
* List of photographic film formats

== References ==
#International standard: ISO 13450
== External links ==
* 110 Cameras at Sub Club, a site on subminiature photography.
* Rollei 110 cameras at Rolleigraphy.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1148317" start="0" end="3" title="110 film" label="110"/>
<link wikidata="Q759853" start="25" end="36" title="film format" label="film format"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="45" end="62" title="photography" label="still photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="85" end="90" title="Kodak" label="Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321314" start="166" end="174" title="126 film" label="126 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995890" start="208" end="225" title="Registration pin" label="registration hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q661986" start="846" end="850" title="disc film" label="disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q379688" start="855" end="858" title="Advanced Photo System" label="APS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558535" start="1019" end="1036" title="Pocket Instamatic" label="Pocket Instamatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277847" start="1203" end="1222" title="subminiature camera" label="subminiature camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868991" start="1237" end="1247" title="Minolta 16" label="Minolta 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q571518" start="1482" end="1500" title="Standard 8 mm film" label="Standard 8 mm film"/>
<link wikidata="Q194383" start="1505" end="1515" title="16 mm film" label="16 mm film"/>
<link wikidata="Q164740" start="1524" end="1532" title="Fujifilm" label="Fujifilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369970" start="1785" end="1801" title="Estes Industries" label="Estes Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503383" start="1828" end="1840" title="model rocket" label="model rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811540" start="1870" end="1878" title="Astrocam" label="Astrocam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136612" start="2201" end="2223" title="Reese&amp;#x27;s Peanut Butter Cup" label="Reese&amp;#x27;s two packs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154254" start="2840" end="2850" title="Lomographic" label="Lomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q62621" start="2975" end="2980" title="Canon (company)" label="Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q354578" start="2982" end="2989" title="Minolta" label="Minolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q688121" start="2991" end="2996" title="Minox" label="Minox"/>
<link wikidata="Q503673" start="2998" end="3004" title="Pentax" label="Pentax"/>
<link wikidata="Q699439" start="3006" end="3012" title="Rollei" label="Rollei"/>
<link wikidata="Q696693" start="3014" end="3025" title="Voigtländer" label="Voigtländer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277847" start="3336" end="3360" title="subminiature photography" label="subminiature-photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q595597" start="3385" end="3393" title="negative (photography)" label="negative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4128" end="4139" title="Rollei A110" label="Rollei A110"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4141" end="4156" title="Canon 110 ED 20" label="Canon 110 ED 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868989" start="4158" end="4178" title="Minolta 110 Zoom SLR" label="Minolta 110 Zoom SLR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4186" end="4188" title="Minolta 110 Zoom SLR Mark II" label="II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4190" end="4200" title="Minox 110S" label="Minox 110S"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4202" end="4228" title="Voigtlander Vitoret 110 EL" label="Voigtlander Vitoret 110 EL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046604" start="4230" end="4245" title="Pentax Auto 110" label="Pentax Auto 110"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4254" end="4272" title="Kodak Ektralite 10" label="Kodak Ektralite 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455620" start="4893" end="4903" title="Kodachrome" label="Kodachrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q166816" start="4907" end="4912" title="photographic slide" label="slide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154254" start="4956" end="4966" title="Lomography" label="Lomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q612206" start="5161" end="5183" title="neutral-density filter" label="neutral-density filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044697" start="5544" end="5552" title="Carousel slide projector" label="Carousel"/>
<link wikidata="Q161833" start="5578" end="5583" title="Leica Camera" label="Leica"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="5600" end="5605" title="Kodak" label="Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136382" start="5859" end="5867" title="redscale" label="redscale"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6003" end="6025" title=":Category:Film formats" label="Category: Film formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q759853" start="6028" end="6039" title="Film format" label="Film format"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922334" start="6042" end="6068" title="List of color film systems" label="List of color film systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q115519494" start="6071" end="6104" title="List of photographic film formats" label="List of photographic film formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="6148" end="6151" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277847" start="6216" end="6240" title="subminiature photography" label="subminiature photography"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173664" wikidata="Q920145" url="?curid=173664" title="Grokster">
<text>Grokster Ltd. was a privately owned software company based in Nevis, West Indies that created the Grokster peer-to-peer file-sharing client in 2001 that used the FastTrack protocol. Grokster Ltd. was rendered extinct in late 2005 by the United States Supreme Court&#x27;s decision in &quot;MGM Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd.&quot; The court ruled against Grokster&#x27;s peer-to-peer file sharing program for computers running the Microsoft Windows operating system, effectively forcing the company to cease operations.

The product was similar in look and feel to Kazaa, marketed by Sharman Networks, and Morpheus, which was distributed by StreamCast. Grokster, along with Morpheus and Kazaa, are considered second-generation peer-to-peer file sharing programs. Unlike their predecessor Napster, these file sharing programs allowed users to trade files directly between one another, without these transactions passing through a centralized server. Because Napster maintained this fraction of control over the transaction of files through its server, it was ruled illegal because it should have exercised its power over the server to stop the sharing of copyright infringing files. Grokster and this second generation of peer-to-peer file sharing programs sought to avoid this legal obstacle.

== Summary of the piracy argument ==
It has been estimated that 90% of files shared on Grokster were downloaded illegally. Whether such downloads have substantially affected the retail sales of music, videos, and other works protected by copyright and the intellectual property laws is a matter of debate. Grokster claimed they did not violate any copyright laws because no files passed through their computers. They assigned certain user computers as &quot;root supernodes&quot; that acted as music hubs for their company. Thus they were not responsible for controlling any specific file downloads.

The key issue in the copyright infringement case was the so-called &quot;Sony safe-harbor&quot; principle that was set by the Supreme Court over 21 years previously in &quot;Sony v. Universal Studios&quot; 464 U.S. 417 (1984). The ruling stated that, &quot;...the sale of copying equipment, like the sale of other articles of commerce, does not constitute contributory infringement if the product is widely used for legitimate, unobjectionable purposes. Indeed, it need merely be capable of substantial non-infringing uses&quot; (Sony 464 U.S. at 442). This case challenged the legality of using VTRs to copy content using Betamax tapes. Grokster argued that proof of reasonable, actual or potential, non-infringing use, is sufficient to fulfill the &quot;substantiality&quot; requirement. The RIAA and MPAA argued that Sony safe-harbor requires proof that the non-infringing use is the primary one; an incidental non-infringing use is not enough.

Among the &quot;amicus curiae&quot; briefs:

* The U.S. government proposed that a manufacturer of a technological device will be protected by Sony safe-harbor only if the non-infringing uses are commercially significant compared to the infringing uses.
* A group of law and economic professors (among them Professors Kenneth J. Arrow, and William M. Landes) argue that the test whether the non-infringing use is substantial, requires an examination of all the existing legal mechanisms for accomplishing the same task. The example given is the distribution of the Bible. This is lawfully available through peer-to-peer file sharing software and is therefore a non-infringing use. But many religious websites offer a free copy. Thus, since downloading the Bible through peer-to-peer file sharing software is an addition to the list of well-established legitimate methods for obtaining a free Bible, the benefits of this addition are not substantial and the overall use of P2P software should not be considered a non-infringing use.
* The cost-benefit analysis, first introduced by Judge Posner from the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals in the Aimster case, holds that a manufacturer of technological device will enjoy the Sony safe-harbor only if &quot;...it would have been disproportionately costly for him to eliminate or at least reduce substantially the infringing uses.&quot;
* The Creative Commons organization presented a strong argument for non-infringing use in the form of the Creative Commons licence, despite the fact that the architecture of the software did not allow for the licence information to be transferred.
* Notable Emerging Technology Companies with the support of the Electronic Frontier Foundation (among them Kaleidescape, Inc. (CEO Michael Malcolm), Sling Media, Inc. (Founder Raghu Tarra), Time Trax Technologies Corp. (CEO Elliott Frutkin) argued unwarranted alteration of the test set forth in Sony Corp. v. Universal City Studios, 464 U.S. 417 (1984), that would have profound negative consequences for emerging technology companies. Determining a product’s &quot;primary uses&quot; necessarily requires evaluating how the product is actually used. This &quot;ex post facto&quot;, or after-the-fact, test for contributory infringement would greatly increase the legal uncertainty surrounding the decision to pursue commercialization of a new technology. Emerging technology companies cannot necessarily predict the &quot;primary uses&quot; to which their new technology will be put, much less whether those uses would be held by the courts to be infringing uses.

== History of the case in the U.S. courts ==
In April 2003, Los Angeles federal judge Stephen Wilson ruled in favor of Grokster and Streamcast (providers of Morpheus P2P software) against the Recording Industry Association of America and the Motion Picture Association of America and held that their file sharing software was not illegal.

On 20 August 2003, the decision was appealed by the RIAA and the MPAA.

On 17 August 2004, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit issued a partial ruling supporting Grokster, holding This appeal presents the question of whether distributors of peer-to-peer file-sharing networking software may be held contributorily or vicariously liable for copyright infringements by users. Under the circumstances presented by this case, we conclude that the defendants are not liable for contributory and vicarious copyright infringement and affirm the district court&#x27;s partial grant of summary judgment.

In December 2004, the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case. On 25 March 2005, billionaire and former Broadcast.com owner Mark Cuban announced he would finance Grokster&#x27;s fight in the Supreme Court. Oral arguments were held for &quot;MGM v. Grokster&quot; on 29 March 2005, and in June 2005, the court unanimously held that Grokster could indeed be sued for infringement for their activities prior to the date of this judgment. But the future impact of the case may only be to require software companies to more carefully advertise their packages to discourage illegal downloading (see also inducement rule).

Grokster settled with plaintiffs shortly after the Supreme Court&#x27;s decision. On 14 February 2006, the plaintiffs filed motions for summary judgment as to the liability of the remaining defendants, StreamCast and Sharman. Defendant Sharman Networks reached a tentative settlement agreement in August 2006.

On 27 September 2006, Judge Steven Wilson of the United States District Court for the Central District of California granted summary judgment to the plaintiffs as to StreamCast&#x27;s liability. The court rejected StreamCast&#x27;s argument that the plaintiff needs to show specific instances of infringement resulting from StreamCast&#x27;s acts, holding that &quot;Plaintiff need prove only that StreamCast distributed the product with the intent to encourage infringement.&quot;

== Supreme Court decision leads to shutdown ==

Grokster closed its site on November 7, 2005. A note on its home page cited a United States Supreme Court ruling that copying copyrighted material using &quot;unauthorized peer-to-peer services is illegal&quot; and while legal download services exist, &quot;this service is not one of them.&quot;

The website is now threatening visitors that their actions can get them caught, displaying the visitor&#x27;s IP address.

The screen text reads as follows:
== Impact of legal threats and fallout from Grokster’s demise ==
In the aftermath of the Grokster warning, many users became alarmed that their IP addresses were being stored. Prosecution of such individuals relies upon what has commonly been referred to as a process of doe subpoena in which prosecutors are required to gain a series of subpoenas in order to find out the identity of the user behind the IP address in question. Following the shutdown of Grokster, blogs became inundated with concerned users fearful of the warning; however, there have been no reports of the use of doe subpoenas in this case.

Research into the effects of warnings such as the one left on Grokster’s website has shown that while these warnings can result in a substantial reduction in online file sharing of individuals, the overall availability of downloadable content did not diminish. Furthermore, researchers cannot account for how much of this reduction in individual file sharing is simply shifted to other file sharing programs. In cases where the RIAA has issued threats, the users who conduct the most file sharing usually reduced their daily transactions to levels below the level of prosecution. In effect, these warnings have only caused only a brief reduction in overall online file sharing.

==In popular culture==
*Weird Al Yankovic mentions Grokster in &quot;Don&#x27;t Download This Song&quot;.

==See also==

* Comparison of file sharing applications

==References==
== External links ==
* MGM v. Grokster case documents
* The Legality of File Sharing - MGM vs Grokster
* MGM v. Grokster Ninth Circuit oral argument transcript
* MGM v. Grokster: Day 1 - March 30, 2005 MP3 Newswire recap of first day of trial
* &quot;Legally Speaking: Did MGM Really Win the Grokster Case?&quot; Pamela Samuelson
* Technical Background of Grokster Decision - Philip Larson&#x27;s Blog
* Legal Background of Grokster Decision - Philip Larson&#x27;s Blog
* Summary of Supreme Court Decision - Philip Larson&#x27;s Blog
* &quot;Advanced Peer-Based Technology Business Models&quot;. Ghosemajumder, Shuman. MIT Sloan School of Management, 2002.
* &quot;Music Downloads: Pirates- or Customers? &quot;. Silverthorne, Sean. Harvard Business School Working Knowledge, 2004.
* Metro–Goldwyn–Mayer Studios (MGM) v. Grokster, 545 U.S. (2005) - Civil liberties</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q920145" start="0" end="13" title="Grokster" label="Grokster Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q207794" start="62" end="67" title="Nevis" label="Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="69" end="80" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373485" start="107" end="132" title="peer-to-peer file-sharing" label="peer-to-peer file-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397643" start="162" end="180" title="FastTrack (protocol)" label="FastTrack protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715752" start="290" end="325" title="MGM Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd." label="MGM Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q2373485" start="372" end="397" title="peer-to-peer file sharing" label="peer-to-peer file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="432" end="449" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="450" end="466" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163401" start="566" end="571" title="Kazaa" label="Kazaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163401" start="585" end="601" title="Sharman Networks" label="Sharman Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q635599" start="607" end="615" title="Morpheus (file-sharing software)" label="Morpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622646" start="642" end="652" title="StreamCast" label="StreamCast"/>
<link wikidata="Q275141" start="789" end="796" title="Napster" label="Napster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="1533" end="1542" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="1551" end="1572" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="1917" end="1939" title="copyright infringement" label="copyright infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562455" start="2070" end="2095" title="Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc." label="Sony v. Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q690148" start="2519" end="2526" title="Betamax" label="Betamax"/>
<link wikidata="Q46350" start="2861" end="2874" title="amicus curiae" label="amicus curiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373485" start="3452" end="3477" title="peer-to-peer file sharing" label="peer-to-peer file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728739" start="3984" end="3991" title="Aimster" label="Aimster"/>
<link wikidata="Q43449" start="4229" end="4245" title="Creative Commons" label="Creative Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q624023" start="4535" end="4565" title="Electronic Frontier Foundation" label="Electronic Frontier Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6351951" start="4578" end="4596" title="Kaleidescape" label="Kaleidescape, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="5498" end="5509" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105820" start="5524" end="5538" title="Stephen Victor Wilson" label="Stephen Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q635599" start="5595" end="5603" title="Morpheus (file-sharing software)" label="Morpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="5630" end="5671" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q676222" start="5680" end="5717" title="Motion Picture Association of America" label="Motion Picture Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358778" start="5873" end="5925" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373485" start="6040" end="6065" title="peer-to-peer file-sharing" label="peer-to-peer file-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="6417" end="6430" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q318503" start="6517" end="6527" title="Mark Cuban" label="Mark Cuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715752" start="6634" end="6649" title="MGM v. Grokster" label="MGM v. Grokster"/>
<link wikidata="Q13512334" start="6961" end="6980" title="illegal downloading" label="illegal downloading"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986160" start="6991" end="7006" title="inducement rule" label="inducement rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622646" start="7212" end="7222" title="StreamCast" label="StreamCast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163401" start="7227" end="7234" title="Sharman Networks" label="Sharman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288056" start="8578" end="8590" title="doe subpoena" label="doe subpoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349" start="9622" end="9639" title="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic" label="Weird Al Yankovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606351" start="9667" end="9696" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Download This Song" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Download This Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q842191" start="9721" end="9760" title="Comparison of file sharing applications" label="Comparison of file sharing applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327775" start="9979" end="9991" title="MP3 Newswire" label="MP3 Newswire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129255" start="10090" end="10106" title="Pamela Samuelson" label="Pamela Samuelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504960" start="10373" end="10394" title="Shuman Ghosemajumder" label="Ghosemajumder, Shuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q142740" start="10396" end="10426" title="MIT Sloan School of Management" label="MIT Sloan School of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q49126" start="10510" end="10551" title="Harvard Business School" label="Harvard Business School Working Knowledge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173665" wikidata="Q749979" url="?curid=173665" title="Béla Fleck and the Flecktones">
<text>Béla Fleck and the Flecktones is an American jazz fusion band that is known for its eclectic style and instrumentation, combining jazz improvisation with progressive bluegrass, rock, classical, funk, and world music traditions.

The Flecktones formed in 1988 when Béla Fleck was invited to perform on the PBS TV series &quot;The Lonesome Pine Specials&quot;. The original members were Fleck on banjo, Victor Wooten on bass guitar, his brother Roy Wooten on Drumitar, and Howard Levy on harmonica and keyboards. After Levy&#x27;s departure in 1992 the group continued as a trio for several years until recruiting Jeff Coffin in 1997 on saxophones. Coffin quit the group in 2010, and Levy rejoined in 2011.

==History==

=== Formation ===
Near the end of his time with the New Grass Revival band, Fleck was invited to play for the &quot;Lonesome Pine Special&quot; on PBS in 1988, and he gathered a group of musicians to assist him. He had met Howard Levy the year before at the Winnipeg Folk Festival. Victor Wooten auditioned over the phone and volunteered his brother Roy as a potential member. After the PBS performance, Fleck decided to keep the group together, calling it Bela Fleck and the Flecktones and using it to explore a more complex series of his own compositions. 

The Flecktones merged bluegrass with jazz, presenting record store owners with the problem of selecting a genre under which to stock their whimsically titled albums, whose covers bore cartoons. The leader played electric banjo and was influenced by the Kentucky bluegrass of Earl Scruggs and &quot;The Ballad of Jed Clampett&quot;. Victor Wooten broke into jazz bass solos. Roy Wooten called himself &quot;Future Man&quot; and played drumitar, an instrument which he&#x27;d developed by linking a customised SynthAxe guitar synthesizer controller to drum sounds. Melodies were usually taken by Howard Levy. 

The first Flecktones video, &quot;Sinister Minister&quot;, was in rotation at the networks VH-1, which played pop and adult contemporary music; BET, the Black Entertainment channel; and Country Music Television. The band performed initially at jazz festivals, as well as with soul singer Stevie Wonder, blues guitarist Bonnie Raitt, and the Christian a cappella group Take 6. Followers of the Grateful Dead took note.

===Recording===
The band&#x27;s debut album, &quot;Béla Fleck and the Flecktones&quot; (Warner Bros, 1989), received a Grammy nomination for Best Contemporary Jazz Album, as did their second album, &quot;Flight of the Cosmic Hippo&quot; (Warner Bros., 1991), which also received a nomination for Best Instrumental Composition for the song &quot;Blu-Bop&quot; and contained the Flecktones&#x27;s version of &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot;. Their next album had another cartoon cover and the palindromic title &quot;UFO TOFU&quot; (Warner Bros., 1992). One of its songs, &quot;Bonnie &amp; Slyde&quot;, had Fleck playing banjo atypically with a slide, an idea suggested to him by slide guitarist Bonnie Raitt.

&quot;UFO Tofu&quot; would be the last album the Flecktones recorded with their original lineup until Rocket Science in 2011. Howard Levy left the band in December 1992. While the departure of Levy was tough for the band, it was not unexpected. During their 1992 tour it became evident to the band that Levy was not happy with the rigors of touring and wanted to spend more time with his wife and children.

The remaining trio, consisting of Fleck and the Wooten brothers, recorded their fourth album, &quot;Three Flew Over the Cuckoo&#x27;s Nest&quot;. &quot;&#x27;Once we started rehearsing, everything was fine,&#x27; said Fleck. &#x27;We started finding ways to sound good, and it was real exciting.&#x27;&quot; Without Levy, the Flecktones as usual spent most of 1993 on the road and released &quot;Three Flew Over the Cuckoo&#x27;s Nest&quot; in September of that year. The band continued to tour for the next couple of years. 1996 saw the release of the live album &quot;Live Art&quot;, featuring recordings made over a four-year touring period which also saw the core Flecktones trio (plus, on some tunes, Levy) collaborating with assorted jazz and bluegrass musicians including Sam Bush, Branford Marsalis, Chick Corea, and Bruce Hornsby.

=== Return to quartet ===

In April 1997, the Flecktones became a quartet again, as they added saxophone player Jeff Coffin to the mix. In June 1997, the Flecktones opened for the Dave Matthews Band. In July the Flecktones toured Europe and sat in on the second set of a Phish show in Lyon, France. This marked the second and final time that the Flecktones played with Phish.

In June 1998, the Flecktones released their sixth album, and fifth studio album, &quot;Left of Cool&quot;. It represented a switch from previous Flecktones albums, as the band, according to critic Terri Horak, &quot;jettisoned their self-imposed rule to only record what could be duplicated on live instruments.&quot; In July 2000, the Flecktones released their seventh album, &quot;Outbound&quot;, another studio album. The Flecktones&#x27; philosophy with this album was to do something different from everything they had done before. What makes &quot;Outbound&quot; unique is the way in which the Flecktones recorded the album. The quartet recorded each track on the album, then invited guest musicians to overdub vocals or instrumentation. &quot;Outbound&quot; guests include Jon Anderson from Yes, Shawn Colvin, and John Medeski, of Medeski, Martin and Wood, to name a few.

&quot;Live at the Quick&quot;, which was also released as a DVD, is the band&#x27;s eighth album and second live album. For fans of live Flecktones, this album, like &quot;Live Art&quot;, successfully captured the sound and feel of the Flecktones in concert.

In February 2006, the band released their tenth album, &quot;The Hidden Land&quot;. As with every Flecktones album, they needed to change something from their last album. For &quot;The Hidden Land&quot;, the Flecktones didn&#x27;t want any guest musicians. &quot;&#x27;The truth is, the last few records are not what we are,&#x27; Fleck said. &#x27;Obviously, we loved playing with those musicians, but if you keep on doing it, you become a gathering point rather than a group with its own identity.&#x27;&quot; For the Flecktones to keep moving forward, they felt their music had to get back to the roots of the quartet.

Jeff Coffin amicably left the band in 2010 to join the Dave Matthews Band. Original member Howard Levy rejoined the following year in 2011, when the band recorded and released their eleventh album &quot;Rocket Science&quot;.

In June 2012, following another summer tour, the Flecktones announced their hiatus as a band.

=== Reunion ===
In January 2016, the Flecktones announced a short reunion tour scheduled for June 2016, confirming an appearance at the Telluride Bluegrass Festival on June 16, 2016. In 2017, the band announced concerts for June–August 2017, and also confirmed a tour with Chick Corea Elektric Band in August 2017.

==Critical reception==
Thom Jurek of AllMusic.com called the Flecktones&#x27;s music an &quot;unclassifiable meld of jazz, progressive bluegrass, rock, classical, funk, and world music traditions,&quot; a style sometimes dubbed &quot;blu-bop&quot;.

Of the album &quot;Béla Fleck and the Flecktones&quot; critic Geoffrey Himes wrote, &quot;Fleck&#x27;s banjo-playing takes the quartet on wide tangents through the outer space of jazz improvisation and minimalist composition, but he always brings them back to the traditions of rural America.&quot;

The quartet received attention for their musical innovations and invention, including praise from music critic Bill Kolhaase. However, he was critical of the band&#x27;s lack of a drum kit, claiming that Wooten&#x27;s &quot;electronic beat seemed a bit muddy compared to the real thing&quot;.

&quot;Cosmic Hippo&quot; was received favorably. Himes applauded their prodigious improvisatory ability. John Griffin of &quot;The Gazette&quot; also praised the group&#x27;s ability to create such an individual style that &quot;the whole of idea of style disappears.&quot; Mike Joyce, of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; was impressed by the Flecktones&#x27; ability to maintain a distinct voice. Joyce called a Flecktones show a &quot;musical free-for-all, embracing the band&#x27;s recorded material and venturing off into the great unknown.&quot; Jim Santella of &quot;The Buffalo News&quot; praised the band&#x27;s mastery of styles and their ability to weave together complicated pieces. Santella even compared Fleck&#x27;s playing to a &quot;miniature Bach canon.&quot;

Geoffrey Himes remarked that &quot;Left of Cool&quot; sounded too ordinary. In his negative review he wrote, &quot;Unfortunately the Flecktones&#x27; first studio album in five years reveals that they&#x27;ve become a very ordinary band.&quot; Himes adds, &quot;The four Flecktones are all marvelous musicians, and they come up with imaginative parts for the new album&#x27;s 15 cuts. The overall concept, however has diminished into easy-to-digest pop-jazz, for which there is too much already.&quot;

&quot;Hidden Land&quot; received mixed reviews. Critic Michael Endelman of &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;, wrote that the Flecktones sound &quot;hasn&#x27;t aged well.&quot; Dan Ouelette of &quot;Billboard&quot; found &quot;Hidden Land&quot; to be &quot;by far their best album.&quot; Ouelette was particularly impressed by the quartet&#x27;s range of repertoire in this album.

&quot;Jingle All the Way&quot; was well received. Geoffrey Himes praised the band for being able to package the Flecktones&#x27; complex sound into an easily digestible holiday album without having to compromise.

Jeff Kelman of &quot;Jazz Times&quot; writes favorably about &quot;Rocket Science&quot; and Levy&#x27;s reunion with the Flecktones, &quot;Rocket Science recaptures everything that made the Flecktones so fresh, so innovative, so important during its first five years.&quot; Kelman particularly praised the album&#x27;s writing and the interactions between Levy and Fleck. &quot;AllMusic&quot; critic Thom Jurek also gave &quot;Rocket Science&quot; a rave review, &quot;&quot;Rocket Science&quot; fires on all cylinders and comes off as a fresh and exciting reintroduction to a newly energized Flecktones.&quot;

==Awards and honors==
== Discography ==
Béla Fleck and the Flecktones have 10 studio albums, 2 live albums, and 1 compilation album.

===Studio albums===
* &quot;Béla Fleck and the Flecktones&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Flight of the Cosmic Hippo&quot; (1991)
* &quot;UFO Tofu&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Three Flew Over the Cuckoo&#x27;s Nest&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Left of Cool&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Outbound&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Little Worlds&quot; (2003)
* &quot;The Hidden Land&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Jingle All the Way&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Rocket Science&quot; (2011)

===Live albums===
* &quot;Live Art&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Live at the Quick&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Flying Saucer Dudes&quot; (2015) (1991 performance)

===Compilation albums===
* &quot;Greatest Hits of the 20th Century&quot; (1999)

==Band members==
*Béla Fleck – banjos, synthesizers, guitar (1988–)
*Howard Levy – harmonicas, piano, keyboards, synthesizers, jaw harp (1988–1993, 2010–)
*Victor Wooten – bass guitars, double bass, cello (1988–)
*Roy Wooten (&quot;Future Man&quot;) – drumitar, drums, percussion, electronic drums (1988–)

Former
*Jeff Coffin – saxophones, flute, clarinet, synthesizers (1998–2010)

===Timeline===
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q749979" start="0" end="29" title="Béla Fleck and the Flecktones" label="Béla Fleck and the Flecktones"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="45" end="56" title="jazz fusion" label="jazz fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049625" start="135" end="148" title="Musical improvisation" label="improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="154" end="175" title="progressive bluegrass" label="progressive bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="177" end="181" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="183" end="192" title="Classical music" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="194" end="198" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q205049" start="204" end="215" title="world music" label="world music"/>
<link wikidata="Q561390" start="264" end="274" title="Béla Fleck" label="Béla Fleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q355512" start="401" end="414" title="Victor Wooten" label="Victor Wooten"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755173" start="443" end="453" title="Future Man" label="Roy Wooten"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040117" start="457" end="465" title="Drumitar" label="Drumitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631859" start="471" end="482" title="Howard Levy" label="Howard Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807777" start="612" end="623" title="Jeff Coffin" label="Jeff Coffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007840" start="771" end="788" title="New Grass Revival" label="New Grass Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631859" start="942" end="953" title="Howard Levy" label="Howard Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="977" end="985" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q355512" start="1001" end="1014" title="Victor Wooten" label="Victor Wooten"/>
<link wikidata="Q74032" start="1554" end="1566" title="Earl Scruggs" label="Earl Scruggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715424" start="1577" end="1603" title="The Ballad of Jed Clampett" label="The Ballad of Jed Clampett"/>
<link wikidata="Q663098" start="1787" end="1795" title="SynthAxe" label="SynthAxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527709" start="1796" end="1814" title="guitar synthesizer" label="guitar synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="2176" end="2189" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q234693" start="2207" end="2219" title="Bonnie Raitt" label="Bonnie Raitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q327344" start="2256" end="2262" title="Take 6" label="Take 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="2281" end="2294" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647971" start="2358" end="2387" title="Béla Fleck and the Flecktones (album)" label="Béla Fleck and the Flecktones"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="2395" end="2406" title="Warner Records" label="Warner Bros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746609" start="2511" end="2537" title="Flight of the Cosmic Hippo" label="Flight of the Cosmic Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="2719" end="2743" title="The Star-Spangled Banner" label="The Star-Spangled Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001913" start="2826" end="2834" title="UFO Tofu" label="UFO TOFU"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990864" start="3529" end="3567" title="Three Flew Over the Cuckoo&amp;#x27;s Nest" label="Three Flew Over the Cuckoo&amp;#x27;s Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654956" start="3999" end="4007" title="Live Art" label="Live Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q539156" start="4208" end="4216" title="Sam Bush" label="Sam Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q454819" start="4218" end="4235" title="Branford Marsalis" label="Branford Marsalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192465" start="4237" end="4248" title="Chick Corea" label="Chick Corea"/>
<link wikidata="Q918502" start="4254" end="4267" title="Bruce Hornsby" label="Bruce Hornsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807777" start="4382" end="4393" title="Jeff Coffin" label="Jeff Coffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q832086" start="4450" end="4468" title="Dave Matthews Band" label="Dave Matthews Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q921267" start="4541" end="4546" title="Phish" label="Phish"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="4555" end="4559" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096594" start="4734" end="4746" title="Left of Cool" label="Left of Cool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111875" start="5030" end="5038" title="Outbound (Bela Fleck and the Flecktones album)" label="Outbound"/>
<link wikidata="Q313749" start="5427" end="5439" title="Jon Anderson" label="Jon Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="5445" end="5448" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q267438" start="5450" end="5462" title="Shawn Colvin" label="Shawn Colvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q719672" start="5468" end="5480" title="John Medeski" label="John Medeski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916133" start="5485" end="5509" title="Medeski, Martin and Wood" label="Medeski, Martin and Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656963" start="5533" end="5550" title="Live at the Quick" label="Live at the Quick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654956" start="5699" end="5707" title="Live Art" label="Live Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739553" start="5848" end="5863" title="The Hidden Land" label="The Hidden Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q832086" start="6465" end="6483" title="Dave Matthews Band" label="Dave Matthews Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355130" start="6613" end="6627" title="Rocket Science (Béla Fleck and the Flecktones album)" label="Rocket Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402345" start="6867" end="6895" title="Telluride Bluegrass Festival" label="Telluride Bluegrass Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421983" start="7004" end="7029" title="Chick Corea Elektric Band" label="Chick Corea Elektric Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="7281" end="7284" title="bluegrass music" label="blu"/>
<link wikidata="Q105513" start="7285" end="7288" title="Bebop" label="bop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647971" start="7316" end="7345" title="Béla Fleck and the Flecktones (album)" label="Béla Fleck and the Flecktones"/>
<link wikidata="Q35006485" start="7359" end="7373" title="Geoffrey Himes" label="Geoffrey Himes"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="7777" end="7785" title="drum kit" label="drum kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="8186" end="8205" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390786" start="8463" end="8479" title="The Buffalo News" label="The Buffalo News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647971" start="10540" end="10569" title="Béla Fleck and the Flecktones (album)" label="Béla Fleck and the Flecktones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746609" start="10591" end="10617" title="Flight of the Cosmic Hippo" label="Flight of the Cosmic Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001913" start="10639" end="10647" title="UFO Tofu" label="UFO Tofu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990864" start="10669" end="10707" title="Three Flew Over the Cuckoo&amp;#x27;s Nest" label="Three Flew Over the Cuckoo&amp;#x27;s Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096594" start="10729" end="10741" title="Left of Cool" label="Left of Cool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111875" start="10763" end="10771" title="Outbound (Béla Fleck and the Flecktones album)" label="Outbound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652593" start="10793" end="10806" title="Little Worlds" label="Little Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739553" start="10828" end="10843" title="The Hidden Land" label="The Hidden Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202346" start="10865" end="10883" title="Jingle All the Way (Béla Fleck and the Flecktones album)" label="Jingle All the Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355130" start="10905" end="10919" title="Rocket Science (Béla Fleck and the Flecktones album)" label="Rocket Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654956" start="10960" end="10968" title="Live Art" label="Live Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656963" start="10990" end="11007" title="Live at the Quick" label="Live at the Quick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746609" start="11029" end="11048" title="Flying Saucer Dudes" label="Flying Saucer Dudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601440" start="11115" end="11148" title="Greatest Hits of the 20th Century" label="Greatest Hits of the 20th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q561390" start="11181" end="11191" title="Béla Fleck" label="Béla Fleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631859" start="11232" end="11243" title="Howard Levy" label="Howard Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q355512" start="11319" end="11332" title="Victor Wooten" label="Victor Wooten"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755173" start="11377" end="11412" title="Future Man" label="Roy Wooten (&amp;quot;Future Man&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807777" start="11478" end="11489" title="Jeff Coffin" label="Jeff Coffin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173668" wikidata="Q44054" url="?curid=173668" title="Franz Marc">
<text>Franz Moritz Wilhelm Marc (8 February 1880 – 4 March 1916) was a German painter and printmaker, one of the key figures of German Expressionism. He was a founding member of &quot;Der Blaue Reiter&quot; (The Blue Rider), a journal whose name later became synonymous with the circle of artists collaborating in it.

His mature works mostly are animals, and are known for bright colors. He was drafted to serve in the German Army at the beginning of World War I, and died two years later at the Battle of Verdun.

In the 1930s, the Nazis named him a degenerate artist as part of their suppression of modern art. However, most of his work survived World War II, securing his legacy. His work is now exhibited in many eminent galleries and museums. His major paintings have attracted large sums, with a record of £42,654,500 for &quot;Die Füchse&quot; (&quot;The Foxes&quot;) in 2022.

==Early life==
Franz Marc was born in 1880 in Munich, the then capital of the Kingdom of Bavaria. His father, Wilhelm Marc, was a professional landscape painter; his mother, Sophie, was a homemaker and a devout, socially liberal Calvinist. At the age of 17 Marc wanted to study theology, as his older brother Paul had. Two years later, however, he enrolled in the arts program of Munich University. He was first required to serve in the military for a year, after which, in 1900, he began studies instead at the Academy of Fine Arts, Munich, where his teachers included Gabriel von Hackl and Wilhelm von Diez. In 1903 and 1907, he spent time in France, particularly in Paris, visiting the museums in the city and copying many paintings, a traditional way for artists to study and develop technique. In Paris, Marc frequented artistic circles, meeting numerous artists and the actress Sarah Bernhardt. He discovered a strong affinity for the work of painter Vincent van Gogh. After the 1903 trip, he ceased attending the Academy of Fine Arts. 

During his 20s, Marc was involved in a number of stormy relationships, including an affair lasting for many years with Annette Von Eckhardt, a married antique dealer nine years his senior. He married twice, first to Marie Schnür, then to Maria Franck; both were artists.

==Career==

In 1906, Marc traveled with his elder brother Paul, a Byzantine expert, to Thessaloniki, Mount Athos, and various other Greek locations. A few years later, in 1910, Marc developed an important friendship with the artist August Macke. In 1910 Marc painted &quot;Nude with Cat&quot; and &quot;Grazing Horses&quot;, and showed works in the second exhibition of the &quot;Neue Künstlervereinigung&quot; (New Artists&#x27; Association, of which Marc was briefly a member) at the Thannhauser Galleries in Munich.

===Der Blaue Reiter===
In 1911, Marc founded the &quot;Der Blaue Reiter&quot; journal, which became the center of an artist circle, along with Macke, Wassily Kandinsky, and others who had decided to split off from the &quot;Neue Künstlervereinigung&quot; movement. Though Marc showed several of his works in the first &quot;Der Blaue Reiter&quot; exhibition at the Thannhauser Galleries in Munich between December 1911 and January 1912, as it was the apex of the German expressionist movement, the exhibit also showed in Berlin, Cologne, Hagen, and Frankfurt. In 1912, Marc met Robert Delaunay, whose use of color and the futurist method was a major influence on Marc&#x27;s work; fascinated by futurism and cubism, Marc created art that increasingly was stark in nature, painting natural abstract forms which found spiritual value in color. He painted &quot;The Tiger&quot; and &quot;Red Deer&quot; in 1912 and &quot;The Tower of Blue Horses&quot;, &quot;The Foxes&quot;, and &quot;Fate of the Animals&quot; in 1913.

===Wartime===

With the outbreak of World War I in 1914, Marc was drafted into the Imperial German Army as a cavalryman. By February 1916, as shown in a letter to his wife, he had gravitated to military camouflage. His technique for hiding artillery from aerial observation was to paint canvas covers in broadly pointillist style. He took pleasure in creating a series of nine such tarpaulin covers in styles varying &quot;from Manet to Kandinsky&quot;, suspecting that the latter could be the most effective against aircraft flying at or higher.

By 1916, he had been promoted to lieutenant and awarded the Iron Cross.

After mobilization of the German Army, the government identified notable artists to be withdrawn from combat for their own safety. Marc was on the list but was struck in the head and killed instantly by a shell splinter during the Battle of Verdun in 1916 before orders for reassignment could reach him.

==Style==

Marc made some sixty prints in woodcut and lithography. Most of his mature work portrays animals, usually in natural settings. His work is characterized by bright primary color, an almost cubist portrayal of animals, stark simplicity and a profound sense of emotion. Even in his own time, his work attracted notice in influential circles. Marc gave an emotional meaning or purpose to the colors he used in his work: blue was used to portray masculinity and spirituality, yellow represented feminine joy, and red encased the sound of violence.

One of Marc&#x27;s best-known paintings is &quot;Tierschicksale&quot; (&quot;Animal Destinies&quot; or &quot;Fate of the Animals&quot;), which hangs in the Kunstmuseum Basel. Marc had completed the work in 1913, when &quot;the tension of impending cataclysm had pervaded society&quot;, as one art historian noted. On the rear of the canvas, Marc wrote, &quot;Und Alles Sein ist flammend Leid&quot; (&quot;And all being is flaming agony&quot;). Serving in World War I, Marc wrote to his wife about the painting, &quot;[it] is like a premonition of this warhorrible and shattering. I can hardly conceive that I painted it.&quot;

== Nazi Germany and the seizure of so-called &quot;degenerate&quot; art ==
After the National Socialists took power, they suppressed modern art; in 1936 and 1937, the Nazis condemned the late Marc as an &quot;entarteter Künstler&quot; (degenerate artist) and ordered approximately 130 of his works removed from exhibition in German museums. The &quot;Blue Horses&quot; was auctioned off at the infamous Theodor Fischer gallery &quot;degenerate art&quot; sale in Lucerne, on 29 June 1939, and acquired by the Musée des Beaux-Arts in Liège. His painting &quot;Landscape With Horses&quot; was discovered in 2012 along with more than a thousand other paintings, in the Munich apartment of Cornelius Gurlitt whose father, Hildebrand Gurlitt, was one of Hitler&#x27;s four official art dealers of Modernist art the Nazis called &quot;degenerate&quot; which the Nazis sold or traded to raise cash for the Third Reich.

In 2017, the family of Kurt Grawi demanded the restitution of Marc&#x27;s painting &quot;The Foxes&quot; (1913) from Düsseldorf&#x27;s Kunstpalast. Grawi, a German Jewish banker who had owned the painting before the Nazis rose to power was arrested on Kristallnacht and incarcerated in Sachsenhausen concentration camp in 1938, before he managed to flee to Chile in 1939. The painting passed through Galerie Nierendorf, and William and Charlotte Dieterle, according to the German Lost Art Foundation. In 2021, the German Advisory Commission recommended that the city of Düsseldorf restitute the painting to Grawi&#x27;s heirs; this was done, and the painting was sold at Christie&#x27;s by Grawi&#x27;s heirs in 2022.

==Legacy and honors==

Marc&#x27;s family house in Munich is marked with a historical plaque. The Franz Marc Museum which is located in Kochel am See, opened in 1986 and is dedicated to the artist&#x27;s life and work. It houses many of his paintings, and also works by other contemporary artists.

In October 1998, several of Marc&#x27;s paintings garnered record prices at Christie&#x27;s art auction house in London, including &quot;Rote Rehe I&quot; (&quot;Red Deer I&quot;), which sold for $3.3 million. In October 1999, his &quot;Der Wasserfall&quot; (&quot;The Waterfall&quot;) was sold by Sotheby&#x27;s in London for $5.06 million. This price set a record for Franz Marc&#x27;s work and for twentieth-century German painting. In 2008, the former record was again broken when Marc&#x27;s &quot;Weidende Pferde III&quot; (&quot;Grazing Horses III&quot;) was sold for £12,340,500 ($24,376,190) at Sotheby&#x27;s. This record was again beaten by the £42.6m sale of &quot;The Foxes&quot; in 2022. 
==Public collections==
Among the public collections holding works by Franz Marc are :
* Museum de Fundatie, Zwolle, Netherlands
* Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York
* Franz Marc Museum in Kochel am See
* Lenbachhaus, Munich
* Detroit Institute of Arts

==Selected images==
==See also==
* &quot;The Tower of Blue Horses&quot;, 1913, missing since 1945

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* Franz Marc Virtual Gallery
* Gallery of Marc&#x27;s work
* Links on Marc
* WebMuseum Franz Marc Page
* Franz Marc&#x27;s Cats in Art</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44054" start="0" end="25" title="Franz Marc" label="Franz Moritz Wilhelm Marc"/>
<link wikidata="Q271588" start="84" end="94" title="printmaking" label="printmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="122" end="142" title="German Expressionism" label="German Expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q117035" start="178" end="194" title="Der Blaue Reiter" label="Der Blaue Reiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="414" end="425" title="Imperial German Army" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q130847" start="491" end="507" title="Battle of Verdun" label="Battle of Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q156460" start="546" end="563" title="entarteter Künstler" label="degenerate artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q28839414" start="823" end="869" title="The Foxes (Marc)" label="&amp;quot;Die Füchse&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Foxes&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q154195" start="958" end="976" title="Kingdom of Bavaria" label="Kingdom of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="1023" end="1040" title="landscape painter" label="landscape painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="1109" end="1118" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q55044" start="1260" end="1277" title="Munich University" label="Munich University"/>
<link wikidata="Q414052" start="1392" end="1420" title="Academy of Fine Arts, Munich" label="Academy of Fine Arts, Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q833358" start="1450" end="1467" title="Gabriel von Hackl" label="Gabriel von Hackl"/>
<link wikidata="Q788722" start="1472" end="1488" title="Wilhelm von Diez" label="Wilhelm von Diez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605" start="1764" end="1779" title="Sarah Bernhardt" label="Sarah Bernhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="1837" end="1853" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q20243210" start="2140" end="2152" title="Marie Schnür" label="Marie Schnür"/>
<link wikidata="Q784160" start="2162" end="2174" title="Maria Marc" label="Maria Franck"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2262" end="2271" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="2283" end="2295" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="2297" end="2308" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q33981" start="2428" end="2440" title="August Macke" label="August Macke"/>
<link wikidata="Q698293" start="2576" end="2600" title="Neue Künstlervereinigung" label="Neue Künstlervereinigung"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710610" start="2682" end="2703" title="Thannhauser Galleries" label="Thannhauser Galleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="2707" end="2713" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q117035" start="2771" end="2787" title="Der Blaue Reiter" label="Der Blaue Reiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q61064" start="2866" end="2883" title="Wassily Kandinsky" label="Wassily Kandinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="3186" end="3199" title="expressionist" label="expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33978" start="3294" end="3309" title="Robert Delaunay" label="Robert Delaunay"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="3338" end="3346" title="Futurism (art)" label="futurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="3424" end="3430" title="cubism" label="cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197647" start="3634" end="3658" title="The Tower of Blue Horses" label="The Tower of Blue Horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q28839414" start="3672" end="3681" title="The Foxes (painting)" label="The Foxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432407" start="3699" end="3718" title="Fate of the Animals" label="Fate of the Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3771" end="3782" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="3818" end="3838" title="Imperial German Army" label="Imperial German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q196086" start="3929" end="3948" title="military camouflage" label="military camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q200034" start="4047" end="4058" title="pointillist" label="pointillist"/>
<link wikidata="Q40599" start="4163" end="4168" title="Manet" label="Manet"/>
<link wikidata="Q61064" start="4172" end="4181" title="Wassily Kandinsky" label="Kandinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q154554" start="4343" end="4353" title="Iron Cross" label="Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q130847" start="4587" end="4603" title="Battle of Verdun" label="Battle of Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="4703" end="4710" title="woodcut" label="woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q133036" start="4715" end="4726" title="lithography" label="lithography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432407" start="5325" end="5344" title="Fate of the Animals" label="Fate of the Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q194626" start="5372" end="5389" title="Kunstmuseum Basel" label="Kunstmuseum Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="5929" end="5948" title="National Socialists" label="National Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q19429021" start="6247" end="6262" title="Theodor Fischer (auctioneer)" label="Theodor Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q156460" start="6277" end="6291" title="degenerate art" label="degenerate art"/>
<link wikidata="Q15143412" start="6529" end="6546" title="Cornelius Gurlitt (art collector)" label="Cornelius Gurlitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15126735" start="6561" end="6579" title="Hildebrand Gurlitt" label="Hildebrand Gurlitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q99701414" start="6779" end="6789" title="Kurt Grawi" label="Kurt Grawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28839414" start="6845" end="6854" title="The Foxes (painting)" label="The Foxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="7008" end="7021" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q154498" start="7042" end="7074" title="Sachsenhausen concentration camp" label="Sachsenhausen concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491880" start="7156" end="7174" title="Galerie Nierendorf" label="Galerie Nierendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448165" start="7573" end="7590" title="Franz Marc Museum" label="Franz Marc Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436387" start="8565" end="8583" title="Museum de Fundatie" label="Museum de Fundatie"/>
<link wikidata="Q793" start="8585" end="8591" title="Zwolle" label="Zwolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="8593" end="8604" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q201469" start="8607" end="8635" title="Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum" label="Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448165" start="8648" end="8665" title="Franz Marc Museum" label="Franz Marc Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q256533" start="8669" end="8682" title="Kochel am See" label="Kochel am See"/>
<link wikidata="Q262234" start="8685" end="8696" title="Lenbachhaus" label="Lenbachhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="8698" end="8704" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201549" start="8707" end="8732" title="Detroit Institute of Arts" label="Detroit Institute of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197647" start="8775" end="8799" title="The Tower of Blue Horses" label="The Tower of Blue Horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756454" start="8813" end="8820" title="Art theft" label="missing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173669" wikidata="Q1246014" url="?curid=173669" title="Pyrgi Tablets">
<text>The Pyrgi Tablets (dated ) are three golden plates inscribed with a bilingual Phoenician–Etruscan dedicatory text. They are the oldest historical source documents from Italy, predating Roman hegemony, and are rare examples of texts in these languages. They were discovered in 1964 during a series of excavations at the site of ancient Pyrgi, on the Tyrrhenian coast of Italy in Latium (Lazio). The text records the foundation of a temple and its dedication to the Phoenician goddess Astarte, who is identified with the Etruscan supreme goddess Uni in the Etruscan text. The temple&#x27;s construction is attributed to Thefarie Velianas, ruler of the nearby city of Caere.

Two of the tablets are inscribed in the Etruscan language, the third in Phoenician. The writings are important in providing both a bilingual text that allows researchers to use knowledge of Phoenician to interpret Etruscan, and evidence of Phoenician or Punic influence in the Western Mediterranean. They may relate to Polybius&#x27;s report (&quot;Hist.&quot; 3,22) of an ancient and almost unintelligible treaty between the Romans and the Carthaginians, which he dated to the consulships of Lucius Junius Brutus and Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus (509 BC).

The Phoenician inscriptions are known as KAI 277. The tablets are now held at the National Etruscan Museum, Villa Giulia, Rome.

Pallottino has claimed that the existence of this bilingual suggests an attempt by Carthage to support or impose a ruler (Tiberius Velianas) over Caere at a time when Etruscan sea power was waning and to be sure that this region, with strong cultural ties to Greek settlements to the south, stayed in the Etrusco-Carthaginian confederacy. The exact nature of the rule of Tiberius Velianas has been the subject of much discussion. The Phoenician root MLK refers to sole power, often associated with a king. But the Etruscan text does not use the Etruscan word for &#x27;king&#x27;, , instead presenting the term for &#x27;magistrate&#x27;, (perhaps modified by a word that may mean &#x27;great&#x27;). This suggests that Tiberius Velianas may have been a tyrant of the kind found in some Greek cities of the time. Building a temple, claiming to have been addressed by a god, and creating or strengthening his connections with foreign powers may all have been ways that he sought to solidify and legitimate his own power.

Another area that the Pyrgi Tablets seem to throw light on is that Carthage was indeed involved in central Italy at this point in history. Such involvement was suggested by mentions by Polybius of a treaty between Rome and Carthage at about the same time period (circa 500 BC), and by Herodotus&#x27;s accounts of Carthaginian involvement in the Battle of Alalia. But these isolated accounts did not have any contemporaneous texts from the area to support them until these tablets were unearthed and interpreted. Schmidtz originally claimed that the language pointed more toward an eastern Mediterranean form of Phoenician rather than to Punic/Carthaginian. But he has more recently reversed this view, and he even sees the possibility that the Carthaginians are directly referred to in the text.

The text is also important for our understanding of religion in central Italy around the year 500 BC. Specifically, it suggests that the commemoration of the death of Adonis was an important rite in Central Italy at least at this time (around 500 BC), that is if, as is generally assumed, the Phoenician phrase &quot;on the day of the burial of the divinity&quot; refers to this rite. This claim would be further strengthened if Schmidtz&#x27;s recent claim can be accepted that the Phoenician phrase means &quot;at the death of (the) Handsome (one) [=Adonis].&quot; Together with evidence of the rite of Adonai in the Liber Linteus in the 7th column, there is a strong likelihood that the ritual was practiced in (at least) the southern part of Etruria from at least circa 500 BC through the second century BC (depending on one&#x27;s dating of the Liber Linteus). Adonis himself does not seem to be directly mentioned in any of the extant language of either text.

==Phoenician text==
The Phoenician inscriptions are known as KAI 277. Following is a transcription with English translations.

For the Lady, for Astarte,

this is the holy place, which was made, and which was placed (by) Tiberius Velianas, king over Kasriye (= Caerites?),

during the month of the sacrifice to the Sun, as an offering in the temple.

And he built a chamber (or &quot;-bn TW&quot; = &quot;Tiberius Velianas built (it)&quot;), because Astarte requested (this) from him, year three &quot;3&quot; of his reign, in the month of Krr, on the day of the burial of the divinity.

And (may) the years of the statue of the deity in her temple (be) years like (or &quot;as numerous as&quot;) the stars.

=== Translation variants ===
The Phoenician text has long been known to be in a Semitic, more specifically a Canaanite language (specifically North Canaanite; South Canaanite dialects include Hebrew, Moabite, and Edomite); hence there was no need for it to be &quot;deciphered&quot;. And while most of the inscription can certainly reliably be read, certain passages are philologically uncertain on account of perceived complications of syntax and the vocabulary employed in the inscription, and as such they have become the source of debate among both Semiticists and classicists.

For example, other translations of the final line, besides that cited above, include: &quot;And I made a duplicate of the statue of the goddess &lt;Astarte&gt; in her temple as do the Kakkabites [?Carthaginians]&quot;; and &quot;As for the red robe of the statues of the goddess &lt;Astarte&gt; in her temple, her/its red robe is like a those of the gods of the Kakkabites [Carthaginians]&quot; (both of these from Krahmalkov&#x27;s Phoenician-Punic Dictionary). Further, In Schmidtz&#x27;s 2016 treatment of the text, he reinterprets the string &quot;bmtnʼ bbt&quot; (translated above and commonly as &quot;as an offering in the temple&quot;) as &quot;bmt n&#x27; bbt&quot; to mean &quot;at the death of (the) Handsome (one) [=Adonis].&quot;

==Phoenician vocabulary==

Much of the well known vocabulary (from the glossary by A. Bloch, 1890, unless otherwise indicated) of the text is, of course, religious, including &quot;rb-t&quot; &quot;Lady,&quot; &quot;ʻštrt&quot; the goddess &quot;Astarte,&quot; &quot;qdš&quot; &quot;holy,&quot; &quot;ʼlm&quot; &quot;divinity,&quot; &quot;bt&quot; &quot;temple, house,&quot; &quot;zbḥ&quot; &quot;sacrifice,&quot; &quot;qbr&quot; &quot;burial&quot;; or they involve the calendar or elements of the natural world: &quot;ym&quot; &quot;day,&quot; &quot;yrḥ&quot; &quot;month,&quot; &quot;šnt&quot; &quot;year(s),&quot; &quot;šmš&quot; &quot;sun&quot; (in this context, also a deity), &quot;kbb&quot; &quot;stars.&quot; Common verbs include &quot;šmš&quot; &quot;made,&quot; &quot;ytn&quot; &quot;placed,&quot; &quot;bn&quot; &quot;built,&quot; &quot;mlk&quot; &quot;rule, reign.&quot; Most of the items below not covered in this list are grammatical elements, uncited claims, or reflect earlier scholarship that has now been superseded by newer studies.

Nouns in the text include: bt&#x27; , &quot;house, temple&quot; [Semitic *bayt- ], kkb , star [Semitic *kabkab- ] [hakkawkabīm/hakkawkabūm = the-stars], ʼlm , divinity [Semitic *ʼil- &quot;god&quot;], ʼšr , place, ʻštrt , Astarte [Semitic *ʻaṯtar- ], krr , Churvar [calendar month] [cf. Etruscan &quot;Χurvar&quot;], kyšryʼ , Caerites [a people], lmʼš , statue (But analyzed by some as the preposition &quot;lm&quot; &quot;during&quot; plus the relative pronoun &quot;ʼš&quot; &quot;which&quot;), &quot;mtnʼ, gift [Semitic *ntn &#x27;to give&#x27;], qbr, burial, rbt, lady [cf. Akkadian &quot;rābu&quot; &quot;grand, large&quot;] [rabbu, female: rabbatu ], šmš, sun [Semitic *šamš-], šnt&quot;&#x27;, year [šanot &quot;years&quot; – from: šanāt]
, tw, aedicula [taw], yd, hand ym, day [Semitic *yawm-], yrḥ, month [Semitic *warḥu-] [Canaanite: yarhu], zbḥ, sacrifice

Verbs: mlk, to rule, to reign [Semitic *mlk], ʼrš, to raise, bn, to build [ bny ] [wayyiben = [and] he built], bn, to build [ bny ] [wayyiben = [and] he built], mlk, to rule, to reign [Semitic *mlk], pʻl, to make, to do [Semitic *pʻl], ::ytn, to give [Semitic *[y]-ntn] [ya-ntin[u]] he-gives / Hebrew: yittēn

Other: ʼš, which, who, that [rel.pron], ʼz, this [ ha-dha? ], ʻl, over, above [Semitic *ʻal-], b-, in, at, with, on [Semitic *bi-], bn, to build [ bny ] [wayyiben = [and] he built], k-, for, since [Semitic *ki-], km, like, as [ka-ma], l-, to, for [Semitic *la-], qdš, holy, šlš, three [Semitic *ṯalāṯ-], w-, and [Semitic *wa-]

==Etruscan text==
This partial English translation is generally speculative, following van der Meer, except where noted. Line breaks are indicated with / with line numbers in superscript immediately following. Note that Schmitz has pointed out that &quot;Etruscologists...dispute nearly every word in the Etruscan texts.&quot; Other proposed translations are presented in a 2022 article by M. Ivanković.

===First plate===


This temple and sacred buildings (&quot;herama-šva&quot;) have been requested by Juno Astar(t)e...having been built at his own () cost(?),

Tiberius Velianas ...has given (&quot;tur-ce&quot;) (it) as an offering(?), (or &quot;according to her own (&quot;sal&quot;) wishes (&quot;cluvenias&quot;))

(as) custodian(?) of the place(?) of the &quot;cella&quot; (or &quot;the funeral chamber&quot; &quot;tameres-ca&quot;)

during the feast (of the month) of Tuler

when three years (were) full (?) from the day of Tesiamet

on the feast of (the month) Alsasa

when the of the magistrate (was??) (the) great .

Indeed, in this sanctuary, the years are (going to be) as many as the stars.

=== Second plate ===


When Tiberius Velianas had built () the (&quot;altar(s)&quot;? or &quot;desiderata&quot;?) of (epithet of ?)

he dedicated (&quot;šela-ce&quot;) an offering during the month () of Juno.

The yearly ( literally &quot;of the years&quot;) offerings for the temple were () (to be like the) eternal (?) stars.

====Translation variants====
Wylin translates (4–5) as &quot;has ratified the offering of the temple.&quot; However, Steinbauer (agreeing with Rix) has challenged this assumption and, considering that it seems to be positioned at the beginning of a series of phrases within the contexts of a step-by-step instruction in the Liber Linteus, proposed that (with its variants and ) simply means &quot;then.&quot; The second to last word, , is clearly a plural, so would match the (putative) plural &#x27;star-s&#x27; of the Phoenician text in this location. It also occurs in one of the supplementary texts below, as well as in the inscription in the Golini Tomb, but in the latter context, this meaning does not seem to fit.

A minimalist &#x27;translation&#x27; drawing only on well established meanings of Etruscan words, and not depending on the Phoenician text (which is often itself uncertain, see above, and is, in any case, not a word for word translation) has been presented by Adiego:

::This and the , which were ...-ed from the part of , ...ing the , gave to her, the (or: to his ), to/of the , that from the chamber (?) in the day- , when three years . In the day- the , when of the -magistracy , that , and this(?)/thus...-ed the year the -s.

::When Thefarie Veliiunas ...-ed a -offering the month ...-ed the -s of the years of the were .

==Etruscan vocabulary==

Much of the more certainly defined vocabulary (from the glossary in Pallottino, 1975, unless otherwise indicated) of the text is again, of course, religious, including references to the god &quot;uni&quot; &quot;Juno,&quot; nouns like &quot;tmia&quot; &quot;temple,&quot; &quot;vacal&quot; &quot;offering, libation (?),&quot; and &quot;ilucve&quot; &quot;festival&quot;; or they involve the calendar or elements of the natural world: &quot;tiur&quot; &quot;month, moon,&quot; &quot;avil&quot; &quot;year(s),&quot; &quot;pulum-χva&quot; &quot;stars&quot; (?). Other well attested words in the text include the number &quot;three&quot; &quot;ci&quot;, and some common verbs such as &quot;turu-&quot; &quot;give&quot; and &quot;am-&quot; &quot;be,&quot; and the well known term for &quot;magistrate&quot; &quot;zilac-&quot;. Most of the rest of the words are contested or uncertain.

===Verbs===
:acna(s), to bring forth 
:am, to be 
:tur, to give ( &#x27;has given&#x27;)
:θem, to build, establish

===Nouns===
:astre, Phoenician goddess of fertility, 
:atran, reign, rulership?
:avil, year ( &#x27;of the years, yearly&#x27;)
:xurvar, month [Phoenician *kurar]
:meχ, people
:pulum, star 
:tiur, month
:tmia, temple ( &#x27;of the temple&#x27;)
:θefariei, Tiberius [Roman male name]
:uni, Etruscan mother goddess of fertility [cf. Latin &quot;Iūno&quot;]
:vacal, votive offering
:velianas, Velianas [family name].
:zilac magistrate

===Other parts of speech===
:ca, this; ica-c and this
:ci, three
:nac, when, during, while
:śnuiu-aφ, as many? (LLZ, col 6, lines 1,2,4)

== Supplementary Etruscan Texts ==
=== Inscription on a bronze tablet at Pyrgi ===
These were much more damaged than the gold tablets above. 
Cr 4.3:
::
::

Cr 4.2
::

Deities mentioned here include , and .

=== Inscriptions on vessels found in the sanctuary at Pyrgi ===

:: 1 ][ 
:n32, fragment of a vase, VI
: (div) patera, or plate V TLE 877
:(div) patera, or plate V REE 40 n54
::(div?) fragment of a vase, or vessel IV REE 56 n31
:(div)patera, or plate V REE 64 n36
::In the Golini Tomb 1 at Orvito we have a woman serving at the banquet table hand extended with A VESSEL in her hand , the inscription reads O RAMA MLIOUNS


:(div)Greek kylix, V REE 56 n24 Lead tablet from the temple of Minerva at Castrum Novum (near Pyrgi) (CIE 631
::
::
::

::
::
::
:: .

Side 2:
::...] 
::...]
::...] 

Notes: Words also occurring in the gold Pyrgi Tablets are in bold: &quot;star(s)?; &quot;sacrifice/libation&quot; , or &quot;then&quot;; &quot;when.&quot;

Words and sequences recurring within the text include: ?; ? (&quot;ca&quot; &quot;this&quot;); &quot;to offer&quot;; &quot;offering&quot; (&quot;nun&quot;?) &quot;some&quot; (?); &quot;beautiful&quot;; (demonstrative pronoun); &quot;be&quot;; (&quot;to do, offer&quot;); (&lt; &quot;girl&quot;??); ? (&lt; &quot;as&quot;??).

== Notes ==

== References ==

===First printed edition===
Colonna, G. – Garbini, G. – Pallottino, M. – Vlad Borrelli, L., &#x27;&quot;Scavi nel santuario etrusco di
Pyrgi. Relazione preliminare della settima campagna, 1964, e scoperta di tre lamine d’oro inscritte in
etrusco e punico”, &quot;ArchCl&quot; 16, 1964: 49–117.
:: Colonna, G., “I dati dello scavo”: 50–57.
:: Pallotino, M., “Scoperta e prima valutazione delle lamine inscritte”: 58–63.
:: Vlad Borrelli, L., “Nota tecnica sulle lamine”: 64–65.
:: Garbini, G., “L’iscrizione punica”: 66–76.
:: Pallotino, M., “Le iscrizioni etrusche”: 76–104.
:: Pallotino, M., “Conclusioni storiche”: 104–117.

===Other references===

* Adams, J. N. (2003) &quot;Bilingualism and the Latin Language&quot;, Cambridge: 202–206.
* Adiego, I.-X. (2015–2016) “The Etruscan Text of Pyrgi Golden Tablets: Certainties and Uncertainties”, in Bellelli, V. &quot;Le lamine di Pyrgi&quot;, Verona : 135–156. 
* Agostiniani, L. (2007)&quot;Scritti scelti di Luciano Agostiniani: omaggio per il suo 65mo compleanno, Tomo I, scritti etruschi, AIONLing&quot; 25 [2003]), Napoli 
* Amadsi Guzzo M. G. (1995) “Mondes étrusque et italique”, in V. Krings (éd.), &quot;La civilisation phénicienne et punique. Manuel de recherche&quot;, Leiden / New York / Köln: 663–673 (671–673)
* Amadsi Guzzo, M. G.(2014) “Punic Scripts”, in J. A. Hackett &amp; W. E. Aufrecht (eds.), &quot;An Eye for Form. Epigraphic Essays in Honor of G. F. M. Cross&quot;, Winona Lake, Indiana, 314–333 (320–322).
* Amadsi Guzzo, M. G. (2015–2016) “Sull’ambientazione della lamina fenicia di Pyrgi”, in Bellelli &quot;Le lamine di Pyrgi&quot; Verona : 5–19.
* Baglione, M. P. – Colonna, G. (1997) “Appendice I”, in A. Maggiani, &quot;Vasi attici figurati con dediche a divinità etrusche,&quot; Roma: 85–98.
* Belfiore, V. (2011) &quot;Il Liber Linteus di Zagabria. Testualità e contenuto&quot;, Pisa / Roma
* Belfiore, V. (2012) “Studi sul lessico ‘sacro’. Laris Pulenas, le lamine di Pyrgi e la bilingue di Pesaro”, &quot;Rasenna: Journal of the Center for Etruscan Studies&quot; 3/1, art. 3: 1–20. UMass Amherst. http://scholarworks.umass.edu/rasenna/vol3/iss1/3 http://scholarworks.umass.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1018&amp;context=rasenna
* Belfiore, V. (2014) &quot;La morfologia derivativa in etrusco. Formazioni di parole in -na e in -ra&quot;, Pisa/Roma: 105–106.
* Belfiore, V. (2015–2016) “Nuovi spunti di riflessione sulle lamine di Pyrgi in etrusco”, Bellelli &quot;Le lamine di Pyrgi&quot; Verona: 103–134.
* Bellelli, V. and P. Xella (eds) (2015–2016) &quot;Le lamine di Pyrgi: Nuovi studi sulle iscrizioni in etrusco e in fenicio nel cinquantenario della scoperta&quot;. &quot;SEL&quot; 32–33; Verona
* Benelli, E. (2007) &quot;Le iscrizioni etrusche. Leggerle e capirle,&quot; Ancona: 265–266.
* Benelli, E. (2015–2016) “Riforme della scrittura e cultura epigrafica al tempo delle lamine di Pyrgi”, in Bellelli &quot;Le lamine di Pyrgi&quot; Verona : 81–88.
* Bloch, R (1965) &quot;Inscriptions punique et étrusques découvertes à Pyrgi&quot; Paris: La Société. &quot;Bulletin de la Société nationale des antiquaires de France&quot;, 1965–01, p. 41
* Colonna, G. (2000) &quot; Il santuario di Pyrgi dalle origini mitistoriche agli altorilievi dei Sette e di Leucoteia&quot;. Roma; Università degli studi di Roma La Sapienza.
* Cristofani, M. (1996) “Sulla dedica di Pyrgi”, in E. ACQUARO (ed.), &quot;Alle soglie della classicità. Il Mediterraneo tra tradizione e innovazione. Studi in onore di Sabatino Moscati&quot;, III, Pisa / Roma: 1117–1126.
* De Simone, C. (2012) “Il teonimo Šuri: riflessioni ad alta voce”, &quot;Mediterranea&quot; 9: 107–132.
*Dupont-Sommer, Andre (1964) &quot;L&#x27;inscription punique récemment découverte à Pyrgi&quot; Paris: Imprimerie nationale
* Egan, R. B. (2004) “Carthage, kkb, kakkabh and the kkbm at Pyrgi”, RSF 32,1, [2006]: 79–85.
* Eichner, H. (2011) “Anmerkungen zum Etruskischen”, in G. ROCCA (ed.), &quot;Le lingue dell’Italia antica: Iscrizioni, testi e grammatica. In memoriam Helmut Rix&quot; (1926–2004). Atti del Convegno internazionale (Milano 2011), (= Alessandria V), Alessandria: 67–92 (77–78).
* Hadas-Label, J. (2004) &quot;Le bilinguisme étrusco-latin. Contribution à l&#x27;étude de la romanisation de l&#x27;Étrurie,&quot; Louvain / Paris: 136–148.
* Hadas-Lebel, J. (2017) &quot;&quot;Thefarie Velianas&quot;, la tyrannie étrusque et l’origine du licteur romain,&quot; &quot;REL&quot; 95, pp. 25–43.
* Kropp, M.(1994) “Versioni indipendenti o traduzione? Rilettura delle lamine d’oro di Pyrgi”, in &quot;Circolazioni culturali nel Mediterraneo antico. Atti della VI giornata Camito-Semitica e Indoeuropea – I Convegno internazionale di Linguistica dell’area mediterranea (Sassari, 24–27 aprile 1991)&quot;, Cagliari: 189–196.
* Maras, D. F. (2013) “Area sud: ricerche in corso sulla documentazione epigrafica (contesti, supporti, formulari, teonimi)” in M. P. BAGLIONE – M. D. GENTILI (edd.), &quot;Riflessioni su Pyrgi,&quot; Roma: 195–206.
* Maras, D. F. &amp; Wallace, R. E. (2015) “Uni and the Golden Gift of Thefarie. The 50th Anniversary of the Discovery of the Golden Tablets of Pyrgi”, &quot;Etruscan News&quot; 17, Winter: 1,4,20.
* Maras, D. F. (2015–2016) “Lettere e sacro. Breve storia della scrittura nel santuario etrusco di Pyrgi”, in Benelli, E &quot;Le lamine di Pyrgi&quot; (= SEL 32–33), Verona: 89–101.
* Pittau, M (1996) &quot;Gli Etruschi e Cartagine: i documenti epigrafici&quot;. &quot;L&#x27;Africa romana: atti dell&#x27;11. Convegno di studio, 15-18 dicembre 1994, Cartagine, Tunisia. Sassari, Editrice Il torchietto.&quot; V. 3, p. 1657–1674.
* Pittau, M. (2000) &quot;Tabula Cortonensis, lamine di Pirgi e altri testi etruschi&quot;, Sassari.
* Rigobianco, L. (2013) &quot;Su numerus, genus e sexus. Elementi per una grammatica dell’etrusco&quot;, Roma : 54–56.
* Röllig, W. (1996)“Akkadisch tu’um, di’um, phönizisch tw, aramäisch twn: Versuch einer Klärung”, in E. Acquardo (ed.) &quot;Alle soglie della classicità. Il Mediterraneo tra tradizione e innovazione&quot;: &quot;Studi in onore di Sabatino Moscati&quot;, vol. III, Roma: 1203–1207.
* Schmitz, PH. C. (1995) “The Phoenician Text from the Etruscan Sanctuary at Pyrgi”, JAOS 115, 559–575.
* Schmitz, PH. C.(2007) “Adonis in the Phoenician Text from Pyrgi? A New Reading of KAI 277.5”, &quot;Etruscan News&quot;: 9, 13.
* Schmitz, PH. C. (2013) “Phoenician and Punic Religion”, in M. Saltzman (ed.), &quot;The Cambridge History of Religions in the Classical World&quot;, vol. 1., &quot;From the Bronze Age to the Hellenistic Era&quot;, Cambridge: 205–233.
* Schmitz, PH. C. (2015–2016)“Sempre Pyrgi. A Retraction and Reassessment of the Phoenician Text”, in Bellelli &quot;Le lamine di Pyrgi&quot;, Verona: 33–43.
* Steinbauer, D. (1999) &quot;Neues Handbuch des Etruskischen&quot;, St. Katharinen: 196–209.
* Torelli, M. (2003) “’Αγαλήτορα· παῐδα. Τυρρηνοί (TLE2 802). Brevi considerazioni su una glossa etrusca”, in S. Marchesini &amp; P. Poccetti (eds.), &quot;Linguistica è storia. Sprachwissenschaft ist Geschichte. Scritti in onore di Carlo de Simone&quot;, Pisa: 171–177 (173).
* van der Meer, B. ( 2007) &quot;Liber Linteus Zagrabiensis. The Linen Book of Zagreb. A Comment on the Longest Etruscan Text&quot;, Louvain / Dudley.
* van Heems, G. (2015) “Idéologie et écriture: réflexions sur les mentions de titres et magistratures dans les inscriptions étrusques”, in M.-L. Haack (éd.), &quot;L’écriture et l’espace de la mort. Épigraphie et nécropoles à l&#x27;époque pré-romaine&quot; [en ligne], Roma: Publications de l’École française de Rome.
* van Heems, G. (2011) “Accord sur le désaccord: quelques réflexions sur les rapports entre morphèmes casuels et adpositions en étrusque”, in M. Fruyt – M. Mazoyer – D. Pardee (eds.), &quot;Grammatical Cases in the Languages of the Middle East and Europe&quot;, Chicago: 399–416.
* Wallace, R. E. (2008) &quot;Ziχ Rasna. A Manual of the Etruscan Language and Inscriptions&quot;, Ann Arbor: 8.
* Wylin, K. (2000) &quot;Il verbo etrusco. Ricerca morfosintattica delle forme usate in funzione verbale&quot;, Roma 
* Wylin, K. (2003) “Esiste una seconda lamina A di Pyrgi?” &quot;PdP&quot; 328, : 61–65.
* Wylin, K. (2004 [2005]) “Un terzo pronome/aggettivo dimostrativo etrusco sa”, &quot;Studi Etrusci&quot; 70, : 213–225.
* Wylin, K. (2006) “Pyrgi B et la rédaction de la tabula Cortonensis”, &quot;Revue belge de Philologie et d’Histoire&quot; 84,: 35–44.

== External links ==
* The Etruscan Texts Project A searchable database of Etruscan texts.
* Photograph, transliteration, and partial translation
*Tavola di Cortona e Lamine di Pyrgi - traduzione (Italian translation by Giovanni Semerano)
* Wikisource: Pyrgi Tablets</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1246014" start="4" end="17" title="Pyrgi Tablets" label="Pyrgi Tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q36734" start="78" end="88" title="Phoenician language" label="Phoenician"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="89" end="97" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724661" start="335" end="340" title="Pyrgi" label="Pyrgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="349" end="365" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="369" end="374" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048669" start="378" end="384" title="Latium" label="Latium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762010" start="446" end="456" title="Dedication (ritual)" label="dedication"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="464" end="473" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130274" start="483" end="490" title="Astarte" label="Astarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="519" end="527" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q650410" start="544" end="547" title="Uni (mythology)" label="Uni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="555" end="563" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914373" start="665" end="670" title="Caere" label="Caere"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="713" end="730" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="913" end="922" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="927" end="932" title="Punic" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="958" end="971" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="992" end="1000" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1099" end="1105" title="Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="1114" end="1127" title="Carthage" label="Carthaginians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489757" start="1151" end="1157" title="consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q223440" start="1166" end="1186" title="Lucius Junius Brutus" label="Lucius Junius Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q353188" start="1191" end="1219" title="Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus" label="Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q98078904" start="1235" end="1258" title="Canaanite and Aramaic inscriptions" label="Phoenician inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157792" start="1272" end="1275" title="Kanaanäische und Aramäische Inschriften" label="KAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055388" start="1313" end="1337" title="National Etruscan Museum" label="National Etruscan Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q964499" start="1339" end="1351" title="Villa Giulia" label="Villa Giulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="2566" end="2574" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="2666" end="2675" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q764673" start="2727" end="2743" title="Battle of Alalia" label="Battle of Alalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q163920" start="3346" end="3352" title="Adonis" label="Adonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q821090" start="3784" end="3790" title="Adonai" label="Adonai"/>
<link wikidata="Q395968" start="3798" end="3811" title="Liber Linteus" label="Liber Linteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q98078904" start="4170" end="4193" title="Canaanite and Aramaic inscriptions" label="Phoenician inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157792" start="4207" end="4210" title="Kanaanäische und Aramäische Inschriften" label="KAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q130274" start="4291" end="4298" title="Astarte" label="Astarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914373" start="4407" end="4415" title="Caere" label="Caerites"/>
<link wikidata="Q36734" start="4888" end="4898" title="Phoenician language" label="Phoenician"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="4935" end="4942" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q747547" start="4964" end="4982" title="Canaanite languages" label="Canaanite language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="5047" end="5053" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412273" start="8676" end="8679" title="Q-D-S" label="qdš"/>
<link wikidata="Q395968" start="10502" end="10515" title="Liber Linteus" label="Liber Linteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183971" start="10825" end="10836" title="Golini Tomb" label="Golini Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q21485162" start="12808" end="12816" title="Tiberius (praenomen)" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q125046" start="12895" end="12899" title="Juno (mythology)" label="Iūno"/>
<link wikidata="Q395968" start="13097" end="13100" title="Liber Linteus" label="LLZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q596009" start="23101" end="23118" title="Giovanni Semerano" label="Giovanni Semerano"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173671" wikidata="Q10547" url="?curid=173671" title="Lower Franconia">
<text>Lower Franconia (, ) is one of seven districts of Bavaria, Germany. The districts of Lower, Middle and Upper Franconia make up the region of Franconia. It consists of nine districts and 308 municipalities (including three cities).

==History==
After the founding of the Kingdom of Bavaria the state was totally reorganised and, in 1808, divided into 15 administrative government regions (German: , singular ), in Bavaria called (singular: ). They were created in the fashion of the French departements, quite even in size and population, and named after their main rivers. 

In the following years, due to territorial changes (e. g. loss of Tyrol, addition of the Palatinate), the number of Kreise was reduced to 8. One of these was the Untermainkreis (Lower Main District). In 1837 king Ludwig I of Bavaria renamed the Kreise after historical territorial names and tribes of the area. This also involved some border changes or territorial swaps. Thus the name Untermainkreis changed to Lower Franconia and Aschaffenburg, but the city name was dropped in the middle of the 20th century, leaving just Lower Franconia.

From 1933, the regional Nazi &quot;Gauleiter&quot;, Otto Hellmuth, (who had renamed his party Gau &quot;Mainfranken&quot;) insisted on renaming the government district as well. He encountered resistance from Bavarian state authorities but finally succeeded in having the name of the district changed, effective 1 June 1938. After 1945 the name was restored.

The municipal reform () of June 1972 consolidated the 22 country districts of Lower Franconia into nine.


Unterfranken is the north-west part of Franconia and consists of three district-free cities () and nine country districts ().

The major portion of the Franconian wine region is situated in Lower Franconia.

== Economy ==
The Gross domestic product (GDP) of the region was 53.7 billion € in 2018, accounting for 1.6% of German economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was 37,500 € or 124% of the EU27 average in the same year. The GDP per employee was 102% of the EU average.

==Coat of arms==
The coat of arms includes the &quot;Franconian Rake&quot; (the arms of Duchy of Franconia) in the upper portion, the &quot;&quot;, a banner, quarterly argent (silver) and gules (red), on a lance or (gold), in bend, on an azure (blue) field, associated with Würzburg in the lower left quadrant, and a white/silver wheel on a red field symbolizing the clerical state of Mainz, in the lower right quadrant.

== Area and population ==


==Main sights==
Next to the former episcopal residence cities of Würzburg (with Veitshöchheim) and Aschaffenburg, the towns of Miltenberg, Amorbach and Werneck, the scenic attractions of the River Main including the Mainschleife at Volkach and the low mountain ranges of the Rhön with the spa town Bad Kissingen and of the Spessart with Mespelbrunn Castle belong to the major tourist attractions.

==Notable people from Lower Franconia==
* Regiomontanus
* Florian Geyer
* Tilman Riemenschneider
* Balthasar Neumann
* Friedrich Rückert
* Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen
* Leonhard Frank
* Carl Diem
* Dirk Nowitzki

==Institutes of higher education==

* Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg
* University of Applied Sciences Würzburg-Schweinfurt
* Hochschule Aschaffenburg

==See also==
* Middle Franconia
* Upper Franconia

==References==
==External links==
*Official website in English
*Official website
*Flag at Flagspot
*Unterfranken 1910
*Statistics</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10547" start="0" end="15" title="Lower Franconia" label="Lower Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22721" start="37" end="46" title="Regierungsbezirk" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="50" end="57" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="59" end="66" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q10551" start="92" end="98" title="Middle Franconia" label="Middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10554" start="103" end="118" title="Upper Franconia" label="Upper Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150907" start="141" end="150" title="Franconia" label="Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154195" start="270" end="288" title="Kingdom of Bavaria" label="Kingdom of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="489" end="500" title="departement" label="departement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118268" start="641" end="646" title="German Tyrol" label="Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q326359" start="664" end="674" title="Palatinate (region)" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498042" start="737" end="751" title="Untermainkreis" label="Untermainkreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44361" start="788" end="807" title="Ludwig I of Bavaria" label="Ludwig I of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10547" start="987" end="1002" title="Lower Franconia" label="Lower Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10471" start="1007" end="1020" title="Aschaffenburg (district)" label="Aschaffenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451250" start="1153" end="1162" title="Gauleiter" label="Gauleiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q109208" start="1170" end="1183" title="Otto Hellmuth" label="Otto Hellmuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q153250" start="1736" end="1758" title="Franconia (wine region)" label="Franconian wine region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471238" start="2135" end="2150" title="Franconian Rake" label="Franconian Rake"/>
<link wikidata="Q703265" start="2170" end="2188" title="Duchy of Franconia" label="Duchy of Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427044" start="2356" end="2364" title="Bishopric of Würzburg" label="Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q457449" start="2412" end="2417" title="Wheel of Mainz" label="wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q284667" start="2467" end="2472" title="Archbishopric of Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999" start="2597" end="2605" title="Würzburg" label="Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q573628" start="2612" end="2625" title="Veitshöchheim" label="Veitshöchheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942" start="2631" end="2644" title="Aschaffenburg" label="Aschaffenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q502681" start="2659" end="2669" title="Miltenberg" label="Miltenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q474051" start="2671" end="2679" title="Amorbach" label="Amorbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q526691" start="2684" end="2691" title="Werneck" label="Werneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670" start="2729" end="2733" title="Main (river)" label="Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q504787" start="2764" end="2771" title="Volkach" label="Volkach"/>
<link wikidata="Q148988" start="2807" end="2811" title="Rhön" label="Rhön"/>
<link wikidata="Q488346" start="2830" end="2843" title="Bad Kissingen" label="Bad Kissingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182470" start="2855" end="2863" title="Spessart" label="Spessart"/>
<link wikidata="Q573708" start="2869" end="2887" title="Mespelbrunn Castle" label="Mespelbrunn Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q76365" start="2972" end="2985" title="Regiomontanus" label="Regiomontanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q77407" start="2988" end="3001" title="Florian Geyer" label="Florian Geyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44723" start="3004" end="3026" title="Tilman Riemenschneider" label="Tilman Riemenschneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q61349" start="3029" end="3046" title="Balthasar Neumann" label="Balthasar Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q60644" start="3049" end="3066" title="Friedrich Rückert" label="Friedrich Rückert"/>
<link wikidata="Q35149" start="3069" end="3091" title="Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen" label="Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q77069" start="3094" end="3108" title="Leonhard Frank" label="Leonhard Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q71850" start="3111" end="3120" title="Carl Diem" label="Carl Diem"/>
<link wikidata="Q44068" start="3123" end="3136" title="Dirk Nowitzki" label="Dirk Nowitzki"/>
<link wikidata="Q161976" start="3176" end="3215" title="University of Würzburg" label="Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622239" start="3218" end="3269" title="University of Applied Sciences Würzburg-Schweinfurt" label="University of Applied Sciences Würzburg-Schweinfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q10551" start="3313" end="3329" title="Middle Franconia" label="Middle Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10554" start="3332" end="3347" title="Upper Franconia" label="Upper Franconia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173672" wikidata="Q10554" url="?curid=173672" title="Upper Franconia">
<text>Upper Franconia (, ) is a (administrative [&quot;Regierungs&quot;] region [&quot;bezirk&quot;]) of the state of Bavaria, southern Germany. It forms part of the historically significant region of Franconia, the others being Middle Franconia and Lower Franconia, which are all now part of the German Federal State of Bayern (&quot;Bavaria&quot;).

With more than 200 independent breweries which brew approximately 1000 different types of beer, Upper Franconia has the world&#x27;s highest brewery-density per capita. A special Franconian beer route (&quot;Fränkische Brauereistraße&quot;) runs through many popular breweries.

==Geography==
The administrative region borders on Thuringia (&quot;Thüringen&quot;) to the north, Lower Franconia (&quot;Unterfranken&quot;) to the west, Middle Franconia (&quot;Mittelfranken&quot;) to the south-west, and Upper Palatinate (&quot;Oberpfalz&quot;) to the south-east, Saxony (&quot;Sachsen&quot;) to the north-east and the Czech Republic to the east.

==History==

After the founding of the Kingdom of Bavaria the state was totally reorganized and, in 1808, divided into 15 administrative government regions (German: Regierungsbezirke (singular Regierungsbezirk)), in Bavaria called Kreise (singular: Kreis). They were created in the fashion of the French departements, quite even in size and population, and named after their main rivers.

In the following years, due to territorial changes (e. g. loss of Tyrol, addition of the Palatinate), the number of Kreise was reduced to 8. One of these was the Mainkreis (Main District). In 1837 king Ludwig I of Bavaria renamed the Kreise after historical territorial names and tribes of the area. This also involved some border changes or territorial swaps. Thus the name Mainkreis changed to Upper Franconia.

==Main sights==
Next to the former episcopal residence city of Bamberg, the capital Bayreuth, the former residence city of Coburg and the classicist centre of Hof, as well as the towns of Lichtenfels, Kronach, Gößweinstein and Kulmbach, the Weißenstein Palace, Banz Abbey and the Basilica of the Fourteen Holy Helpers, the scenic attractions of the River Main and the low mountain ranges of the Fichtel Mountains with the town of Wunsiedel and the Franconian Forest belong among the region&#x27;s major tourist attractions. There are also numerous spas like Bad Rodach, Bad Steben, Bad Staffelstein, Bad Berneck and Bad Alexandersbad.

==Coat of arms==
==Administrative subdivisions==
Oberfranken is subdivided into nine &quot;Landkreise&quot; (districts) and four &quot;Kreisfreie Städte&quot; (district-free or independent cities). The lowest level is divided into 214 municipalities (including four cities).

&quot;Landkreise&quot;:
* Bamberg
* Bayreuth
* Coburg
* Forchheim
* Hof
* Kronach
* Kulmbach
* Lichtenfels
* Wunsiedel

&quot;Kreisfreie Städte&quot;:
* Bamberg
* Bayreuth
* Coburg
* Hof

==Historical population==

== Economy ==
The gross domestic product (GDP) of the region was 40.6 billion € in 2018, accounting for 1.2% of German economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was €34,900 or 116% of the EU27 average in the same year. The GDP per employee was 96% of the EU average.

==See also==
* Middle Franconia (&quot;Mittelfranken&quot;)
* Lower Franconia (&quot;Unterfranken&quot;)
* Kleinziegenfelder Tal
* Krassach (River)

==References==
==External links==
*Official website (in German)
*Sights in Frankonia (in German)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10554" start="0" end="15" title="Upper Franconia" label="Upper Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="103" end="108" title="States of Germany" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="112" end="119" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q150907" start="195" end="204" title="Franconia" label="Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10551" start="223" end="239" title="Middle Franconia" label="Middle Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10547" start="244" end="259" title="Lower Franconia" label="Lower Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131734" start="377" end="386" title="Brewery" label="breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="436" end="440" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205" start="676" end="685" title="Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10547" start="724" end="739" title="Lower Franconia" label="Lower Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10551" start="780" end="796" title="Middle Franconia" label="Middle Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10555" start="848" end="864" title="Upper Palatinate" label="Upper Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="908" end="914" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="963" end="977" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q154195" start="1031" end="1049" title="Kingdom of Bavaria" label="Kingdom of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q22721" start="1185" end="1201" title="Regierungsbezirk" label="Regierungsbezirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16543832" start="1447" end="1452" title="County of Tyrol" label="Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q326359" start="1470" end="1480" title="Palatinate (region)" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885638" start="1543" end="1552" title="Mainkreis (Bavaria)" label="Mainkreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44361" start="1583" end="1602" title="Ludwig I of Bavaria" label="Ludwig I of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936" start="1858" end="1865" title="Bamberg" label="Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3923" start="1879" end="1887" title="Bayreuth" label="Bayreuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q14821" start="1918" end="1924" title="Coburg" label="Coburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6938" start="1954" end="1957" title="Hof, Bavaria" label="Hof"/>
<link wikidata="Q160405" start="1983" end="1994" title="Lichtenfels, Bavaria" label="Lichtenfels"/>
<link wikidata="Q494537" start="1996" end="2003" title="Kronach" label="Kronach"/>
<link wikidata="Q507319" start="2005" end="2017" title="Gößweinstein" label="Gößweinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q157598" start="2022" end="2030" title="Kulmbach" label="Kulmbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q179062" start="2036" end="2054" title="Schloss Weißenstein" label="Weißenstein Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q175500" start="2056" end="2066" title="Banz Abbey" label="Banz Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q694252" start="2075" end="2112" title="Basilica of the Fourteen Holy Helpers" label="Basilica of the Fourteen Holy Helpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670" start="2150" end="2154" title="Main (river)" label="Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q157728" start="2190" end="2207" title="Fichtel Mountains" label="Fichtel Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q495778" start="2225" end="2234" title="Wunsiedel" label="Wunsiedel"/>
<link wikidata="Q282737" start="2243" end="2260" title="Franconian Forest" label="Franconian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q491118" start="2353" end="2363" title="Bad Rodach" label="Bad Rodach"/>
<link wikidata="Q522305" start="2365" end="2375" title="Bad Steben" label="Bad Steben"/>
<link wikidata="Q504634" start="2377" end="2393" title="Bad Staffelstein" label="Bad Staffelstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q504528" start="2395" end="2406" title="Bad Berneck" label="Bad Berneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q513780" start="2411" end="2428" title="Bad Alexandersbad" label="Bad Alexandersbad"/>
<link wikidata="Q10444" start="2733" end="2740" title="Bamberg (district)" label="Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10439" start="2743" end="2751" title="Bayreuth (district)" label="Bayreuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q10440" start="2754" end="2760" title="Coburg (district)" label="Coburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10445" start="2763" end="2772" title="Forchheim (district)" label="Forchheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q10431" start="2775" end="2778" title="Hof (district)" label="Hof"/>
<link wikidata="Q10434" start="2781" end="2788" title="Kronach (district)" label="Kronach"/>
<link wikidata="Q10436" start="2791" end="2799" title="Kulmbach (district)" label="Kulmbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q10442" start="2802" end="2813" title="Lichtenfels (district)" label="Lichtenfels"/>
<link wikidata="Q10432" start="2816" end="2825" title="Wunsiedel (district)" label="Wunsiedel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936" start="2860" end="2867" title="Bamberg" label="Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3923" start="2870" end="2878" title="Bayreuth" label="Bayreuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q14821" start="2881" end="2887" title="Coburg, Germany" label="Coburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6938" start="2890" end="2893" title="Hof, Germany" label="Hof"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="2940" end="2962" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q10551" start="3225" end="3241" title="Middle Franconia" label="Middle Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10547" start="3272" end="3287" title="Lower Franconia" label="Lower Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445461" start="3317" end="3338" title="Kleinziegenfelder Tal" label="Kleinziegenfelder Tal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752239" start="3341" end="3357" title="Krassach (River)" label="Krassach (River)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173674" wikidata="Q10551" url="?curid=173674" title="Middle Franconia">
<text>Middle Franconia (, ) is one of the three administrative regions of Franconia, Germany, in the west of Bavaria bordering the state of Baden-Württemberg. The administrative seat is Ansbach; the most populous and largest city is Nuremberg.

==Subdivisions==
The region is divided into seven districts (&#x27;Landkreise&#x27;) and five independent cities (&#x27;Kreisfreie Städte&#x27;). The lowest level is divided into 210 municipalities (including five cities).

===Independent cities===
* Ansbach
* Erlangen
* Fürth
* Nuremberg
* Schwabach

===Districts===
* Ansbach
* Erlangen-Höchstadt
* Fürth
* Neustadt (Aisch)-Bad Windsheim
* Nürnberger Land
* Roth
* Weißenburg-Gunzenhausen

==History==


After the founding of the Kingdom of Bavaria the state was totally reorganised and, in 1808, divided into 15 administrative government regions (German: Regierungsbezirke (singular Regierungsbezirk)), in Bavaria called Kreise (singular: Kreis). They were created in the fashion of the French departements, quite even in size and population, and named after their main rivers.

In the following years, due to territorial changes (e. g. loss of Tyrol, addition of the Palatinate), the number of Kreise was reduced to eight. One of these was the Rezatkreis (Rezat District). In 1837 king Ludwig I of Bavaria renamed the Kreise after historical territorial names and tribes of the area. This also involved some border changes or territorial swaps. Thus the district name of Rezatkreis changed to Middle Franconia.

==Main sights==
Next to the major city Nuremberg, the capital Ansbach and the former residence city Erlangen, the towns of the Romantic Road Rothenburg ob der Tauber and Dinkelsbühl belong to the major tourist attractions. The Lichtenau Fortress, Rothenberg Fortress, Hohenstein and Cadolzburg belong to the most important castles of Middle Franconia. The Franconian Jura and the northern valley of the River Altmühl are among the scenic attractions.

==Coat of arms==
&quot;For the German Imperial Eagle, see Reichsadler&quot;
==Population==
== Economy ==
The Gross domestic product (GDP) of the region was 78.6 billion € in 2018, accounting for 2.4% of German economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was 40,900 € or 136% of the EU27 average in the same year. The GDP per employee was 105% of the EU average.

==See also==
Other Franconian Districts:
* Upper Franconia (&quot;Oberfranken&quot;)
* Lower Franconia (&quot;Unterfranken&quot;)
Political party that is in Franconia:

* Party for Franconia &quot;(Frankenpartei)&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*(Middle Franconia State Government; Regierung von Mittelfranken 
*Bezirk Mittelfranken </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10551" start="0" end="16" title="Middle Franconia" label="Middle Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22721" start="42" end="63" title="Regierungsbezirk" label="administrative region"/>
<link wikidata="Q150907" start="68" end="77" title="Franconia" label="Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="79" end="86" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="103" end="110" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="134" end="151" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859" start="180" end="187" title="Ansbach" label="Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="227" end="236" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859" start="490" end="497" title="Ansbach" label="Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126" start="500" end="508" title="Erlangen" label="Erlangen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075" start="511" end="516" title="Fürth" label="Fürth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="519" end="528" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q14889" start="531" end="540" title="Schwabach" label="Schwabach"/>
<link wikidata="Q10454" start="560" end="567" title="Ansbach (district)" label="Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q10447" start="570" end="588" title="Erlangen-Höchstadt" label="Erlangen-Höchstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q10455" start="591" end="596" title="Fürth (district)" label="Fürth"/>
<link wikidata="Q10456" start="599" end="629" title="Neustadt (Aisch)-Bad Windsheim" label="Neustadt (Aisch)-Bad Windsheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q10449" start="632" end="647" title="Nürnberger Land" label="Nürnberger Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q10451" start="650" end="654" title="Roth (district)" label="Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q10453" start="657" end="680" title="Weißenburg-Gunzenhausen" label="Weißenburg-Gunzenhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q154195" start="722" end="740" title="Kingdom of Bavaria" label="Kingdom of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q22721" start="876" end="892" title="Regierungsbezirk" label="Regierungsbezirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118268" start="1138" end="1143" title="German Tyrol" label="Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q326359" start="1161" end="1171" title="Palatinate (region)" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709460" start="1238" end="1248" title="Rezatkreis" label="Rezatkreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44361" start="1280" end="1299" title="Ludwig I of Bavaria" label="Ludwig I of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="1545" end="1554" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859" start="1568" end="1575" title="Ansbach" label="Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126" start="1606" end="1614" title="Erlangen" label="Erlangen"/>
<link wikidata="Q311252" start="1633" end="1646" title="Romantic Road" label="Romantic Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q153494" start="1647" end="1671" title="Rothenburg ob der Tauber" label="Rothenburg ob der Tauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q491743" start="1676" end="1687" title="Dinkelsbühl" label="Dinkelsbühl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408940" start="1733" end="1751" title="Lichtenau Fortress" label="Lichtenau Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168640" start="1753" end="1772" title="Rothenberg Fortress" label="Rothenberg Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012443" start="1774" end="1784" title="Hohenstein Castle (Middle Franconia)" label="Hohenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q522025" start="1789" end="1799" title="Cadolzburg" label="Cadolzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q669883" start="1862" end="1877" title="Franconian Jura" label="Franconian Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q317060" start="1915" end="1922" title="Altmühl" label="Altmühl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139378" start="2016" end="2027" title="Reichsadler" label="Reichsadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q10554" start="2382" end="2397" title="Upper Franconia" label="Upper Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10547" start="2426" end="2441" title="Lower Franconia" label="Lower Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15839584" start="2510" end="2529" title="Party for Franconia" label="Party for Franconia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173676" wikidata="Q2495158" url="?curid=173676" title="Severed Heads">
<text>Severed Heads were an Australian electronic music group founded in 1979 as Mr and Mrs No Smoking Sign. The original members were Richard Fielding and Andrew Wright, who were soon joined by Tom Ellard. Fielding and Wright had both left the band by mid-1981 with Ellard remaining the sole consistent member for the rest of the band&#x27;s existence. Throughout the next decade, several musicians joined Severed Heads&#x27; ranks, including Garry Bradbury, Simon Knuckey, Stephen Jones and Paul Deering.

In 1984 the band released &quot;Dead Eyes Opened&quot; as a single, which was remixed in 1994 and re-released, reaching No. 16 on the ARIA Singles Chart. Two of their singles, &quot;Greater Reward&quot; (1988) and &quot;All Saints Day&quot; (1989), reached the top 30 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Dance Club Songs chart. Ellard disbanded the group in 2007 and continued with other projects. Subsequent Severed Heads reunions have occurred: in 2010 for a 30th-anniversary concert, in 2011 in support of Gary Numan&#x27;s tour of Australia, again in 2011 at BimFEST in Antwerp, in 2013 with a gig at the Adelaide Festival of Arts and in September 2015 with a tour of the United States for the first time in more than 20 years. In November 2016, Severed Heads played at the State Library of Victoria as part of Melbourne Music Week and in November 2017 they headlined a one-off double act along with Snog at the Corner Hotel in Richmond, Victoria. Severed Heads announced that they would again disband following headlining shows in September 2019.

==History==
===Early years and independent releases (1979–1982)===
In 1979, Richard Fielding and Andrew Wright formed an experimental electronic duo, Mr. &amp; Mrs. No Smoking Sign, in Sydney. By the end of that year, Tom Ellard joined the group. The group issued cassette albums, including &quot;Mr. and Mrs. No Smoking Sign Go Cruising fer Burgers!&quot; In December 2006, Ellard explained the name change: &quot;[W]e were called Mr. &amp; Mrs. No Smoking Sign, because that was really ugly. Then, we wanted to fool people that we were Industrial and it worked. Severed Heads was a really dumb name, so that&#x27;s what stuck. Forever. I hate it by the way.&quot;

The group&#x27;s early music was characterised by the use of tape loops, noisy arrangements of synthesisers and other dissonant sound sources in the general category of industrial music. Wright departed late in 1979, leaving the duo of Ellard and Fielding to put together the band&#x27;s early studio offerings, including the A-side of a split album, &quot;Ear Bitten/No Vowels, No Bowels&quot;, with the B-side by Rhythmyx Chymx. Fielding departed the band during the recording of 1981&#x27;s &quot;Clean&quot;, leaving much of the work to be completed solely by Ellard.

Severed Heads began incorporating various popular music tropes, such as a consistent 4/4 rhythm, strong melodic lines, resolving chord arrangements and Ellard&#x27;s thin but gently eerie vocals and elliptical, poetic lyrics. This move was underscored by the incorporation of mimetic devices, such as drum machines and bass synthesisers. The result was a striking hybrid of avant-garde industrial and pop. The group moved their live shows from &quot;experimental venues and art spaces to rock clubs&quot;, and they issued the &quot;Blubberknife&quot; and &quot;80&#x27;s Cheesecake&quot; albums in 1982 after expanding to include synthesiser player Garry Bradbury and guitarist Simon Knuckey. Following the release of these albums, Severed Heads were also joined by video expert and musician Stephen Jones.

===Major label years and mainstream success (1983–1998)===
1983 saw British label Ink Records issue &quot;Since the Accident&quot;, which was later released by Nettwerk records in North America and Volition Records in Australia. AllMusic&#x27;s John Bush described the album as not &quot;quite a crossover effort&quot; with the lead single, &quot;Dead Eyes Opened&quot;, being &quot;surprisingly melodic synth-pop&quot;. The band&#x27;s recording deals led to a world tour, which became a multimedia event with the addition of video synthesisers performed by Jones. After the tour, Severed Heads returned to Australia in August 1984. However, this period saw more personnel change for the band. Bradbury had departed during the recording of &quot;Since the Accident&quot; in 1983 (leaving most of the recording to Ellard) and Knuckey departed soon before the 1984 world tour, so the lineup that went on tour consisted of Ellard, Jones and the newly recruited Paul Deering.

In 1985, Severed Heads issued &quot;City Slab Horror&quot;, again on Ink Records for the European market. For this album, Bradbury returned as guest musician and contributed to vocals and songwriting. Clashes with Ellard caused Deering to leave the band in order to continue working with Bradbury. In October that year, Jon Casimir of &quot;the Canberra Times&quot; described the group as &quot;Australia&#x27;s most innovative electronic band&quot;, which had an &quot;obsession with the ugly and horrific&quot; with music &quot;reminiscent of Cabaret Voltaire and Throbbing Gristle.&quot; Local label Volition compiled international tracks for the local-only album &quot;Stretcher&quot; in November 1985. In August the following year, the band followed with &quot;Come Visit the Big Bigot&quot;. During that year, Ellard and Jones took Severed Heads on a European and North American tour. &quot;Bad Mood Guy&quot; was issued by Volition in October 1987. &quot;The Canberra Times&quot;″ Kathryn Whitfield felt the group had &quot;gone way beyond experimental&quot; to provide &quot;a commercially viable product&quot; while Ellard reflected &quot;we have just worked carefully and solidly in an area that we think is good&quot;.

Severed Heads peaked at No. 19 in the United States on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Dance Club Songs chart in 1988 with the 12-inch single &quot;Greater Reward&quot;, which later appeared on the album &quot;Rotund for Success&quot;, issued in October 1989. The album included several remixes by Sydney-based producer Robert Racic, who produced tracks for the band through the late 1980s and early 1990s and contributed to their sound. Another single to make the &quot;Billboard&quot; chart was &quot;All Saints Day&quot; in 1989, which reached No. 25.

In 1989, Nettwerk and Volition re-released &quot;Since the Accident&quot; and &quot;City Slab Horror&quot;, each with tracks from &quot;Blubberknife&quot;, for the first time on CD. The releases were cut from the original masters resulting in superior quality compared to the original Ink Records releases which Ellard later remarked were &quot;cut from a tape of a tape&quot;.

In 1992, one year after the release of &quot;Cuisine (With Piscatorial)&quot;, Jones left the band, leaving Ellard as the group&#x27;s sole official member. Nettwerk did not renew its contract with the band, leaving Severed Heads adrift in the marketplace. Ellard sought out another label for his next release, &quot;Gigapus&quot;, in 1994, which was released on Volition in Australia and Decibel Records in the US. Around this time, the band had a major Australian hit with a remixed version of &quot;Dead Eyes Opened&quot;, which samples Edgar Lustgarten reading from &quot;Death on the Crumbles&quot;. Both Volition and Decibel soon folded, and once again, Severed Heads were unaligned with the traditional music industry, and they did not fully own the rights to their music. This changed in 1998 when Sony Music released claims to Volition material.

===Later years and subsequent releases (1999–2007)===
With his music back in his hands, Ellard began developing an independent music system, entirely Internet-based, at sevcom.com. During the early 2000s, Ellard developed several innovative products, such as the Sevcom Music Server, a subscription-based ambient music distribution system.

Ellard has worked on a side project, Coklacoma, that released a few albums in the late 1990s and early 2000s. By 2004, he was heavily involved with developing video but increasingly felt that the Severed Heads label was a thing of the past, and in 2008 opted to jettison the name. Ellard also worked extensively during the 1990s with other Sydney-based electronic musicians and groups such as Paul Mac (of Itch-E and Scratch-E) and Boxcar, former alumni of the now-defunct Volition label, as well as with the Lab.

===Dissolutions and reunions (2008–2019)===
In early 2008, Ellard announced that Severed Heads were now defunct and that no further creative output would be released under the name. However, the band was reformed by Ellard and new member and longtime friend Stewart Lawler for a 30th-anniversary show on 14 January 2010 as part of the annual Sydney Festival, and in May 2011 the group supported Gary Numan in a tour celebrating the 30th anniversary of Numan&#x27;s album &quot;The Pleasure Principle&quot;. In a May 2011 interview, Tom Ellard explained: &quot;Some people thought it was a bit rude of me to just shut it down without a proper farewell tour and so we decided we would drag it out just one more time and say our toodly-doodly&#x27;s.&quot; On 22 October 2011, Severed Heads played what was intended to be their final performance in Australia Joan Sutherland Centre, Promotional material at the Joan Sutherland Performing Arts Centre. At BimFEST 2011 in Antwerp, they performed what was billed as their &quot;absolutely final&quot; performance as Severed Heads. However, Ellard and Lawler performed what was again intended to be a final gig at the Queen&#x27;s Theatre during the Adelaide Festival of Arts in 2013, a concert that was recorded by Australian Broadcasting Corporation.

Since 2014, several older Severed Heads albums have been released on vinyl via Medical Records and Dark Entries, such as &quot;Since the Accident&quot; and &quot;City Slab Horror&quot;. 2016 saw the release of the &quot;Beautiful Arabic Surface&quot; 10&quot; acetate dub plate, which contained the first newly recorded Severed Heads tracks since their announced hiatus in 2008. The single was released through Bughlt Records in a limited edition of 45 copies.

Renewed interest in the band resulted in a seven-date American tour in September 2015, their first performances in the United States in over 20 years. Following these tour dates, the project remained active with new recordings, further reissues and live performances. 

Severed Heads again split up after a string of headlining shows in the US in September 2019. On the band&#x27;s Bandcamp page selling the &quot;Living Museum&quot; live compilation, they stated: &quot;The 2019 shows were the last bye bye for Severed Heads in Australia, Europe and the USA, and we thank all the people who came out to see us off. We look forward to 2020 and new nilamox* STUFF.&quot;

==Influence==
Vancouver-based industrial band Skinny Puppy was influenced by early Severed Heads material. A relationship was formed between the bands which led to Severed Heads being signed to Nettwerk Records and a joint 1986 North American tour. Tom Ellard was known to have participated in some of the band&#x27;s &quot;brap&quot; sessions, leading to production and performance credits on the Skinny Puppy songs &quot;Assimilate&quot; and &quot;Chainsaw&quot; (on &quot;Bites&quot; and the Chainsaw single, respectively.)
==Personnel==
===Members===
;Final lineup
*Tom Ellard - vocals, bass, keyboards, synthesisers, electronic percussion 
*Stewart Lawler - synthesisers 

;Former members
*Richard Fielding - synthesisers 
*Andrew Wright - synthesisers 
*Garry Bradbury - synthesisers, electronic percussion, vocals 
*Simon Knuckey - guitars 
*Stephen Jones - synthesisers, video synthesisers 
*Paul Deering - synthesisers 
===Timeline===
===Lineups===
==Discography==

*&quot;Ear Bitten/No Vowels, No Bowels&quot; (1980)
*&quot;Side 2&quot; (1980)
*&quot;Clean&quot; (1981)
*&quot;Blubberknife&quot; (1982)
*&quot;Since the Accident&quot; (1983)
*&quot;City Slab Horror&quot; (1985)
*&quot;Come Visit the Big Bigot&quot; (1986)
*&quot;Bad Mood Guy&quot; (1987)
*&quot;Rotund for Success&quot; (1989)
*&quot;Cuisine (With Piscatorial)&quot; (1991)
*&quot;Gigapus&quot; (1994)

*&quot;Haul Ass&quot; (1998)
*&quot;Contoured Simulation&quot; (1998)
*&quot;Airconditioning Your Productivity&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Gashing and Kato&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Op1.0&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Cubical Broadcasts&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Controlling Time&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Op2.0&quot; (2004)
*&quot;Op2.5 - Millennium Cheesecake&quot; (2005)
*&quot;Under Gail Succubus&quot; (2006)
*&quot;Op3.0&quot; (2007)
==Awards and nominations==
===ARIA Music Awards===
The ARIA Music Awards is an annual awards ceremony held by the Australian Recording Industry Association. They commenced in 1987. 
|-
| 2005
| &quot;The Illustrated Family Doctor
| Best Original Cast or Show Album
| 


== References ==
==External links==
*A brief history of Severed Heads at LTM</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2495158" start="0" end="13" title="Severed Heads" label="Severed Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="33" end="49" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354888" start="67" end="71" title="1979 in music" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495158" start="75" end="101" title="Severed Heads" label="Mr and Mrs No Smoking Sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325670" start="129" end="145" title="Richard Fielding" label="Richard Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815713" start="189" end="199" title="Tom Ellard" label="Tom Ellard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524101" start="438" end="452" title="Garry Bradbury" label="Garry Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609623" start="469" end="482" title="Stephen Jones (musician)" label="Stephen Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078365" start="534" end="550" title="Dead Eyes Opened" label="Dead Eyes Opened"/>
<link wikidata="Q275029" start="636" end="654" title="ARIA Charts" label="ARIA Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638075" start="799" end="819" title="Hot Dance Club Songs" label="Hot Dance Club Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q331731" start="1008" end="1018" title="Gary Numan" label="Gary Numan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="1073" end="1080" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681709" start="1108" end="1133" title="Adelaide Festival" label="Adelaide Festival of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200052" start="1277" end="1302" title="State Library of Victoria" label="State Library of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q487586" start="1403" end="1407" title="Snog (band)" label="Snog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012076" start="1431" end="1449" title="Richmond, Victoria" label="Richmond, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325670" start="1628" end="1644" title="Richard Fielding" label="Richard Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815713" start="1770" end="1780" title="Tom Ellard" label="Tom Ellard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274615" start="2280" end="2289" title="tape loop" label="tape loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q487965" start="2388" end="2404" title="industrial music" label="industrial music"/>
<link wikidata="Q368281" start="2557" end="2568" title="split album" label="split album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495158" start="2576" end="2607" title="Ear Bitten/No Vowels, No Bowels" label="Ear Bitten/No Vowels, No Bowels"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095972" start="2719" end="2724" title="Clean (Severed Heads album)" label="Clean"/>
<link wikidata="Q831698" start="3093" end="3105" title="drum machine" label="drum machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="3166" end="3177" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457859" start="3324" end="3336" title="Blubberknife" label="Blubberknife"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078373" start="3353" end="3373" title="80&amp;#x27;s Cheesecake" label="80&amp;#x27;s Cheesecake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524101" start="3441" end="3455" title="Garry Bradbury" label="Garry Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609623" start="3584" end="3597" title="Stephen Jones (musician)" label="Stephen Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521936" start="3706" end="3724" title="Since the Accident" label="Since the Accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029135" start="3760" end="3768" title="Nettwerk" label="Nettwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940206" start="3798" end="3814" title="Volition Records" label="Volition Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="3829" end="3837" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21592150" start="4127" end="4145" title="video synthesizer" label="video synthesisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078341" start="4610" end="4626" title="City Slab Horror" label="City Slab Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q495267" start="4915" end="4933" title="the Canberra Times" label="the Canberra Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024747" start="5119" end="5135" title="Cabaret Voltaire (band)" label="Cabaret Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165655" start="5140" end="5157" title="Throbbing Gristle" label="Throbbing Gristle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078342" start="5340" end="5364" title="Come Visit The Big Bigot" label="Come Visit the Big Bigot"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078343" start="5471" end="5483" title="Bad Mood Guy" label="Bad Mood Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638075" start="5886" end="5906" title="Hot Dance Club Songs" label="Hot Dance Club Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q918887" start="5930" end="5944" title="12-inch single" label="12-inch single"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078346" start="6013" end="6031" title="Rotund For Success" label="Rotund for Success"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349133" start="6123" end="6135" title="Robert Racic" label="Robert Racic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095850" start="6783" end="6809" title="Cuisine (With Piscatorial)" label="Cuisine (With Piscatorial)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24964754" start="7055" end="7062" title="Gigapus" label="Gigapus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078365" start="7240" end="7256" title="Dead Eyes Opened" label="Dead Eyes Opened"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719055" start="7278" end="7294" title="Edgar Lustgarten" label="Edgar Lustgarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="7544" end="7554" title="Sony Music" label="Sony Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="7899" end="7912" title="ambient music" label="ambient music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611102" start="8328" end="8336" title="Paul Mac" label="Paul Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094217" start="8341" end="8361" title="Itch-E and Scratch-E" label="Itch-E and Scratch-E"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951639" start="8367" end="8373" title="Boxcar (band)" label="Boxcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745042" start="8440" end="8447" title="The Lab (band)" label="the Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659934" start="8792" end="8807" title="Sydney Festival" label="Sydney Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q331731" start="8845" end="8855" title="Gary Numan" label="Gary Numan"/>
<link wikidata="Q941491" start="8927" end="8949" title="The Pleasure Principle (Gary Numan album)" label="The Pleasure Principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="9417" end="9424" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122620" start="9611" end="9631" title="Sondheim Theatre" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681709" start="9643" end="9668" title="Adelaide Festival" label="Adelaide Festival of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="9709" end="9744" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Australian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521936" start="9874" end="9892" title="Since the Accident" label="Since the Accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078341" start="9909" end="9925" title="City Slab Horror" label="City Slab Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q545966" start="10591" end="10599" title="Bandcamp" label="Bandcamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q371535" start="10926" end="10938" title="Skinny Puppy" label="Skinny Puppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029135" start="11074" end="11090" title="Nettwerk" label="Nettwerk Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761169" start="11355" end="11360" title="Bites (album)" label="Bites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068023" start="11375" end="11383" title="Chainsaw (Skinny Puppy song)" label="Chainsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815713" start="11450" end="11460" title="Tom Ellard" label="Tom Ellard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325670" start="11575" end="11591" title="Richard Fielding" label="Richard Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524101" start="11640" end="11654" title="Garry Bradbury" label="Garry Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609623" start="11729" end="11742" title="Stephen Jones (musician)" label="Stephen Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495158" start="11862" end="11893" title="Ear Bitten/No Vowels, No Bowels" label="Ear Bitten/No Vowels, No Bowels"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095972" start="11941" end="11946" title="Clean (Severed Heads album)" label="Clean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457859" start="11967" end="11979" title="Blubberknife" label="Blubberknife"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521936" start="12000" end="12018" title="Since the Accident" label="Since the Accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078341" start="12039" end="12055" title="City Slab Horror" label="City Slab Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078342" start="12076" end="12100" title="Come Visit the Big Bigot" label="Come Visit the Big Bigot"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078343" start="12121" end="12133" title="Bad Mood Guy" label="Bad Mood Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078346" start="12154" end="12172" title="Rotund for Success" label="Rotund for Success"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095850" start="12193" end="12219" title="Cuisine (With Piscatorial)" label="Cuisine (With Piscatorial)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24964754" start="12240" end="12247" title="Gigapus" label="Gigapus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24964752" start="12269" end="12277" title="Haul Ass" label="Haul Ass"/>
<link wikidata="Q24266571" start="12608" end="12627" title="Under Gail Succubus" label="Under Gail Succubus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862932" start="12722" end="12739" title="ARIA Music Awards" label="ARIA Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q550239" start="12781" end="12822" title="Australian Recording Industry Association" label="Australian Recording Industry Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653755" start="12854" end="12858" title="ARIA Music Awards of 2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125013" start="12867" end="12896" title="The Illustrated Family Doctor" label="The Illustrated Family Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053510" start="12899" end="12931" title="ARIA Award for Best Original Soundtrack, Cast or Show Album" label="Best Original Cast or Show Album"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173678" wikidata="Q131737" url="?curid=173678" title="Book of Tobit">
<text>The Book of Tobit () is an apocryphal Jewish work from the 3rd or early 2nd century BCE which describes how God tests the faithful, responds to prayers, and protects the covenant community (i.e., the Israelites). It tells the story of two Israelite families, that of the blind Tobit in Nineveh and of the abandoned Sarah in Ecbatana. Tobit&#x27;s son Tobias is sent to retrieve ten silver talents that Tobit once left in Rhages, a town in Media. Guided and aided by the angel Raphael he arrives in Ecbatana, where he meets Sarah. A demon named Asmodeus kills anyone she intends to marry, but with the aid of Raphael the demon is exorcised and Tobias and Sarah marry. Tobias and Sarah then return to Nineveh, where Tobit is cured of his blindness.

The book is included in the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox canons and the Dead Sea Scrolls, but not in the Jewish Masoretic text. Protestant tradition places it in the Apocrypha, with Anabaptists, Lutherans, Anglicans and Methodists recognising it as useful for purposes of edification and liturgy, albeit non-canonical in status. 

The vast majority of modern commentators recognize it as a work of fiction with some references to historical events. The story is set in the 8th century BC, but the book itself is thought to date from between 225 and 175 BC. No scholarly consensus exists on the place of composition, but a Mesopotamian origin seems logical given that the story takes place in Assyria and Persia and it mentions the Persian demon &quot;aeshma daeva&quot;, rendered &quot;Asmodeus&quot;. However, the story contains significant errors in geographical detail (such as the distance from Ecbatana to Rhages and their topography), and arguments against and in favor of Judean or Egyptian composition also exist.

==Structure and summary==
The book has 14 chapters, forming three major narrative sections framed by a prologue and epilogue:
*Prologue (1:1–2)
*Situation in Nineveh and Ecbatana (1:3–3:17)
*Tobias&#x27;s journey (4:1–12:22)
*Tobit&#x27;s song of praise and his death (13:1–14:2)
*Epilogue (14:3–15)

&quot;(Summarised from Benedikt Otzen, &quot;Tobit and Judith&quot;).&quot;

The prologue tells the reader that this is the story of Tobit of the tribe of Naphtali, deported from Tishbe in Galilee to Nineveh by the Assyrians. He has always kept the laws of Moses, and brought offerings to the Temple in Jerusalem before the catastrophe of the Assyrian conquest. The narrative highlights his marriage to Anna, and they have a son named Tobias.

Tobit, a pious man, buries dead Israelites, but one evening while he sleeps he is partially blinded by a bird which defecates in his eyes; he later becomes fully blind after physicians place ointment in his eyes. He becomes dependent on his wife, but accuses her of stealing and prays for death. Meanwhile, his relative Sarah, living in far-off Ecbatana, also prays for death, for the demon Asmodeus has killed her suitors on their wedding nights and she is accused of having caused their deaths.

God hears their prayers and the archangel Raphael is sent to help them. Tobias is sent to recover money from a relative, and Raphael, in human disguise, offers to accompany him. On the way they catch a fish in the Tigris, and Raphael tells Tobias that the burnt heart and liver can drive out demons and the gall can cure blindness. They arrive in Ecbatana and meet Sarah, and as Raphael has predicted the demon is driven out.

Tobias and Sarah are married, Tobias grows wealthy, and they return to Nineveh (Assyria) where Tobit and Anna await them. Tobit&#x27;s blindness is cured, and Raphael departs after admonishing Tobit and Tobias to bless God and declare his deeds to the people (the Israelites), to pray and fast, and to give alms. Tobit praises God, who has punished his people with exile but will show them mercy and rebuild the Temple if they turn to him.

In the epilogue Tobit tells Tobias that Nineveh will be destroyed as an example of wickedness; likewise Israel will be rendered desolate and the Temple will be destroyed, but Israel and the Temple will be restored; therefore Tobias should leave Nineveh, and he and his children should live in righteousness.

==Significance==
Tobit is a work with some historical references, combining prayers, ethical exhortation, humour and adventure with elements drawn from folklore, wisdom tale, travel story, romance and comedy. It offered the diaspora (the Jews in exile) guidance on how to retain Jewish identity, and its message was that God tests his people&#x27;s faith, hears their prayers, and redeems the covenant community (i.e., the Jews). 

Readings from the book are used in the Latin liturgical rites of the Catholic Church. Because of the book&#x27;s praise for the purity of marriage, it is often read during weddings in many rites. Doctrinally, the book is cited for its teachings on the intercession of angels, filial piety, tithing and almsgiving, and reverence for the dead. Tobit is also made reference to in chapter 5 of 1 Meqabyan, a book considered canonical in the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church.

==Composition and manuscripts==
Tobit exists in two Greek versions, one (Sinaiticus) longer than the other (Vaticanus and Alexandrinus). Aramaic and Hebrew fragments of Tobit (four Aramaic, one Hebrew – it is not clear which was the original language) found among the Dead Sea Scrolls at Qumran tend to align more closely with the longer or Sinaiticus version, which has formed the basis of most English translations in recent times.

The Vulgate places Tobit, Judith and Esther after the historical books (after Nehemiah). Some manuscripts of the Greek version place them after the wisdom writings.

==Canonical status==

Those books found in the Septuagint, but not in the Masoretic text are called the deuterocanon, meaning &quot;second canon&quot;. Catholic and Orthodox Christianity include it in the Biblical canon. As Protestants came to follow the Masoretic canon, they therefore did not include Tobit in their canon, but do recognise it in the category of deuterocanonical books called the apocrypha.

The Book of Tobit is listed as a canonical book by the Council of Rome (AD 382), the Council of Hippo (AD 393), the Council of Carthage (397) and (AD 419), the Council of Florence (1442) and finally the Council of Trent (1546), and is part of the canon of both the Catholic Church and Eastern Orthodox Churches. Catholics refer to it as deuterocanonical.

Augustine () and Pope Innocent I (AD 405) affirmed Tobit as part of the Old Testament Canon. Athanasius (AD 367) mentioned that certain other books, including the book of Tobit, while not being part of the Canon, &quot;were appointed by the Fathers to be read&quot;. 

According to Rufinus of Aquileia () the book of Tobit and other deuterocanonical books were not called Canonical but Ecclesiastical books.

Protestant traditions place the book of Tobit in an intertestamental section called Apocrypha. In Anabaptism, the book of Tobit is quoted liturgically during Amish weddings, with &quot;the book of Tobit as the basis for the wedding sermon.&quot; The Luther Bible holds Tobit as part of the &quot;Apocrypha, that is, books which are not held equal to the sacred Scriptures, and nevertheless are useful to read&quot;. Luther&#x27;s personal view was that even if it were &quot;all made up, then it is indeed a very beautiful, wholesome and useful fiction or drama by a gifted poet&quot; and that &quot;this book is useful and good for us Christians to read.&quot; Article VI of the Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of England lists it as a book of the &quot;Apocrypha&quot;. The first Methodist liturgical book, &quot;The Sunday Service of the Methodists&quot;, employs verses from Tobit in the Eucharistic liturgy. Scripture readings from the Apocrypha are included in the lectionaries of the Lutheran Churches and the Anglican Churches, among other denominations using the Revised Common Lectionary, though alternate Old Testament readings are provided. Liturgically, the Catholic and Anglican churches may use a scripture reading from the Book of Tobit in services of Holy Matrimony. 

Tobit contains some interesting evidence of the early evolution of the canon, referring to two rather than three divisions, the Law of Moses (i.e. the torah) and the prophets. For unknown reasons it is not included in the Masoretic text of the Hebrew Bible, although four Aramaic and one Hebrew fragment were found among the Dead Sea Scrolls, indicating an authoritative status among some sects. Proposed explanations have included its age, literary quality, a supposed Samaritan origin, or an infringement of ritual law, in that it depicts the marriage contract between Tobias and his bride as written by her father rather than her groom. Alternatively, allusions to fallen angels and its thematic connections with works such as 1 Enoch and Jubilees may have disqualified it from canonicity. It is, however, found in the Greek text of the Septuagint, from which it was adopted into the Christian canon by the end of the 4th century.

==Influence==
Tobit&#x27;s place in the Christian canon allowed it to influence theology, art and culture in Europe. It was often dealt with by the early Church fathers, and the motif of Tobias and the fish (the fish being a symbol of Christ) was extremely popular in both art and theology; this is normally called &quot;Tobias and the Angel&quot; in art. Particularly noteworthy in this connection are the works of Rembrandt, who, despite belonging to the Dutch Reformed Church, was responsible for a series of paintings and drawings illustrating episodes from the book.

Scholarship on folkloristics (for instance, Stith Thompson, Dov Noy, Heda Jason and Gédeon Huet) recognizes the Book of Tobit as containing an early incarnation of the story of &quot;The Grateful Dead&quot;, albeit with an angel as the hero&#x27;s helper, instead of the spirit of a dead man.

The story of Tobit inspired also the oratorio &quot;Il ritorno di Tobia&quot; (1775) by Joseph Haydn.

==Image gallery==
==See also==
* Mary Untier of Knots (painting with Tobias and the Angel)
* Tobias and the Angel (Verrocchio)
* Philosopher in Meditation (&quot;Tobit and Anna in an Interior&quot; by Rembrandt)

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==


==External links==

*Book of Tobit in Hebrew and English, from Sefaria
* Book of Tobit from St. Takla Haymanot&#x27;s Coptic Orthodox website in English (also available in Arabic)
* Various versions</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131737" start="4" end="17" title="Book of Tobit" label="Book of Tobit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620673" start="27" end="44" title="Jewish apocrypha" label="apocryphal Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="200" end="210" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680" start="286" end="293" title="Nineveh" label="Nineveh"/>
<link wikidata="Q696193" start="324" end="332" title="Ecbatana" label="Ecbatana"/>
<link wikidata="Q190139" start="389" end="396" title="Talent (measurement)" label="talents"/>
<link wikidata="Q636188" start="421" end="427" title="Ray, Iran" label="Rhages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853673" start="439" end="444" title="Media (region)" label="Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q56951" start="476" end="483" title="Raphael (archangel)" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q733322" start="544" end="552" title="Asmodeus" label="Asmodeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q591016" start="776" end="784" title="Catholic Bible" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="789" end="805" title="Eastern Orthodox Church#Bible" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q145780" start="821" end="837" title="Dead Sea Scrolls" label="Dead Sea Scrolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="854" end="860" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q380669" start="861" end="875" title="Masoretic text" label="Masoretic text"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092752" start="915" end="924" title="Apocrypha" label="Apocrypha"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="931" end="941" title="Anabaptist" label="Anabaptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="944" end="952" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="955" end="963" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="969" end="978" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="1053" end="1066" title="Biblical canon" label="non-canonical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="1371" end="1382" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="1441" end="1448" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="1453" end="1459" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q733322" start="1535" end="1543" title="Asmodeus" label="Asmodeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180267" start="1814" end="1822" title="Chapters and verses of the Bible" label="chapters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348367" start="2219" end="2236" title="tribe of Naphtali" label="tribe of Naphtali"/>
<link wikidata="Q10382716" start="2252" end="2258" title="Tishbe" label="Tishbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="2262" end="2269" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680" start="2273" end="2280" title="Nineveh" label="Nineveh"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="2288" end="2297" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q837443" start="2322" end="2335" title="Mosaic law" label="laws of Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906600" start="2366" end="2385" title="Temple in Jerusalem" label="Temple in Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q733322" start="2908" end="2916" title="Asmodeus" label="Asmodeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q56951" start="3057" end="3064" title="Raphael (archangel)" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="3229" end="3235" title="Tigris River" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q49374" start="4663" end="4685" title="Latin liturgical rites" label="Latin liturgical rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266263" start="4876" end="4888" title="intercession" label="intercession"/>
<link wikidata="Q614263" start="4900" end="4912" title="filial piety" label="filial piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="4914" end="4921" title="tithe" label="tithing"/>
<link wikidata="Q931406" start="4926" end="4930" title="alms" label="alms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5014" end="5024" title="Meqabyan#First Book of Ethiopian Maccabees (1 Meqabyan)" label="1 Meqabyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104501" start="5044" end="5053" title="Orthodox Tewahedo biblical canon" label="canonical"/>
<link wikidata="Q179829" start="5061" end="5095" title="Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church" label="Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q223399" start="5386" end="5392" title="Qumran" label="Qumran"/>
<link wikidata="Q131175" start="5537" end="5544" title="Vulgate" label="Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q202129" start="5559" end="5565" title="Book of Judith" label="Judith"/>
<link wikidata="Q131068" start="5570" end="5576" title="Book of Esther" label="Esther"/>
<link wikidata="Q131640" start="5611" end="5619" title="Book of Nehemiah" label="Nehemiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="5746" end="5756" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q380669" start="5773" end="5787" title="Masoretic text" label="Masoretic text"/>
<link wikidata="Q201410" start="5803" end="5815" title="deuterocanon" label="deuterocanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092752" start="6097" end="6106" title="apocrypha" label="apocrypha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281392" start="6164" end="6179" title="Council of Rome" label="Council of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745306" start="6194" end="6210" title="Council of Hippo" label="Council of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493851" start="6225" end="6250" title="Council of Carthage (397)" label="Council of Carthage (397)"/>
<link wikidata="Q321032" start="6269" end="6288" title="Council of Florence" label="Council of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="6312" end="6328" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6374" end="6389" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="6394" end="6419" title="Eastern Orthodox Churches" label="Eastern Orthodox Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q201410" start="6446" end="6462" title="Deuterocanonical books" label="deuterocanonical"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="6465" end="6474" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q134694" start="6482" end="6497" title="Pope Innocent I" label="Pope Innocent I"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="6558" end="6568" title="Athanasius of Alexandria" label="Athanasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q365835" start="6747" end="6766" title="Rufinus of Aquileia" label="Rufinus of Aquileia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092752" start="6958" end="6967" title="Apocrypha" label="Apocrypha"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="6972" end="6982" title="Anabaptism" label="Anabaptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="7032" end="7037" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571095" start="7124" end="7136" title="Luther Bible" label="Luther Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="7290" end="7296" title="Martin Luther" label="Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q937617" start="7554" end="7574" title="Thirty-Nine Articles" label="Thirty-Nine Articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="7582" end="7599" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q170207" start="7632" end="7641" title="Biblical apocrypha" label="Apocrypha"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="7659" end="7668" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635574" start="7692" end="7728" title="The Sunday Service of the Methodists" label="The Sunday Service of the Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q337921" start="7790" end="7808" title="Lection" label="Scripture readings"/>
<link wikidata="Q284465" start="7848" end="7860" title="lectionary" label="lectionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q119510" start="7949" end="7974" title="Revised Common Lectionary" label="Revised Common Lectionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="8314" end="8319" title="torah" label="torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="8407" end="8419" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q145780" start="8488" end="8504" title="Dead Sea Scrolls" label="Dead Sea Scrolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q220890" start="8893" end="8900" title="Book of Enoch" label="1 Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q843946" start="8905" end="8913" title="Book of Jubilees" label="Jubilees"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="9003" end="9013" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530155" start="9419" end="9439" title="Tobias and the Angel" label="Tobias and the Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="9514" end="9523" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q132116" start="9686" end="9699" title="folkloristics" label="folkloristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q428220" start="9715" end="9729" title="Stith Thompson" label="Stith Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12405649" start="9731" end="9738" title="Dov Noy" label="Dov Noy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597665" start="9854" end="9871" title="Grateful dead (folklore)" label="The Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q85477" start="10002" end="10010" title="oratorio" label="oratorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658277" start="10017" end="10036" title="Il ritorno di Tobia" label="Il ritorno di Tobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="10053" end="10065" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Joseph Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q472799" start="10101" end="10121" title="Mary Untier of Knots" label="Mary Untier of Knots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635039" start="10161" end="10194" title="Tobias and the Angel (Verrocchio)" label="Tobias and the Angel (Verrocchio)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381192" start="10197" end="10222" title="Philosopher in Meditation" label="Philosopher in Meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33424604" start="10437" end="10444" title="Sefaria" label="Sefaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591811" start="10466" end="10491" title="St. Takla Haymanot&amp;#x27;s Church (Alexandria)" label="St. Takla Haymanot&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="10492" end="10507" title="Coptic Orthodox" label="Coptic Orthodox"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173681" wikidata="Q733278" url="?curid=173681" title="Asmodeus (band)">
<text>Asmodeus is an Austrian black metal band founded in 1996.

== History ==
Tyr and Desdemon began the band as a project called Diabolus. After the first permanent line up was assembled, the name was changed to Asmodeus.

In late 1998, Tyr (guitars), Desdemon (bass, vocals), Dargoth (guitars), and Harth (drums) recorded their first demo, &quot;Supreme Surrender&quot;. Harth and Dargoth then left the band, and were replaced by Lestat (guitars) and Ashrak (drums). After their first shows in Austria, Asmodeus recorded their second demo, &quot;As the Winter Moon Bleeds&quot;.

The group toured with bands including Satyricon, Behemoth, Hecate Enthroned and Rebaelliun, becoming more popular in the black metal underground. In November 2000, the third demo was recorded and released. Lestat then left the band, and Naroth joined as the new guitarist.

&quot;Phalanx Inferna&quot;, Asmodeus&#x27; first full-length album, was released via Twilight Records. Due to the positive response to the album, Asmodeus were invited to perform at a variety of national and international concerts in 2004. In April 2005, the first tour through Europe took place with Belphegor, Arkhon Infaustus, and In Aeternum. Naroth couldn&#x27;t play the tour and left the band, and was replaced by Azazel. Following the completion of the tour, Ashrak left the band as well. A long search for new permanent members began, and in October 2005 a new drummer, Malthus, was recruited. Asmodeus later recorded &quot;Imperium Damnatum&quot; with T.T. of Abigor in December 2005 at Infinite Sounds Studios.

Their new album &quot;Adamant&quot; was specially released in a woodpak (CD case made of wood) at the Austrian label Talheim Records. A digipak, vinyl version and a few shows are planned.

== Discography ==
=== Studio albums ===
*&quot;Phalanx Inferna&quot; (2003, Twilight Vertrieb)
*&quot;Imperium Damnatum&quot; (2006, Twilight Vertrieb)
*&quot;Adamant&quot; (2018, Talheim Records)

=== Demos ===
*&quot;Supreme Surrender&quot; (1998)
*&quot;As the Winter Moon Bleeds&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Embers of Aeon&quot; (2001)

=== Compilations ===
*&quot;Twilight Sampler&quot; (2006)

== Lineup ==
=== Current members ===
* Tyr - guitars (1996–present)
* Desdemona - bass, vocals (1996–present)
* Azalea - guitars (2006-2009, 2012–present; touring 2005–2006)
* Nordger - drums (2010–present)

=== Former members ===
* Harth - drums (1996-1999)
* Dargoth - guitars (1996-1999)
* Ashram - drums (1999-2005)
* Lestat - guitars, backing vocals (1999-2002)
* Naroth - guitars (2002-2005)
* Malthus - drums (2005-2010)
* Garm - guitars (2010-2012)

===Timeline===
==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q733278" start="0" end="8" title="Asmodeus (band)" label="Asmodeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="15" end="22" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="24" end="35" title="black metal" label="black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="331" end="335" title="Demo (music)" label="demo"/>
<link wikidata="Q335352" start="615" end="624" title="Satyricon (band)" label="Satyricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q272260" start="626" end="634" title="Behemoth (band)" label="Behemoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326369" start="636" end="652" title="Hecate Enthroned" label="Hecate Enthroned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651565" start="657" end="667" title="Rebaelliun" label="Rebaelliun"/>
<link wikidata="Q589580" start="1153" end="1162" title="Belphegor (band)" label="Belphegor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523018" start="1164" end="1180" title="Arkhon Infaustus" label="Arkhon Infaustus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1186" end="1197" title="In Aeternum" label="In Aeternum"/>
<link wikidata="Q244219" start="1522" end="1528" title="Abigor" label="Abigor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173685" wikidata="Q503293" url="?curid=173685" title="Donald Johanson">
<text>Donald Carl Johanson (born June 28, 1943) is an American paleoanthropologist. He is best known for discovering the fossil of a female hominin australopithecine known as &quot;Lucy&quot; in the Afar Triangle region of Hadar, Ethiopia.

== Biography ==

=== Early life and education ===
Johanson was born in Chicago, Illinois to Swedish parents. He is the nephew of wrestler Ivar Johansson.

He earned a bachelor&#x27;s degree from the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign in 1966 and his master&#x27;s degree (1970) and PhD (1974) from the University of Chicago. At the time of the discovery of Lucy, he was an associate professor of anthropology at Case Western Reserve University. In 1981, he established the Institute of Human Origins in Berkeley, California, which he moved to Arizona State University in 1997. Johanson holds an honorary doctorate from Case Western Reserve University and was awarded an honorary doctorate by Westfield State College in 2008.

=== &quot;Lucy&quot; ===

Lucy was discovered in Hadar, Ethiopia on November 24, 1974, when Johanson, coaxed away from his paperwork by graduate student Tom Gray for a spur-of-the-moment survey, caught the glint of a white fossilized bone out of the corner of his eye and recognized it as hominin. Forty percent of the skeleton was eventually recovered and was later described as the first known member of &quot;Australopithecus afarensis&quot;. Johanson was astonished to find so much of her skeleton all at once. Pamela Alderman, a member of the expedition, suggested she be named &quot;Lucy&quot; after the Beatles&#x27; song &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds,&quot; which was played repeatedly during the night of the discovery.

A bipedal hominin, Lucy stood about three and a half feet tall; her bipedalism supported Raymond Dart&#x27;s theory that australopithecines walked upright. The whole team including Johanson concluded from Lucy&#x27;s rib that she ate a plant-based diet and from her curved finger bones that she was probably still at home in trees. They did not immediately see Lucy as a separate species, but considered her an older member of &quot;Australopithecus africanus&quot;. The subsequent discovery of several more skulls of similar morphology persuaded most palaeontologists to classify her as a species called &quot;afarensis&quot;.

Johanson and Maitland A. Edey won a 1982 U.S. National Book Award in Science for the first popular book about this work, &quot;Lucy: The Beginnings of Humankind&quot;.

=== &quot;First Family&quot; ===

AL 333, commonly referred to as the &quot;First Family&quot;, is a collection of prehistoric homininid teeth and bones of at least thirteen individuals that were also discovered in Hadar by Johanson&#x27;s team in 1975. Generally thought to be members of the species &quot;Australopithecus afarensis,&quot; the fossils are estimated to be about 3.2 million years old.

=== Awards and honors ===
* In 1976, Johanson received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.
* In 1991, the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry (CSICOP) awarded Johanson their highest honor, the &quot;In Praise of Reason&quot; award.
* On October 19, 2014, Johanson gave the second annual Patrusky Lecture.
* On October 24, 2014, Johanson accepted the &quot;Emperor Has No Clothes&quot; award at the Freedom From Religion Foundation 37th annual convention.
* Asteroid 52246 Donaldjohanson, a target of the &quot;Lucy&quot; mission was named in his honor. The official was published by the Minor Planet Center on December 25, 2015 ().

=== Other activities ===

Since 2013, Johanson has been listed on the Advisory Council of the National Center for Science Education.

== Bibliography ==
* 
* 

== See also ==
* Yves Coppens
* Australopithecus afarensis
* &quot;Dawn of Humanity&quot; (2015 PBS film)
* List of fossil sites &quot;(with link directory)&quot;
* List of hominina (hominin) fossils &quot;(with images)&quot;
* Multi-regional origin
* Single-origin hypothesis

== Notes ==
== References ==

== External links ==

* Institute of Human Origins at Arizona State University
*In Search of Human Origins – PBS
* – Video
* NPR. &quot;Science Friday&quot;. &quot;Human Origins&quot; – May 9, 1997, interview with Johanson.
* NPR. &quot;Science Friday&quot;. &quot;Lucy&#x27;s Relative&quot; – December 1, 2006, interview with Johanson.
* NPR. &quot;Science Friday&quot;. &quot;Lucy&#x27;s Legacy&quot; – March 6, 2009, interview with Johanson.
* &quot;Origins of Modern Humans: Multiregional or Out of Africa?&quot; by Donald Johanson
* Studs Terkel Radio Archive. &quot;Donald Johanson discusses his book &quot;Lucy: The Beginnings of Humankind&quot;&quot; – March 16, 1981, interview with Studs Terkel.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q503293" start="0" end="20" title="Donald Johanson" label="Donald Carl Johanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206" start="57" end="76" title="paleoanthropologist" label="paleoanthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q107588" start="134" end="141" title="hominin" label="hominin"/>
<link wikidata="Q511893" start="142" end="159" title="australopithecine" label="australopithecine"/>
<link wikidata="Q245388" start="175" end="179" title="Lucy (Australopithecus)" label="Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217223" start="193" end="206" title="Afar Triangle" label="Afar Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567353" start="217" end="232" title="Hadar, Ethiopia" label="Hadar, Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="306" end="313" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="315" end="323" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q572876" start="373" end="387" title="Ivar Johansson (wrestler)" label="Ivar Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="402" end="424" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="434" end="476" title="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign" label="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="493" end="513" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="525" end="528" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="545" end="566" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047060" start="655" end="686" title="Case Western Reserve University" label="Case Western Reserve University"/>
<link wikidata="Q24693296" start="716" end="742" title="Institute of Human Origins" label="Institute of Human Origins"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="746" end="766" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="786" end="810" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047060" start="862" end="893" title="Case Western Reserve University" label="Case Western Reserve University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14438080" start="935" end="958" title="Westfield State University" label="Westfield State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567353" start="1018" end="1033" title="Hadar, Ethiopia" label="Hadar, Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q245388" start="1122" end="1130" title="Tom Gray (archaeologist)" label="Tom Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q107685" start="1381" end="1407" title="Australopithecus afarensis" label="Australopithecus afarensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q723178" start="1604" end="1633" title="Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" label="Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1707" end="1722" title="Bipedalism#Evolution of human bipedalism" label="bipedal hominin"/>
<link wikidata="Q103237" start="1826" end="1844" title="Australopithecus" label="australopithecines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1931" end="1957" title="Lucy (Australopithecus)#Rib cage and plant-based diet" label="she ate a plant-based diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q239272" start="2138" end="2164" title="Australopithecus africanus" label="Australopithecus africanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q572316" start="2380" end="2399" title="National Book Award" label="National Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2400" end="2410" title="List of winners of the National Book Award#Science" label="in Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q294544" start="2537" end="2543" title="AL 333" label="AL 333"/>
<link wikidata="Q107685" start="2810" end="2836" title="Australopithecus afarensis" label="Australopithecus afarensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="2991" end="3022" title="American Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115728" start="3039" end="3070" title="Committee for Skeptical Inquiry" label="Committee for Skeptical Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064406" start="3216" end="3232" title="Patrusky Lecture" label="Patrusky Lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q531069" start="3327" end="3359" title="Freedom From Religion Foundation" label="Freedom From Religion Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15163754" start="3395" end="3415" title="52246 Donaldjohanson" label="52246 Donaldjohanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21076293" start="3433" end="3457" title="Lucy (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Lucy&amp;quot; mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q522039" start="3516" end="3535" title="Minor Planet Center" label="Minor Planet Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q617660" start="3656" end="3693" title="National Center for Science Education" label="National Center for Science Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382212" start="3739" end="3751" title="Yves Coppens" label="Yves Coppens"/>
<link wikidata="Q107685" start="3754" end="3780" title="Australopithecus afarensis" label="Australopithecus afarensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20967597" start="3783" end="3827" title="Dawn of Humanity" label="&amp;quot;Dawn of Humanity&amp;quot; (2015 PBS film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828615" start="3830" end="3850" title="List of fossil sites" label="List of fossil sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q785292" start="3887" end="3921" title="List of human evolution fossils" label="List of hominina (hominin) fossils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509795" start="3950" end="3971" title="Multi-regional origin" label="Multi-regional origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="3974" end="3998" title="Single-origin hypothesis" label="Single-origin hypothesis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173686" wikidata="Q1412816" url="?curid=173686" title="Kerry Packer">
<text>Kerry Francis Bullmore Packer (17 December 1937 – 26 December 2005) was an Australian media tycoon, and was considered one of Australia&#x27;s most powerful media proprietors of the twentieth century. The Packer family company owned a controlling interest in both the Nine Network and the publishing company Australian Consolidated Press, which were later merged to form Publishing and Broadcasting Limited (PBL). Outside Australia, Packer was best known for founding World Series Cricket. At the time of his death, he was the richest and one of the most influential men in Australia. In 2004, &quot;Business Review Weekly&quot; magazine estimated Packer&#x27;s net worth at .

==Early life==
Kerry Packer was born on 17 December 1937 in Sydney, Australia. His father was Sir Frank Packer, an Australian media proprietor who controlled Australian Consolidated Press and the Nine Network. His mother, Gretel Bullmore, was the daughter of Herbert Bullmore, the Scottish rugby union player. He had an older brother, Clyde Packer. He took part in various sports at school, including boxing, cricket, and rugby; though he struggled academically, possibly due to undiagnosed dyslexia. On his father&#x27;s death in 1974, the family estate, valued at $100 million, passed directly to Packer. His father had fallen out with his elder son, Clyde, in 1972.

==Business==
Packer, through his family company Consolidated Press Holdings, was the major shareholder with a 37% holding in Publishing and Broadcasting Limited (PBL). Until Packer&#x27;s death PBL owned the Nine television network, and Australian Consolidated Press which produces many of Australia&#x27;s top-selling magazines. He was involved in a number of other gambling and tourism ventures, notably Crown Casino in Melbourne. The Nine Network and Australian Consolidated Press businesses have since been divested to PBL Media.

Packer was widely respected in business circles, courted by politicians on both sides, and was widely regarded as one of the most astute businessmen of his time, despite having been a poor student.

Although Packer&#x27;s reputation as an astute businessman was legendary and he made some good investments, he was by no means a self-made man—his grandfather, Robert Clyde Packer, and his father, Sir Frank Packer, had built up the media empire and its related holdings over many decades. As pointed out by internet news outlet Crikey, if $100 million had been invested in the Australian sharemarket in September 1974 through a balanced portfolio of the top 200 companies, that portfolio would be worth a lot more than $6.9 billion in December 2005, possibly as much as $11 billion.

Packer controlled Nine Network and &quot;Nine&#x27;s Wide World of Sports&quot; in the 1980s, and &quot;famously sold the network to Alan Bond and then bought it back three years later for less than a quarter of the price.&quot; Writes the &quot;Sydney Morning Herald&quot;, &quot;Packer&#x27;s decision to sell Nine to Bond in 1987 for $1.2 billion - before buying back the network in 1990 for $250 million - is legendary in Australian television.&quot;

Moreover, Packer was not the first choice to take over the running of the family&#x27;s business empire—his father had intended that Kerry&#x27;s elder brother, Clyde Packer, would take over the company, but Clyde fell out with his father in the early 1970s and left Australia permanently.

Kerry Packer&#x27;s independent business life began after his father&#x27;s death in 1974 when he inherited control of the family&#x27;s controlling share in PBL, valued at . Further, his principal Australian investments in television and casinos were highly protected from competition by government regulation which Packer and his employees worked very hard to have maintained.

The Packer family&#x27;s business reputation suffered a blow following the 2001 collapse of One.Tel, a telephone company in which his son, James, had invested.

Kerry Packer was also one of Australia&#x27;s largest landholders. In 2003, a deposit of rubies was discovered on one of his properties.

The Packer media empire included magazines, television networks, telecommunications, petrochemicals, heavy engineering, a 75% stake in the Perisher Blue ski resort, diamond exploration, coal mines and property, a share in the Foxtel cable TV network, and investments in the lucrative casino business in Australia and overseas.

==Media interests==

===The &quot;Packer Empire&quot;===
The Packer family has long been involved in media. Packer&#x27;s grandfather Robert Clyde Packer owned two Sydney newspapers while his father, Sir Frank Packer, was one of Australia&#x27;s first media moguls, and Kerry&#x27;s son, James, was executive chairman of PBL, before resigning in 2008. Sir Frank wanted Kerry to experience work in the newspaper industry from the ground up, so Packer started in the loading dock of the Sydney newspaper &quot;The Telegraph&quot;, loading papers. He was not originally destined for the role, but in the early 1970s Kerry took the place of the designated successor, his older brother, Clyde, after Clyde fell out with their father, quit PBL and moved to America. Kerry took over the running of PBL in 1974, on the death of his father.

===The CBC Disaster===
During the 1980s, Packer owned radio stations 2UE and 3AK. He decided to link both stations to form the ill-fated Commonwealth Broadcasting Corporation. With both stations networked, breakfast came from Melbourne&#x27;s 3AK and everything else from Sydney&#x27;s 2UE. The format lasted six months in 1986.

===Alan Bond media buyback===
In 1987, Packer made a fortune at the expense of disgraced tycoon Alan Bond. He reportedly sold Bond the Nine Network at the record price of in 1987, and then bought it back three years later for a mere A$250 million, when Bond&#x27;s empire was collapsing. Packer later quipped, &quot;You only get one Alan Bond in your lifetime, and I&#x27;ve had mine&quot;. Packer was then able to reinvest the proceeds in a 25% share in the Foxtel pay TV consortium.

After the sale to Bond, Packer said that he had regretted the decision to sell Nine and wished he had not gone through with the transaction. At the 2006 PBL AGM, Kerry&#x27;s son, James, told of the true complexities of the deal. Kerry Packer received A$800 million in cash, with A$250 million left in Bond Media as subordinated debt. As Bond went under, Packer converted the subordinated debt into a 37% stake in Bond Media. About A$500 million of debt remained in Bond Media. Packer received $800 million in cash before receiving a free 37% equity stake that put a debt-included value of A$500 million on the Nine Network, which by then included Channel Nine in Brisbane.

===Hands-on business approach===
Packer sometimes took a direct interest in the editorial content of his papers, although he was far less interventionist than the notoriously hands-on Rupert Murdoch. Packer also occasionally interfered directly in the programming of his TV stations; in 1992, he called his Sydney station, TCN-9, and ordered its personnel to &quot;Get that shit off the air!&quot;, referring to &quot;Australia&#x27;s Naughtiest Home Videos&quot; hosted by Doug Mulray, which was cut during its first and only airing on national television. (It has since aired in its entirety.) He is also said to have often manipulated broadcasts of cricket himself, to ensure that the end of a cricket match was broadcast, despite previously set television broadcast schedules.

===Government inquiry and legal challenges===
Packer faced a 1991 Australian government inquiry into the print media industry with some reluctance, but great humour. When asked to state his full name and the capacity in which he appeared, he replied: &quot;Kerry Francis Bullmore Packer. I have appeared here reluctantly.&quot; Packer fronted the inquiry over allegations that he had some secret control over the content of the Fairfax papers (an organisation that Packer had wished to purchase for some time, but was restricted from by cross-ownership laws). During the inquiry, he repeatedly berated the politicians conducting it, and the government. When asked about his company&#x27;s tax-minimisation schemes, he replied: &quot;Of course I am minimising my tax. And if anybody in this country doesn&#x27;t minimise their tax, they want their heads read, because as a government, I can tell you you&#x27;re not spending it that well that we should be donating extra!&quot;

At the time of his death, the Nine Network was the jewel in the PBL crown. Although it had a tough year in 2005 against rival Seven Network (which was aided largely by US TV hits such as &quot;Desperate Housewives&quot; and &quot;Lost&quot;), Nine still finished the year as the number-one network.

==World Series Cricket==
Outside Australia, Packer was best known for founding World Series Cricket. In 1977 the Nine Network cricket rights deal led to a confrontation with the cricket authorities, as top players from several countries rushed to join him at the expense of their international sides.

One of the leaders of the &quot;rebellion&quot; was England captain Tony Greig, who remained a commentator on the Nine Network&#x27;s payroll until his death in December 2012. Packer&#x27;s aim was to secure broadcasting rights for Australian cricket, and he was largely successful. In the 1970s the global cricket establishment fiercely opposed Packer in the courts. To counter the establishment, Packer hired the ten best Queen&#x27;s Counsels in the UK and put them on retainers, stipulating that they were not to take on any additional work during the court case (the sole purpose of which was to deny the establishment the best legal minds to prosecute their case) . When he died he was mourned with a minute&#x27;s silence at the MCG as one of the most influential figures in the history of the sport.

Packer was famously quoted from a 1976 meeting with the Australian Cricket Board, with whom he met to negotiate the rights to televise cricket. According to witnesses, he said: &quot;There is a little bit of the whore in all of us, gentlemen. What is your price?&quot;

==World Rugby Corporation==
Packer funded the World Rugby Corporation (WRC), a company formed by lawyer Geoff Levy and former Wallaby player Ross Turnbull. Both wanted a professional worldwide rugby union competition in 1995. A majority of the All Blacks and Wallaby teams signed up to the WRC. In response, the Australian, New Zealand and South African rugby unions formed SANZAR, who partnered with News Limited to launch two professional competitions, the Super 12 and Tri Nations Series. The South African Rugby Union told the Springboks players that they would never play for their country again if they committed to the WRC, and they remained with the SARU. Most of the All Blacks then followed them, and finally the Wallabies did too, so the WRC project was abandoned.

==Controversy==
Packer was often the centre of controversy. One of the earliest incidents occurred on 7 June 1960, when his father was trying to take over the Anglican Press, a small publisher run by Francis James. According to author Richard Neville, Frank Packer was angered by James&#x27;s refusal to sell the Anglican Press, so he sent Kerry and some burly friends to pressure him into selling. They forced their way in and reportedly began vandalising the premises, but James was able to barricade himself in his office and call Rupert Murdoch, Packer&#x27;s most powerful rival. Murdoch quickly dispatched his own team of &#x27;heavies&#x27;, who threw Kerry and friends out. Not surprisingly, the Murdoch press had a field day with the news that the son of Australia&#x27;s biggest media tycoon had been caught brawling in the street.

Like Murdoch, Packer&#x27;s critics saw his ever-expanding cross-media holdings as a potential threat to media diversity and freedom of speech. He also repeatedly came under fire for his companies&#x27; alleged involvement in tax evasion schemes and for the extremely low amounts of company tax that his corporations are reported to have paid over the years. He fought repeated battles with the Australian Taxation Office over his corporate taxes.

His most severe legal challenge came in 1984 with the Costigan Commission alleging (using the codename of &quot;the squirrel&quot;, renamed &quot;the Goanna&quot; in media reports) that he was involved in tax evasion and organised crime, including drug trafficking. He successfully counter-attacked the commission with the assistance of his counsel Malcolm Turnbull. In 1987, the charges were formally dismissed by Attorney-General Lionel Bowen. Mystery surrounded Packer&#x27;s receipt of a &quot;loan&quot; of A$225,000 in cash from Brian Ray, a bankrupt Queensland businessman. When questioned about this transaction at the Costigan Royal Commission, Packer said &quot;...I like cash. I have a squirrel mentality. I like to keep money in cash. It is by no means the most cash I ever had in my life.&quot;

Notwithstanding the significant efforts made to preserve his security and privacy, Packer suffered two mysterious break-ins at his companies&#x27; headquarters in Park Street, Sydney:
* In 1995, 25 gold bars, weighing a total of —equivalent to A$23.3 million at 2022 gold prices—and a Vegemite jar full of gold nuggets were stolen from Packer&#x27;s personal safe;
* In 2003, a licensed Glock semi-automatic pistol was stolen from a desk drawer on the executive level. Packer was not charged with failing to &quot;keep safe&quot; the weapon, but he did subsequently surrender his firearms licence.

Packer broke the sports boycott of apartheid South Africa which prevented South African sportsmen from representing their country when he recruited a number of South African cricketers to play on his World Series Cricket Team. His timing was criticised, coming just months after the Soweto riots and the death of Steve Biko, murdered by the members of the South African security forces.

==Personal life==
Packer&#x27;s primary schooling suffered greatly when he was struck with a severe bout of poliomyelitis at age eight, and he was confined to an iron lung for nine months. His father apparently thought little of his son&#x27;s abilities, once cruelly describing him as &quot;the family idiot&quot;, although Kerry subsequently steered PBL to heights far beyond anything his father or brother achieved. The nickname his father gave Kerry made him strive to new heights in schooling, trying to achieve &quot;A&quot; grades. His end of year report said he was one of the most notable students. In an interview, former employee Trevor Sykes stated that &quot;He didn&#x27;t read much on the printed page. If you didn&#x27;t want Kerry to read something, you wrote more than a one-page memo.&quot;

Packer&#x27;s grandfather Herbert Bullmore represented the Scotland national rugby union team in an international match against Ireland in Dublin in 1902 and worked as a doctor in Sydney for many years.

Kerry Packer and his wife of 42 years, Roslyn Packer (&quot;nee&quot; Weedon), had two children: a daughter, Gretel, and a son, James. At the time of Packer&#x27;s death, he and Ros had two grandchildren: Francesca then 10, and Ben, then 7, from Gretel&#x27;s first marriage to British financier Nick Barham, and Gretel and her husband Shane Murray were expecting their first child together, William (born 2006). Gretel and Shane married just before Packer&#x27;s death.

Packer conducted extra-marital affairs with a number of women including the model Carol Lopes, who reportedly committed suicide after being shunned by Packer; publisher and former ConPress employee Ita Buttrose and Julie Trethowan, his long-time mistress and manager (from 1983) of the Packer-owned Sydney city health and fitness club, the Hyde Park Club. After his death, &quot;The Sydney Morning Herald&quot; reported that from about 1995, Packer transferred control of multimillion-dollar Sydney real estate holdings to Trethowan.

In June 2009, the &quot;Sydney Morning Herald&quot; reported that former federal opposition leader and future Australian Prime Minister, Malcolm Turnbull, a former legal adviser and business associate of Packer, revealed to journalist Annabel Crabb that Packer had threatened to have him killed when they fell out over their 1991 attempt to take over the Fairfax newspaper group through their Tourang consortium. Packer reportedly made the threat after Turnbull told Packer he was going to have him thrown out of the consortium by revealing Packer&#x27;s intention to play an interventionist role in the newspaper group.

Packer was a supporter of South Sydney Rabbitohs in the National Rugby League competition.

He was an advocate of the Australian Republic Movement.

===Polo===
Packer was a keen polo player. In 1992, he and Gonzalo Pieres Sr. founded Ellerstina, a polo team that has claimed multiple titles at the Argentine Open and other high-handicap tournaments. Packer bought the Fyning Hill estate in West Sussex and expanded it to over 400 acres. Packer built the headquarters for his Ellerston polo team at Fyning Hill, and would arrive at the estate in May for the three-month English polo season. Packer sold the estate to the Russian businessman Roman Abramovich in 1999 for 12 million.

===Gambling===
Packer was a long-time heavy smoker and an avid gambler, fabled for his large wins and losses. In 1999, a three-day losing streak at London casinos cost him almost A$28 million – the biggest reported gambling loss in British history.

Once he won A$33 million at the MGM Grand Casino in Las Vegas, and he often won as much as A$7 million each year during his annual holidays in the UK. Packer&#x27;s visits were a risky affair for the casinos, as his wins and losses could make quite a difference to the finances of even bigger casinos. Packer was also known for his sometimes volcanic temper—and for his perennial contempt for journalists who sought to question his activities.

Packer is quoted for an exchange in a poker tournament at the Stratosphere Casino, where a Texan oil investor was attempting to engage him in a game of poker. Upon the Texan saying &quot;I&#x27;m worth $60 million!&quot;, Packer apparently pulled out a coin and asked nonchalantly, &quot;heads or tails?&quot;, referring to an A$120 million wager (according to Bob Stupak&#x27;s biography). Some variations of the story put the sum at A$60 million to A$100 million and say the line was &quot;I&#x27;ll toss you for it&quot;.

In the late 1990s, he walked into a major London casino and played £15 million on four roulette tables on his own and lost it all. This has been confirmed by casino owners in South East England.

Former PGA professional John Daly said on the &quot;Full Send Podcast&quot; that Packer closed down the Desert Inn Casino (which was replaced by the Wynn Hotel) by winning 52 million dollars in one day and insisting they pay him in cash, as the previous day when he lost 8.2 million dollars they insisted he pay them in cash.

The Ritz Hotel in London even had its own room for Kerry Packer. There he was able to play blackjack with a minimum bet of £10,000 per hand. He once lost more than £19 million in this room.

==Failing health==
Packer suffered as many as four heart attacks. In 1990, while playing polo at Warwick Farm, Sydney, he suffered from a heart attack that left him clinically dead for seven minutes. Packer was revived by paramedics and then airlifted to St Vincent&#x27;s Private Hospital, Sydney, and received bypass surgery from Dr Victor Chang, a pioneering cardiac surgeon. It was not common for an ambulance to have a defibrillator at the time – it was purely by chance that the ambulance which responded to the call had one fitted.

After recovering, Packer donated a large sum to the Ambulance Service of New South Wales to pay for equipping all NSW ambulances with a portable defibrillator (colloquially known as &quot;Packer Whackers&quot;). He told Nick Greiner &quot;I&#x27;ll go you 50/50&quot;, and the NSW State government paid the other half of the cost. He is reported to have said, &quot;Son, I&#x27;ve been to the other side, and let me tell you, there&#x27;s nothing there.&quot; And in a press conference, &quot;...there&#x27;s no one waiting there for you, there&#x27;s no one to judge you, so you can do what you bloody well like&quot;.

He also suffered from a chronic kidney condition for many years, and in 2000, he made headlines when his long-serving helicopter pilot, Nick Ross, donated one of his own kidneys to Packer for transplantation. The story of the transplant was covered in detail by the Australian TV documentary program &quot;Australian Story&quot;, a rare occasion on which Packer granted a media interview (and, to the surprise of many, not to his own network; &quot;Australian Story&quot; is produced by the public network, ABC). After recovering from the operation, Packer launched an organ transplant association in memory of cricketer David Hookes.

==Death==
Kerry Packer died of kidney failure on 26 December 2005, nine days after his 68th birthday, at home in Sydney, Australia, with his family by his bedside. Knowing that his health was failing, he instructed his doctors not to treat him with curative intent or by artificially prolonging his life with dialysis. He told his cardiologist earlier in the week that he was &quot;running out of petrol&quot; and wanted to &quot;die with dignity&quot;. His private funeral service was held on 30 December 2005, at the family&#x27;s country retreat, Ellerston, near Scone in the Hunter Valley. Having obtained council permission, he was buried on the Ellerston property near the polo field. It was reported in November 2011, both in the UK and Australia, that the grave was to be marked by a bronze statue of a horse&#x27;s head by sculptor Nic Fiddian-Green, popularly known as &quot;Artemis&quot; but believed reverted to the name Fiddian-Green originally gave it: &quot;I Look Beyond for a Distant Land&quot;.

=== State memorial service ===
The Packer family accepted an offer of a state memorial service, which was held on 17 February 2006 at the Sydney Opera House. The granting of this taxpayer-funded honour was criticised by some members of the community, as Packer was notorious for his alleged tax minimisation. At the memorial service, close friend Alan Jones was Master of Ceremonies. The service featured speeches from his son, James; Russell Crowe on behalf of his daughter, Gretel; the Prime Minister in office at the time, John Howard; and cricket legend Richie Benaud. Attendees included Tom Cruise (a friend of James Packer) and his then-partner Katie Holmes; Greg Norman; members of the Australian cricket team; and past and present figures from all sides of politics.

==Philanthropy==
The Kerry Packer Civic Gallery within the Bob Hawke Prime Ministerial Centre of the University of South Australia was endowed by the Packer family.

==See also==
* Kerry Packer Foundation
* &quot;Paper Giants: The Birth of Cleo&quot;
* &quot;Howzat! Kerry Packer&#x27;s War&quot;
* &quot;Paper Giants: Magazine Wars&quot;
* &quot;Power Games: The Packer-Murdoch War&quot;
* Super League war

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 

== External links ==

*Photo of Kerry Packer
*KerryPacker.com.au for sale 
* Kerry Packer media profile
* 1970s interview on Packer&#x27;s childhood
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1412816" start="0" end="29" title="Kerry Packer" label="Kerry Francis Bullmore Packer"/>
<link wikidata="Q55628335" start="205" end="218" title="Packer family" label="Packer family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956246" start="235" end="255" title="controlling interest" label="controlling interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="268" end="280" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="308" end="337" title="Are Media#Australian Consolidated Press" label="Australian Consolidated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q750172" start="371" end="406" title="Publishing and Broadcasting Limited" label="Publishing and Broadcasting Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349761" start="468" end="488" title="World Series Cricket" label="World Series Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836459" start="600" end="622" title="Business Review Weekly" label="Business Review Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="738" end="744" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488864" start="772" end="788" title="Frank Packer" label="Sir Frank Packer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="836" end="865" title="Are Media#Australian Consolidated Press" label="Australian Consolidated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="874" end="886" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5733716" start="937" end="953" title="Herbert Bullmore" label="Herbert Bullmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136994" start="1013" end="1025" title="Clyde Packer" label="Clyde Packer"/>
<link wikidata="Q132971" start="1169" end="1177" title="dyslexia" label="dyslexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q750172" start="1473" end="1508" title="Publishing and Broadcasting Limited" label="Publishing and Broadcasting Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="1556" end="1579" title="Nine Network" label="Nine television network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1585" end="1614" title="Are Media#Australian Consolidated Press" label="Australian Consolidated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145115" start="1754" end="1766" title="Crown Melbourne" label="Crown Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="1785" end="1797" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q103628739" start="1802" end="1831" title="Australian Consolidated Press" label="Australian Consolidated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999054" start="1871" end="1880" title="PBL Media" label="PBL Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448143" start="2211" end="2224" title="self-made man" label="self-made man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342997" start="2242" end="2261" title="Robert Clyde Packer" label="Robert Clyde Packer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185137" start="2410" end="2416" title="Crikey" label="Crikey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="2684" end="2696" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038238" start="2707" end="2739" title="Nine&amp;#x27;s Wide World of Sports" label="Nine&amp;#x27;s Wide World of Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q550179" start="2799" end="2808" title="Alan Bond" label="Alan Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092359" start="3885" end="3892" title="One.Tel" label="One.Tel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680948" start="3932" end="3937" title="James Packer" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q43088" start="4043" end="4049" title="ruby" label="rubies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629394" start="4231" end="4244" title="Perisher Blue" label="Perisher Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342997" start="4554" end="4573" title="Robert Clyde Packer" label="Robert Clyde Packer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819581" start="4928" end="4941" title="The Daily Telegraph (Sydney)" label="The Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q550179" start="5679" end="5688" title="Alan Bond (businessman)" label="Alan Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="5718" end="5730" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976628" start="6042" end="6048" title="Foxtel" label="Foxtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q721830" start="6049" end="6055" title="pay TV" label="pay TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077012" start="6226" end="6229" title="Annual General Meeting" label="AGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138875" start="6385" end="6402" title="subordinated debt" label="subordinated debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="6928" end="6942" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669731" start="7067" end="7072" title="TCN-9" label="TCN-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823506" start="7162" end="7201" title="Australia&amp;#x27;s Naughtiest Home Videos" label="Australia&amp;#x27;s Naughtiest Home Videos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300771" start="7218" end="7229" title="Doug Mulray" label="Doug Mulray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642619" start="7256" end="7277" title="List of television series cancelled after one episode" label="first and only airing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393218" start="7954" end="7961" title="Fairfax Media" label="Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="8630" end="8643" title="Seven Network" label="Seven Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q131758" start="8697" end="8717" title="Desperate Housewives" label="Desperate Housewives"/>
<link wikidata="Q23567" start="8734" end="8738" title="Lost (2004 TV series)" label="Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349761" start="8883" end="8903" title="World Series Cricket" label="World Series Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="8982" end="8989" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038289" start="9174" end="9184" title="Tony Greig" label="Tony Greig"/>
<link wikidata="Q330136" start="9842" end="9845" title="Melbourne Cricket Ground" label="MCG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002584" start="9971" end="9995" title="Australian Cricket Board" label="Australian Cricket Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369683" start="10326" end="10339" title="Ross Turnbull (rugby union)" label="Ross Turnbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="10378" end="10389" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210183" start="10559" end="10565" title="SANZAR" label="SANZAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339152" start="10586" end="10598" title="News Limited" label="News Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q855988" start="10644" end="10652" title="Super Rugby" label="Super 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q58344" start="10657" end="10675" title="The Rugby Championship" label="Tri Nations Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081507" start="11162" end="11175" title="Francis James" label="Francis James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328037" start="11197" end="11212" title="Richard Neville (writer)" label="Richard Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="11930" end="11947" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="12031" end="12050" title="Tax evasion" label="tax evasion schemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q645011" start="12088" end="12099" title="Corporate tax" label="company tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056112" start="12200" end="12226" title="Australian Taxation Office" label="Australian Taxation Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175134" start="12308" end="12327" title="Costigan Commission" label="Costigan Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351221" start="12404" end="12410" title="Goanna" label="Goanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="12475" end="12490" title="Organized crime" label="organised crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="12502" end="12518" title="Illegal drug trade" label="drug trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q927550" start="12603" end="12619" title="Malcolm Turnbull" label="Malcolm Turnbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818607" start="12669" end="12685" title="Attorney-General of Australia" label="Attorney-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555551" start="12686" end="12698" title="Lionel Bowen" label="Lionel Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q841470" start="13348" end="13356" title="Vegemite" label="Vegemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q739882" start="13450" end="13455" title="Glock" label="Glock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923011" start="13679" end="13693" title="Sporting boycott of South Africa during the apartheid era" label="sports boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="13697" end="13706" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q153081" start="13945" end="13957" title="Soweto riots" label="Soweto riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q214473" start="13975" end="13985" title="Steve Biko" label="Steve Biko"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="14158" end="14171" title="poliomyelitis" label="poliomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q96395160" start="14212" end="14221" title="Negative pressure ventilator" label="iron lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839451" start="14691" end="14703" title="Trevor Sykes" label="Trevor Sykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5733716" start="14887" end="14903" title="Herbert Bullmore" label="Herbert Bullmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="14920" end="14954" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="Scotland national rugby union team"/>
<link wikidata="Q599903" start="14989" end="14996" title="Ireland national rugby union team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962701" start="15104" end="15117" title="Roslyn Packer" label="Roslyn Packer"/>
<link wikidata="Q69647722" start="15174" end="15180" title="Gretel Packer" label="Gretel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15512232" start="15735" end="15747" title="Ita Buttrose" label="Ita Buttrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q390216" start="15916" end="15941" title="The Sydney Morning Herald" label="The Sydney Morning Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460433" start="16145" end="16170" title="List of Australian Leaders of the Opposition" label="federal opposition leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q927550" start="16209" end="16225" title="Malcolm Turnbull" label="Malcolm Turnbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767672" start="16307" end="16320" title="Annabel Crabb" label="Annabel Crabb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325289" start="16720" end="16742" title="South Sydney Rabbitohs" label="South Sydney Rabbitohs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140630" start="16750" end="16771" title="National Rugby League" label="National Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824608" start="16812" end="16840" title="Australian Republic Movement" label="Australian Republic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q134211" start="16872" end="16876" title="polo" label="polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537398" start="16901" end="16919" title="Gonzalo Pieres Sr." label="Gonzalo Pieres Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1540459" start="16992" end="17006" title="Campeonato Argentino Abierto de Polo" label="Argentine Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q55099144" start="17062" end="17073" title="Fyning Hill" label="Fyning Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q171428" start="17334" end="17350" title="Roman Abramovich" label="Roman Abramovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q713960" start="17658" end="17674" title="MGM Grand Las Vegas" label="MGM Grand Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q745608" start="17678" end="17687" title="Las Vegas Strip" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q845846" start="18133" end="18152" title="The Strat (Las Vegas)" label="Stratosphere Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="18162" end="18167" title="Texas" label="Texan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934114" start="18432" end="18442" title="Bob Stupak" label="Bob Stupak"/>
<link wikidata="Q389438" start="18817" end="18826" title="John Daly (golfer)" label="John Daly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18845" end="18862" title="Nelk#Full Send Podcast" label="Full Send Podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200583" start="18897" end="18914" title="Desert Inn" label="Desert Inn Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309059" start="18942" end="18952" title="Wynn Las Vegas" label="Wynn Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481002" start="19124" end="19134" title="The Ritz Hotel, London" label="Ritz Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="19362" end="19375" title="Heart attack" label="heart attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q116980481" start="19408" end="19420" title="Warwick Farm Racecourse" label="Warwick Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989450" start="19476" end="19491" title="clinical death" label="clinically dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q186020" start="19623" end="19637" title="Coronary artery bypass surgery" label="bypass surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557223" start="19643" end="19658" title="Victor Chang" label="Dr Victor Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q954202" start="19735" end="19748" title="defibrillator" label="defibrillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741948" start="19903" end="19939" title="Ambulance Service of New South Wales" label="Ambulance Service of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q954202" start="20039" end="20054" title="Packer Whackers" label="Packer Whackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339751" start="20071" end="20083" title="Nick Greiner" label="Nick Greiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="20435" end="20463" title="Nihilism" label="do what you bloody well like"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="20504" end="20510" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="20590" end="20600" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q105196" start="20664" end="20679" title="Organ transplant" label="transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824717" start="20778" end="20794" title="Australian Story" label="Australian Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="20979" end="20982" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018090" start="21093" end="21105" title="David Hookes" label="David Hookes"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="21139" end="21153" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q202301" start="21417" end="21425" title="Kidney dialysis" label="dialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276322" start="21538" end="21554" title="die with dignity" label="die with dignity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365199" start="21658" end="21667" title="Ellerston" label="Ellerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026207" start="21674" end="21679" title="Scone, New South Wales" label="Scone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638164" start="21687" end="21700" title="Hunter Valley" label="Hunter Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15634161" start="21949" end="21966" title="Nic Fiddian-Green" label="Nic Fiddian-Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="22194" end="22216" title="state funeral" label="state memorial service"/>
<link wikidata="Q45178" start="22260" end="22278" title="Sydney Opera House" label="Sydney Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830529" start="22469" end="22479" title="Alan Jones (talkback host)" label="Alan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q129817" start="22557" end="22570" title="Russell Crowe" label="Russell Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q51330" start="22648" end="22659" title="John Howard" label="John Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739019" start="22680" end="22693" title="Richie Benaud" label="Richie Benaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="22714" end="22724" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q174346" start="22773" end="22785" title="Katie Holmes" label="Katie Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q381941" start="22787" end="22798" title="Greg Norman" label="Greg Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q142555" start="22815" end="22838" title="Australian cricket team" label="Australian cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q269372" start="22957" end="22966" title="Bob Hawke" label="Bob Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15576" start="22999" end="23028" title="University of South Australia" label="University of South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394617" start="23079" end="23102" title="Kerry Packer Foundation" label="Kerry Packer Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23111" end="23142" title="Paper Giants: The Birth of Cleo" label="Paper Giants: The Birth of Cleo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903631" start="23157" end="23188" title="Howzat! Kerry Packer&amp;#x27;s War" label="Howzat! Kerry Packer&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23203" end="23230" title="Paper Giants: Magazine Wars" label="Paper Giants: Magazine Wars"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23245" end="23280" title="Power Games: The Packer-Murdoch War" label="Power Games: The Packer-Murdoch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119021" start="23289" end="23305" title="Super League war" label="Super League war"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173688" wikidata="Q213027" url="?curid=173688" title="Enoch">
<text>Enoch () is a biblical figure and patriarch prior to Noah&#x27;s flood, and the son of Jared and father of Methuselah. He was of the Antediluvian period in the Hebrew Bible. 

The text of the Book of Genesis says Enoch lived 365 years before he was taken by God. The text reads that Enoch &quot;walked with God: and he was no more; for God took him&quot; (), which is interpreted as Enoch entering heaven alive in some Jewish and Christian traditions, and interpreted differently in others.

Enoch is the subject of many Jewish and Christian traditions. He was considered the author of the Book of Enoch and also called the scribe of judgment. In the New Testament, Enoch is referenced in the Gospel of Luke, the Epistle to the Hebrews, and in the Epistle of Jude, the last of which also quotes from it. In the Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Oriental Orthodoxy, he is venerated as a Saint. 

The name of Enoch (Hebrew: חֲנוֹךְ &quot;Ḥănōḵ&quot;) derives from the Hebrew root חנך (&quot;ḥ-n-ḵ&quot;), meaning to train, initiate, dedicate, inaugurate, with חֲנוֹךְ/חֲנֹךְ (&quot;Ḥănōḵ&quot;) being the imperative form of the verb.

==Book of Genesis==
Enoch appears in the Book of Genesis of the Pentateuch as the seventh of the ten pre-Deluge Patriarchs. Genesis states that each of the pre-Flood Patriarchs lived for several centuries. Genesis 5 provides a genealogy of these ten figures (from Adam to Noah), providing the age at which each fathered the next, and the age of each figure at death. Enoch is considered by many to be the exception, who is said to &quot;not see death&quot; (). Furthermore, states that Enoch lived for 365 years, which is shorter than other pre-Flood Patriarchs, who are all recorded as dying at over 700 years of age. The brief account of Enoch in Genesis 5 ends with the cryptic note that &quot;he was not; for God took him&quot;. This happens 57 years after Adam&#x27;s death and 69 years before Noah&#x27;s birth.

==Books of Enoch (Apocryphal)==

Three extensive Apocrypha are attributed to Enoch:
*The Book of Enoch (aka 1 Enoch), composed in Hebrew or Aramaic and preserved in Ge&#x27;ez, first brought to Europe by James Bruce from Ethiopia and translated into English by August Dillmann and Reverent Schoode – recognized by the Orthodox Tewahedo churches and usually dated between the third century BC and the first century AD. 
*2 Enoch (aka Book of the Secrets of Enoch), preserved in Old Church Slavonic, and first translated in English by William Morfill – usually dated to the first century AD.
*3 Enoch, a Rabbinic text in Hebrew usually dated to the fifth century AD.
These recount how Enoch was taken up to Heaven and was appointed guardian of all the celestial treasures, chief of the archangels, and the immediate attendant on the Throne of God. He was subsequently taught all secrets and mysteries and, with all the angels at his back, fulfills of his own accord whatever comes out of the mouth of God, executing His decrees. Some esoteric literature, such as 3 Enoch, identifies Enoch as Metatron, the angel which communicates God&#x27;s word. In consequence, Enoch was seen, by this literature and the Rabbinic kabbalah of Jewish mysticism, as the one who communicated God&#x27;s revelation to Moses, and, in particular, as the dictator of the Book of Jubilees.

===In Book of Giants===
The Book of Giants is a Jewish pseudepigraphal work from the third century BC and resembles the Book of Enoch. Fragments from at least six and as many as eleven copies were found among the Dead Sea Scrolls collections.

===Septuagint===
The third-century BC translators who produced the Septuagint in Koine Greek rendered the phrase &quot;God took him&quot; with the Greek verb &quot;metatithemi&quot; () meaning moving from one place to another. Sirach 44:16, from about the same period, states that &quot;Enoch pleased God and was translated into paradise that he may give repentance to the nations.&quot; The Greek word used here for paradise, &quot;paradeisos&quot; (), was derived from an ancient Persian word meaning &quot;enclosed garden&quot;, and was used in the Septuagint to describe the garden of Eden. Later, however, the term became synonymous for heaven, as is the case here.

===In Classical Rabbinism===
In classical Rabbinical literature, there are various views of Enoch. One view regarding Enoch that was found in the Targum Pseudo-Jonathan, which thought of Enoch as a pious man, taken to Heaven, and receiving the title of &quot;Safra rabba&quot; (&quot;Great scribe&quot;). After Christianity was completely separated from Judaism, this view became the prevailing rabbinical idea of Enoch&#x27;s character and exaltation.

According to Rashi [from Genesis Rabbah], &quot;Enoch was a righteous man, but he could easily be swayed to return to do evil. Therefore, the Holy One, blessed be He, hastened and took him away and caused him to die before his time. For this reason, Scripture changed [the wording] in [the account of] his demise and wrote, &#x27;and he was no longer&#x27; in the world to complete his years.&quot;

Among the minor Midrashim, esoteric attributes of Enoch are expanded upon. In the &quot;Sefer Hekalot&quot;, Rabbi Ishmael is described as having visited the Seventh Heaven, where he met Enoch, who claims that earth had, in his time, been corrupted by the demons Shammazai, and Azazel, and so Enoch was taken to Heaven to prove that God was not cruel. Similar traditions are recorded in Sirach. Later elaborations of this interpretation treated Enoch as having been a pious ascetic, who, called to mix with others, preached repentance, and gathered (despite the small number of people on Earth) a vast collection of disciples, to the extent that he was proclaimed king. Under his wisdom, peace is said to have reigned on earth, to the extent that he is summoned to Heaven to rule over the &quot;sons of God&quot;.

==In Christianity==
===New Testament===
The New Testament contains three references to Enoch.
*The first is a brief mention in one of the genealogies of the ancestors of Jesus in the Gospel of Luke. (Luke 3:37).
*The second mention is in the Epistle to the Hebrews which says, &quot;By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and was not found, because God had translated him: for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God.&quot; (Hebrews 11:5 KJV). This suggests he did not experience the mortal death ascribed to Adam&#x27;s other descendants, which is consistent with Genesis 5:24 KJV, which says, &quot;And Enoch walked with God: and he &quot;[was]&quot; not; for God took him.&quot;
*The third mention is in the Epistle of Jude (1:14–15) where the author attributes to &quot;Enoch, the Seventh from Adam&quot; a passage not found in Catholic and Protestant canons of the Old Testament. The quotation is believed by most modern scholars to be taken from 1 Enoch 1:9 which exists in Greek, in Ge&#x27;ez (as part of the Ethiopian Orthodox canon), and also in Aramaic among the Dead Sea Scrolls. Though the same scholars recognise that 1 Enoch 1:9 itself is a midrash of Deuteronomy 33:2.

The introductory phrase &quot;Enoch, the Seventh from Adam&quot; is also found in 1 Enoch (1 En. 60:8), though not in the Old Testament. In the New Testament this Enoch prophesies &quot;to&quot; ungodly men, that God shall come with His holy ones to judge and convict them ().

===Influence in Christianity===

The Book of Enoch was excluded from both the Hebrew Tanakh and the Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible, the Septuagint. It was not considered canon by either Jewish or early Christian readers. However, Church Fathers such as Justin Martyr, Athenagoras of Athens, Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria, Origen, Tertullian, and Lactantius all speak highly of Enoch and contain many allusions to the Book of Enoch as well as in some instances advocating explicitly for the use of the Book of Enoch as Scripture.

The letter of Jude&#x27;s citation of the Book of Enoch as prophetic text encouraged acceptance and usage of the Book of Enoch in early Christian circles. The main themes of Enoch about the Watchers corrupting humanity were commonly mentioned in early literature. This positive treatment of the Book of Enoch was associated with millennialism which was popular in the early Church. When amillennialism began to be common in Christianity, the Book of Enoch, being incompatible with amillennialism, came to be widely rejected. After the split of the Oriental Orthodox Church from the Catholic Church in the 5th century, use of the Book of Enoch was limited primarily to the Oriental Orthodox Church. Eventually, the usage of the Book of Enoch became limited to Ethiopian circles of the Oriental Orthodox Church.

Another common element that some Church Fathers, like John of Damascus, spoke of, was that they considered Enoch to be one of the two witnesses mentioned in the Book of Revelation. This view still has many supporters today in Christianity.

===In Mormonism===
Among the Latter Day Saint movement and particularly in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Enoch is viewed as having founded an exceptionally righteous city, named Zion, in the midst of an otherwise wicked world. This view is encountered in the standard works, the &quot;Pearl of Great Price&quot; and the &quot;Doctrine and Covenants&quot;, which states that not only Enoch, but the entire peoples of the city of Zion, were taken off this earth without death, because of their piety. (Zion is defined as &quot;the pure in heart&quot; and this city of Zion will return to the earth at the Second Coming of Jesus.) The &quot;Doctrine and Covenants&quot; further states that Enoch prophesied that one of his descendants, Noah, and his family, would survive a Great Flood and thus carry on the human race and preserve the Scripture. The Book of Moses in the &quot;Pearl of Great Price&quot; includes chapters that give an account of Enoch&#x27;s preaching, visions, and conversations with God. They provide details concerning the wars, violence and natural disasters in Enoch&#x27;s day, but also reference the miracles performed by Enoch.

The Book of Moses is itself an excerpt from Joseph Smith&#x27;s translation of the Bible, which is published in full, complete with these chapters concerning Enoch, by Community of Christ, in the &quot;Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible&quot;, where it appears as part of the Book of Genesis. D&amp;C 104:24 (CofC) / (LDS) states that Adam ordained Enoch to the higher priesthood (now called the priesthood of Melchizedek, after the great king and high priest) at age 25, that he was 65 when Adam blessed him, and that he lived for an additional 365 years until he and his city were blessed, making Enoch 430 years old at the time that &quot;he was not, for God took him&quot; (Genesis 5:24).

Additionally in LDS theology, Enoch is implied to be the scribe who recorded Adam&#x27;s blessings and prophecies at Adam-ondi-Ahman, as recorded in D&amp;C (LDS) / D&amp;C 104:29b (CofC).

==Other religions==

===In Islam===
Most Muslims identify Enoch with as the Qur&#x27;anic prophet Idris. However, some etymological research suggests that the Greek version of the name Ezra (Esdras) is a more plausible origin for the name Idris.

Aside from Enoch and Ezra, Idris is also frequently identified as Hermes Trismegistus. This Hermetic identification of Idris isn&#x27;t necessarily exclusive to his identification as a Biblical figure. While there is some dispute over whether or not Idris was Hermes Trismegistus, those who interpret Idris as Hermes Trismegistus also generally agree he was a Biblical prophet. 

===In Theosophy===
According to the theosophist Helena Blavatsky, the Jewish Enoch (or the Greek demigod Hermes) was &quot;the first Grand Master and Founder of Freemasonry.&quot;

===In Samaritanism===
According to the Asatir, Enoch was buried in Mount Ebal.

==Genealogy==
==See also==
*Adam and Eve (LDS Church)
*New Adam
*Entering heaven alive
*Hermes Trismegistus
*Metatron

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
==External links==

* The Descendants of Adam, The Legacy of Cain, The Souls Elijah and Enoch
* Catholic Encyclopedia &quot;Henoch&quot; (1914)
* Andrei A. Orlov essays on 2 Enoch: &quot;Enoch as the Heavenly Priest&quot;, &quot;Enoch as the Expert in Secrets&quot;, &quot;Enoch as the Scribe&quot; and &quot;Enoch as the Mediator&quot;
* Ed. Philip P. Wiener &quot;Dictionary of the History of Ideas&quot;: Cosmic Voyages (1973)
* Dr. Reed C. Durham, Jr. Comparison of Masonic legends of Enoch and Mormon scriptures description of Enoch (1974)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213027" start="0" end="5" title="Enoch" label="Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189541" start="34" end="43" title="Patriarchs (Bible)" label="patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532837" start="53" end="70" title="Noah&amp;#x27;s flood" label="Noah&amp;#x27;s flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q927410" start="87" end="92" title="Jared (biblical figure)" label="Jared"/>
<link wikidata="Q156290" start="107" end="117" title="Methuselah" label="Methuselah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771131" start="133" end="145" title="Antediluvian" label="Antediluvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="192" end="207" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363686" start="389" end="410" title="entering heaven alive" label="entering heaven alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q220890" start="590" end="603" title="Book of Enoch" label="Book of Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q39939" start="693" end="707" title="Gospel of Luke" label="Gospel of Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q128608" start="713" end="735" title="Epistle to the Hebrews" label="Epistle to the Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q131466" start="748" end="763" title="Epistle of Jude" label="Epistle of Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="811" end="826" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="828" end="845" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="851" end="869" title="Oriental Orthodoxy" label="Oriental Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="892" end="897" title="Saint" label="Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="920" end="927" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew:"/>
<link wikidata="Q266273" start="979" end="983" title="Hebrew root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q22716" start="1109" end="1124" title="imperative form" label="imperative form"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="1132" end="1136" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="1180" end="1195" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="1203" end="1213" title="Pentateuch" label="Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532837" start="1244" end="1250" title="Genesis flood narrative" label="Deluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189541" start="1251" end="1261" title="Patriarchs (Bible)" label="Patriarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092752" start="2007" end="2016" title="Apocrypha" label="Apocrypha"/>
<link wikidata="Q220890" start="2043" end="2060" title="Book of Enoch" label="The Book of Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="2088" end="2094" title="Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="2098" end="2105" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35667" start="2123" end="2133" title="Ge&amp;#x27;ez" label="Ge&amp;#x27;ez"/>
<link wikidata="Q348489" start="2162" end="2173" title="James Bruce" label="James Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104499" start="2276" end="2293" title="Orthodox Tewahedo" label="Orthodox Tewahedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q516792" start="2378" end="2385" title="Second Book of Enoch" label="2 Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="2435" end="2454" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="Old Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257262" start="2549" end="2556" title="3 Enoch" label="3 Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="2663" end="2669" title="Heaven" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q178342" start="2742" end="2751" title="archangel" label="archangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920452" start="2789" end="2802" title="Throne of God" label="Throne of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q651204" start="3048" end="3056" title="Metatron" label="Metatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="3172" end="3180" title="kabbalah" label="kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q843946" start="3305" end="3321" title="Book of Jubilees" label="Book of Jubilees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399452" start="3348" end="3366" title="The Book of Giants" label="The Book of Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q827597" start="3379" end="3393" title="pseudepigrapha" label="pseudepigrapha"/>
<link wikidata="Q145780" start="3537" end="3553" title="Dead Sea Scrolls" label="Dead Sea Scrolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="3635" end="3645" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="3649" end="3660" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q155980" start="3795" end="3801" title="Sirach" label="Sirach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363340" start="3897" end="3905" title="paradise" label="paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363340" start="3985" end="3993" title="paradise" label="paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919751" start="4386" end="4408" title="Targum Pseudo-Jonathan" label="Targum Pseudo-Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26456" start="4707" end="4712" title="Rashi" label="Rashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897028" start="4719" end="4733" title="Genesis Rabbah" label="Genesis Rabbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q202344" start="5110" end="5117" title="Midrash" label="Midrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667032" start="5252" end="5266" title="Seven Heavens" label="Seventh Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q721135" start="5372" end="5378" title="Azazel" label="Azazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39939" start="6092" end="6106" title="Gospel of Luke" label="Gospel of Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q128608" start="6151" end="6173" title="Epistle to the Hebrews" label="Epistle to the Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q131466" start="6667" end="6682" title="Epistle of Jude" label="Epistle of Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q220890" start="6908" end="6915" title="Book of Enoch" label="1 Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q145780" start="7030" end="7046" title="Dead Sea Scrolls" label="Dead Sea Scrolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q202344" start="7112" end="7119" title="midrash" label="midrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="7286" end="7299" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q185117" start="7680" end="7693" title="Justin Martyr" label="Justin Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q309772" start="7695" end="7716" title="Athenagoras of Athens" label="Athenagoras of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="7718" end="7726" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188883" start="7728" end="7749" title="Clement of Alexandria" label="Clement of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170472" start="7751" end="7757" title="Origen" label="Origen"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="7759" end="7769" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q209102" start="7775" end="7785" title="Lactantius" label="Lactantius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567687" start="8288" end="8301" title="millennialism" label="millennialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q471317" start="8346" end="8360" title="amillennialism" label="amillennialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51884" start="8824" end="8840" title="John of Damascus" label="John of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914972" start="8900" end="8913" title="two witnesses" label="two witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="8931" end="8949" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="9040" end="9065" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="9086" end="9133" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146159" start="9208" end="9212" title="Zion (Latter Day Saints)" label="Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847515" start="9289" end="9303" title="standard works" label="standard works"/>
<link wikidata="Q459864" start="9315" end="9335" title="Pearl of Great Price (Mormonism)" label="Pearl of Great Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q462463" start="9356" end="9378" title="Doctrine and Covenants" label="Doctrine and Covenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014374" start="9469" end="9503" title="translation (Latter Day Saints)" label="taken off this earth without death"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="9633" end="9646" title="Second Coming" label="Second Coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="9650" end="9655" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81422" start="9763" end="9767" title="Noah" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257242" start="9878" end="9891" title="Book of Moses" label="Book of Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="10226" end="10238" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q625363" start="10350" end="10369" title="Community of Christ" label="Community of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462340" start="10384" end="10421" title="Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible" label="Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812038" start="10581" end="10606" title="priesthood of Melchizedek" label="priesthood of Melchizedek"/>
<link wikidata="Q70899" start="10956" end="10960" title="Adam" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112714" start="10996" end="11011" title="Adam-ondi-Ahman" label="Adam-ondi-Ahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q327375" start="11167" end="11172" title="Idris (prophet)" label="Idris"/>
<link wikidata="Q191787" start="11254" end="11258" title="Ezra" label="Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q192358" start="11382" end="11401" title="Hermes Trismegistus" label="Hermes Trismegistus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192933" start="11408" end="11416" title="Hermeticism" label="Hermetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="11732" end="11743" title="theosophy" label="theosophist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189454" start="11744" end="11760" title="Helena Blavatsky" label="Helena Blavatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q466470" start="11793" end="11800" title="demigod" label="demigod"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="11801" end="11807" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940122" start="11829" end="11841" title="Grand Master (Masonic)" label="Grand Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="11857" end="11868" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523217" start="11912" end="11922" title="the Asatir" label="the Asatir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975866" start="11944" end="11954" title="Mount Ebal" label="Mount Ebal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680016" start="11985" end="12010" title="Adam and Eve (LDS Church)" label="Adam and Eve (LDS Church)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494109" start="12012" end="12020" title="New Adam" label="New Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363686" start="12022" end="12043" title="Entering heaven alive" label="Entering heaven alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q192358" start="12045" end="12064" title="Hermes Trismegistus" label="Hermes Trismegistus"/>
<link wikidata="Q651204" start="12066" end="12074" title="Metatron" label="Metatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q516792" start="12291" end="12298" title="2 Enoch" label="2 Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q93266220" start="12462" end="12478" title="Philip P. Wiener" label="Philip P. Wiener"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173691" wikidata="Q215855" url="?curid=173691" title="Jeff Buckley">
<text>Jeffrey Scott Buckley (raised as Scott Moorhead; November 17, 1966 – May 29, 1997) was an American singer-songwriter. After a decade as a session guitarist in Los Angeles, Buckley attracted a following in the early 1990s performing at venues in East Village, Manhattan such as Sin-é. He signed with Columbia, recruited a band, and released his only studio album, &quot;Grace&quot;, in 1994.

Buckley toured extensively to promote &quot;Grace&quot;, including concerts in the U.S., Europe, Japan, and Australia. In 1996, he worked on his second album, &quot;My Sweetheart the Drunk,&quot; in New York City with the producer Tom Verlaine. In 1997, he resumed work after moving to Memphis, Tennessee, recording four-track demos and playing weekly solo shows in Memphis. On May 29, while awaiting the arrival of his band from New York, Buckley drowned while swimming in the Wolf River, a tributary of the Mississippi. Posthumous releases include a collection of four-track demos and studio recordings for &quot;My Sweetheart the Drunk&quot;, and reissues of &quot;Grace&quot; and the &quot;Live at Sin-é&quot; EP.

After Buckley&#x27;s death, his critical standing grew, and he has been cited as an influence by singers such as Thom Yorke of Radiohead and Matt Bellamy of Muse. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; included &quot;Grace&quot; in three of its lists of the 500 greatest albums, named Buckley&#x27;s version of the Leonard Cohen song &quot;Hallelujah&quot; one of the 500 greatest songs, and included &quot;Grace&quot; in its list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. In 2014, Buckley&#x27;s version of &quot;Hallelujah&quot; was inducted into the American Library of Congress&#x27; National Recording Registry.

==Early life==
Born in Anaheim, California, Buckley was the only son of Mary ( Guibert) and the singer-songwriter Tim Buckley. His mother was a Zonian of Greek, English, French and Panamanian descent, while his father was the son of an Irish American father and an Italian American mother. Buckley was raised by his mother and stepfather, Ron Moorhead, in Southern California, and had a half-brother, Corey Moorhead. Buckley moved many times in and around Orange County while growing up, an upbringing he called &quot;rootless trailer trash&quot;. As a child, Buckley was known as Scott &quot;Scottie&quot; Moorhead, based on his middle name and his stepfather&#x27;s surname.

Buckley&#x27;s biological father, Tim Buckley, released a series of folk and jazz albums in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Jeff said they met only once, when he was eight. After Tim died of a drug overdose in 1975, Jeff chose to go by Buckley and his given name, Jeff, which he found on his birth certificate. To members of his family he remained &quot;Scottie&quot;.

Buckley was brought up around music; his mother was a classically trained pianist and cellist, and his stepfather introduced him to Led Zeppelin, Queen, Jimi Hendrix, the Who, and Pink Floyd at an early age. Led Zeppelin&#x27;s &quot;Physical Graffiti&quot; was the first album he owned, and said the hard rock band Kiss was an early favorite. He grew up singing around the house and in harmony with his mother, and said all his family sang. He began playing guitar at the age of five after discovering an acoustic guitar in his grandmother&#x27;s closet. At age 12, he decided to become a musician and received his first electric guitar, a black Les Paul, at age 13. He attended Loara High School and played in the school jazz band; during this time, he developed an affinity for progressive rock bands Rush, Genesis, and Yes, and the jazz fusion guitarist Al Di Meola. He told MuchMusic about the era that inspired him: &quot;I grew up late &#x27;60s, early &#x27;70s, &#x27;80s, so I observed Joni Mitchell, I observed the Smiths and Siouxsie and the Banshees. That turns me on completely&quot;.

After graduating from high school, Buckley moved to Hollywood to attend the Musicians Institute, completing a one-year course at age 19. Buckley later said the school was &quot;the biggest waste of time&quot;, but said in another interview that he had appreciated studying music theory: &quot;I was attracted to really interesting harmonies, stuff that I would hear in Ravel, Ellington, Bartók.&quot;

==Career==
In Los Angeles, Buckley spent six years working in a hotel and playing guitar in various bands, playing in styles from jazz, reggae, and roots rock to heavy metal. He toured with the dancehall reggae artist Shinehead and played occasional funk and R&amp;B studio sessions, collaborating with the fledgling producer Michael J. Clouse to form X-Factor Productions. From 1988 to 1989, Buckley played in a band, the Wild Blue Yonder, that included John Humphrey and future Tool member Danny Carey. Buckley limited his singing to backing vocals.

Buckley moved to New York City in February 1990 but found few opportunities to work as a musician. He was introduced to Qawwali, the Sufi devotional music of Pakistan, and Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, one of its best-known singers. Buckley was an impassioned fan of Khan, and during what he called his &quot;café days&quot;, he often covered Khan&#x27;s songs. In January 1996, he interviewed Khan for &quot;Interview&quot; and wrote liner notes for Khan&#x27;s &quot;Supreme Collection, Vol. 1&quot; compilation. He also became interested in the blues musician Robert Johnson and the hardcore punk band Bad Brains during this time.

Buckley moved back to Los Angeles in September when his father&#x27;s former manager, Herb Cohen, offered to help him record his first demo of original songs. Buckley completed &quot;Babylon Dungeon Sessions&quot;, a four-song cassette that included the songs &quot;Eternal Life&quot;, &quot;Last Goodbye&quot;, &quot;Strawberry Street&quot; and punk screamer &quot;Radio&quot;. Cohen and Buckley hoped to attract industry attention with the demo tape.

Buckley flew back to New York early the following year to make his public singing debut at a tribute concert for his father, Greetings from Tim Buckley. The event, produced by show Hal Willner, was held at St. Ann&#x27;s Church in Brooklyn on April 26, 1991. Buckley rejected the idea of the concert as a springboard to his career, instead citing personal reasons regarding his decision to sing at the tribute.

Accompanied by the experimental rock guitarist Gary Lucas, Buckley performed &quot;I Never Asked To Be Your Mountain&quot;, a song Tim Buckley wrote about the infant Jeff and his mother. He returned to play &quot;Sefronia – The King&#x27;s Chain&quot;, &quot;Phantasmagoria in Two&quot;, and concluded with &quot;Once I Was&quot; performed acoustically with an impromptu a cappella ending, due to a snapped guitar string. Willner, the show&#x27;s organizer, recalled that Buckley made a strong impression. Buckley&#x27;s performance was counter to his desire to distance himself musically from his father; he later said: &quot;It wasn&#x27;t my work, it wasn&#x27;t my life. But it bothered me that I hadn&#x27;t been to his funeral, that I&#x27;d never been able to tell him anything. I used that show to pay my last respects.&quot; The concert proved to Buckley&#x27;s first step into the music industry that had eluded him for years.

On subsequent trips to New York in mid-1991, Buckley began co-writing with Gary Lucas, resulting in the songs &quot;Grace&quot; and &quot;Mojo Pin&quot;. In late 1991, he began performing with Lucas&#x27;s band Gods and Monsters in New York City. After being offered a development deal as a member of Gods and Monsters at Imago Records, Buckley moved to the Lower East Side, Manhattan, at the end of 1991. The day after Gods and Monsters officially debuted in March 1992, he decided to leave the band.

Buckley began performing at several clubs and cafés around Lower Manhattan, and Sin-é became his main venue. He first appeared at Sin-é in April 1992 and quickly earned a regular Monday night slot there. His repertoire consisted of a diverse range of folk, rock, R&amp;B, blues, and jazz cover songs, much of which he had newly learned. During this period, he discovered singers such as Nina Simone, Billie Holiday, Van Morrison, and Judy Garland. Buckley performed an eclectic selection of covers by artist including Led Zeppelin&#x27;s (&quot;Night Flight&quot;), Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan&#x27;s (&quot;Ye Jo Halka Halka Suroor Hae&quot;), Bob Dylan&#x27;s (&quot;Mama, You&#x27;ve Been On My Mind&quot;), Édith Piaf&#x27;s (&quot;Je ne Connais Pas La Fin&quot;), the Smiths&#x27; (&quot;I Know It&#x27;s Over&quot;), Bad Brains&#x27; (&quot;I Against I&quot;), and Siouxsie Sioux&#x27;s (&quot;Killing Time&quot;). Original songs from the &quot;Babylon Dungeon Sessions&quot; and the songs he had written with Lucas were also included in his set lists. He performed solo, accompanying himself on a Fender Telecaster he borrowed from his friend Janine Nichols. Buckley said he learned how to perform onstage by playing to small audiences.

Over the next few months, Buckley attracted admiring crowds and attention from record label executives, including industry maven Clive Davis dropping by to see him. By mid-1992, limos from executives eager to sign him lined the street outside Sin-é. Buckley signed with Columbia Records, home of Bob Dylan and Bruce Springsteen, for a three-album deal for nearly in October 1992. He spent three days in February 1993 in a studio with the engineer Steve Addabbo and the Columbia A&amp;R representative Steve Berkowitz recording much of his solo repertoire. Buckley sang a cappella and accompanied himself on acoustic and electric guitars, Wurlitzer electric piano, and harmonium. The tapes remain unreleased, but much of the material appeared on Buckley&#x27;s debut album, &quot;Grace&quot;. Recording dates were set for July and August 1993 for what would become Buckley&#x27;s recording debut, an EP of four songs, including a cover of Van Morrison&#x27;s &quot;The Way Young Lovers Do&quot;. The live EP &quot;Live at Sin-é&quot; was released on November 23, 1993.

===&quot;Grace&quot;===

In mid-1993, Buckley began working on his first album with record producer Andy Wallace. Buckley assembled a band, composed of bassist Mick Grøndahl and drummer Matt Johnson, and spent several weeks rehearsing.

In September, the trio headed to Bearsville Studios in Woodstock, New York, to spend six weeks recording basic tracks for what would become &quot;Grace&quot;. Buckley invited ex-bandmate Lucas to play guitar on the songs &quot;Grace&quot; and &quot;Mojo Pin&quot;, and Woodstock-based jazz musician Karl Berger wrote and conducted string arrangements with Buckley assisting at times. Buckley returned home for overdubbing at studios in Manhattan and New Jersey, where he performed take after take to capture the perfect vocals and experimented with ideas for additional instruments and added textures to the songs.

In January 1994, Buckley departed on his first solo North American tour in support of &quot;Live at Sin-é,&quot; followed by a 10-day European tour in March. Buckley played clubs and coffeehouses and made in-store appearances. After returning, Buckley invited guitarist Michael Tighe to join the band and a collaboration between the two resulted in &quot;So Real&quot;, a song recorded with producer/engineer Clif Norrell as a late addition to the album. In June, Buckley began his first full band tour, called the &quot;Peyote Radio Theatre Tour&quot;, which lasted into August. The Pretenders&#x27; Chrissie Hynde, Soundgarden&#x27;s Chris Cornell, and the Edge from U2 were among the attendees of these early shows.

&quot;Grace&quot; was released on August 23, 1994. In addition to seven original songs, the album included three covers: &quot;Lilac Wine&quot;, based on the version by Nina Simone and made famous by Elkie Brooks; &quot;Corpus Christi Carol&quot;, from Benjamin Britten&#x27;s &quot;A Boy was Born&quot;, Op.3, a composition that Buckley was introduced to in high school, based on a 15th-century hymn; and &quot;Hallelujah&quot; by Leonard Cohen, based on John Cale&#x27;s recording from the Cohen tribute album &quot;I&#x27;m Your Fan&quot;. His rendition of &quot;Hallelujah&quot; has been called &quot;Buckley&#x27;s best&quot; and &quot;one of the great songs&quot; by &quot;Time&quot;, and is included on &quot;Happy Mag&quot;&#x27;s list of &quot;The 10 Best Covers Of All Time&quot;, and &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s list of &quot;The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time&quot;.

Sales of &quot;Grace&quot; were slow, and it garnered little radio airplay despite critical acclaim. &quot;The Sydney Morning Herald&quot; proclaimed it &quot;a romantic masterpiece&quot; and a &quot;pivotal, defining work&quot;. Despite slow initial sales, the album went gold in France and Australia over the next two years, achieved gold status in the U.S. in 2002, and sold over six times platinum in Australia in 2006.

&quot;Grace&quot; won appreciation from a number of revered musicians and artists, including members of Buckley&#x27;s biggest influence, Led Zeppelin. Jimmy Page considered &quot;Grace&quot; close to being his &quot;favorite album of the decade&quot;. Robert Plant was also complimentary, as was Brad Pitt, saying of Buckley&#x27;s work, &quot;There&#x27;s an undercurrent to his music, there&#x27;s something you can&#x27;t pinpoint. Like the best of films, or the best of art, there&#x27;s something going on underneath, and there&#x27;s a truth there. And I find his stuff absolutely haunting. It just ... it&#x27;s under my skin.&quot; Others who had influenced Buckley&#x27;s music lauded him: Bob Dylan named Buckley &quot;one of the great songwriters of this decade&quot;, and, in an interview with &quot;The Village Voice&quot;, David Bowie named &quot;Grace&quot; one of 10 albums he would bring with him to a desert island. In 2010, the Smiths singer Morrissey, one of Buckley&#x27;s influences, named &quot;Grace&quot; one of his favorite albums.

===Concert tours===
Buckley spent much of the next year and a half touring internationally to promote &quot;Grace&quot;. Following Buckley&#x27;s &quot;Peyote Radio Theater&quot; tour, the band began a European tour on August 23, 1994, starting with performances in the UK and Ireland. The tour continued in Scandinavia and, throughout September, numerous concerts in Germany were played. The tour ended on September 22 with a concert in Paris. A gig on September 24 in New York dovetailed with the end of the European tour and Buckley and band spent the next month relaxing and rehearsing.

A tour of Canada and the U.S. began on October 19, 1994, at CBGB. The tour was far reaching with concerts held on both East and West Coasts of the U.S. and a number of performances in central and southern states. The tour ended two months later on December 18 at Maxwell&#x27;s in Hoboken, New Jersey. After another month of rest and rehearsal, the band commenced a second European tour, this time mainly for promotion purposes. The band began the tour in Dublin. The short tour largely consisted of promotional work in London and Paris.

In late January, the band did their first tour of Japan, playing concerts and appearing for promotion of the album and newly released Japanese single &quot;Last Goodbye&quot;. The band returned to Europe on February 6. He toured various Western European countries before returning to the U.S. on March 6. Among the gigs performed during this period, Buckley and his band performed at a 19th-century-built French venue, the Bataclan, and material from the concert was recorded and later released in October of that year as a four track EP, &quot;Live from the Bataclan&quot;. Songs from a performance on February 25, at the venue Nighttown in Rotterdam, were released as a promotional-only CD, &quot;So Real&quot;.

Touring recommenced in April with dates across the U.S. and Canada. During this period, Buckley and the band notably played Metro in Chicago, which was recorded on video and later released as &quot;Live in Chicago&quot; on VHS and later on DVD. In addition, on June 4 they played at Sony Music Studios for the Sony Music radio hour. Following this was a month-long European tour between June 20 and July 18 in which they played many summer music festivals, including the Glastonbury Festival and the 1995 Meltdown Festival (at which Buckley sang Henry Purcell&#x27;s &quot;Dido&#x27;s Lament&quot; at the invitation of Elvis Costello). During the tour, Buckley played two concerts at the Paris Olympia, a venue made famous by the French vocalist Édith Piaf. Although he had failed to fill out smaller American venues at that point of his career, both nights at the large Paris Olympia venue were sold out. Shortly after this Buckley attended the Festival de la Musique Sacrée (Festival of Sacred Music), also held in France, and performed &quot;What Will You Say&quot; as a duet with Alim Qasimov, an Azerbaijani mugham singer. Sony BMG has since released a live album, 2001&#x27;s Live à L&#x27;Olympia, which has a selection of songs from both Olympia performances and the collaboration with Qasimov.

Buckley&#x27;s &quot;Mystery White Boy&quot; tour, playing concerts in both Sydney and Melbourne, Australia, lasted between August 28 and September 6 and recordings of these performances were compiled and released on the live album &quot;Mystery White Boy&quot;. Buckley was so well received during these concerts that his album &quot;Grace&quot; went gold in Australia, selling over 35,000 copies, and taking this into account he decided a longer tour was needed and returned for a tour of New Zealand and Australia in February the following year.

Between the two Oceanian tours, Buckley and the band took a break from touring. Buckley played solo in the meantime with concerts at Sin-é and a New Year&#x27;s Eve concert at Mercury Lounge in New York. After the break, the band spent the majority of February on the &quot;Hard Luck Tour&quot; in Australia and New Zealand, but tensions had risen between the group and drummer Matt Johnson. The concert on March 1, 1996, was the last gig he played with Buckley and his band.

Much of the material from the tours of 1995 and 1996 was recorded and released on either promotional EPs, such as the &quot;Grace EP&quot;, or posthumously on albums, such as &quot;Mystery White Boy&quot; (a reference to Buckley not using his real name) and &quot;Live à L&#x27;Olympia&quot;. Many of the other concerts Buckley played during this period have surfaced on bootleg recordings.

Following Johnson&#x27;s departure, the band, now without a drummer, was put on hold and did not perform live again until February 12, 1997. Due to the pressure from extensive touring, Buckley spent the majority of the year away from the stage. However, from May 2 to 5, he played a short stint as bass guitarist with Mind Science of the Mind, with friend Nathan Larson, then guitarist of Shudder to Think. Buckley returned to playing live concerts when he went on his &quot;phantom solo tour&quot; of cafés in the northeast U.S. in December 1996, appearing under a series of aliases: the Crackrobats, Possessed by Elves, Father Demo, Smackrobiotic, the Halfspeeds, Crit-Club, Topless America, Martha &amp; the Nicotines, and A Puppet Show Named Julio. By way of justification, Buckley posted a note stating he missed the anonymity of playing in cafés and local bars:

=== &quot;My Sweetheart the Drunk&quot; ===
In 1996, Buckley started writing a new album with the working title &quot;My Sweetheart the Drunk&quot;. While working with Patti Smith on her 1996 album &quot;Gone Again&quot;, he met collaborator Tom Verlaine, lead singer of the seminal punk-new wave band Television. Buckley asked Verlaine to be producer on the new album and he agreed. In mid-1996, Buckley and his band began recording sessions in Manhattan with Verlaine, recording &quot;Sky Is a Landfill&quot;, &quot;Vancouver&quot;, &quot;Morning Theft&quot;, and &quot;You and I&quot;. Eric Eidel played the drums through these sessions as a stop-gap after Matt Johnson&#x27;s departure, before Parker Kindred joined as full-time drummer. Around this time, Buckley met Inger Lorre of the Nymphs in an East Village bar and struck up a fast and close friendship. Together, they contributed a track to &quot;&quot;, a Jack Kerouac tribute album. After Lorre&#x27;s backup guitarist for an upcoming album quit the project, Buckley offered to fill in. He became attached to one of the songs from the album, &quot;Yard of Blonde Girls&quot; and recorded a cover. Another recording session in Manhattan followed in early 1997, but Buckley and the band were unsatisfied with the material.

On February 4, 1997, Buckley played a short set at the Knitting Factory&#x27;s tenth anniversary concert featuring a selection of his new songs: &quot;Jewel Box&quot;, &quot;Morning Theft&quot;, &quot;Everybody Here Wants You&quot;, &quot;The Sky is a Landfill&quot; and &quot;Yard of Blonde Girls&quot;. Lou Reed was in attendance and expressed interest in working with Buckley. The band played their first gig with Parker Kindred, their new drummer, at Arlene&#x27;s Grocery in New York on February 9. The set featured much of Buckley&#x27;s new material that would appear on &quot;Sketches for My Sweetheart the Drunk&quot; and a recording has become one of Buckley&#x27;s most widely distributed bootlegs. Later that month, Buckley recorded a spoken word reading of the Edgar Allan Poe poem &quot;Ulalume&quot; for the album &quot;Closed on Account of Rabies&quot;. It was his last recording in New York; shortly after, he moved to Memphis, Tennessee.

Buckley became interested in recording at Easley McCain Recording in Memphis, at the suggestion of friend Dave Shouse from the Grifters. He rented a shotgun house there, of which he was so fond he contacted the owner about purchasing it. From February 12 to May 26, 1997, Buckley played at Barristers&#x27;, a bar located in downtown Memphis, underneath a parking garage. He played there numerous times in order to work through the new material in a live atmosphere, at first with the band, then solo as part of a Monday night residency. In early February, Buckley and the band did a third recording session with Verlaine in Memphis, where they recorded &quot;Everybody Here Wants You&quot;, &quot;Nightmares by the Sea&quot;, &quot;Witches&#x27; Rave&quot; and &quot;Opened Once&quot;, but Buckley expressed his dissatisfaction with the sessions and contacted &quot;Grace&quot; producer Andy Wallace to step in as Verlaine&#x27;s replacement. Buckley started recording demos on his own 4-track recorder in preparation for a forthcoming session with Wallace; some of the demos were sent to his band in New York, who listened to them enthusiastically and were excited to resume work on the album. However, Buckley was not entirely happy with the results and sent his band back to New York while he stayed behind to work on the songs. The band was scheduled to return to Memphis for rehearsals and recording on May 29. After Buckley&#x27;s death, the Verlaine-produced recordings and Buckley&#x27;s demos were released as &quot;Sketches for My Sweetheart the Drunk&quot; in May 1998.

==Musical style==
Buckley&#x27;s voice was a particularly distinguished aspect of his music; he possessed a tenor vocal range, spanning around four octaves. When asked what were the artists that influenced him most, during a press conference in Lyon in 1995, Buckley mentioned several female singers including Joni Mitchell, Nina Simone, Billie Holiday, Patti Smith and Siouxsie Sioux, saying: &quot;Siouxsie, I have much of her influence in my voice&quot;. Buckley made full use of this range in his performances, particularly in the songs from &quot;Grace&quot;, and reached peaks of high G in the tenor range at the culmination of &quot;Grace&quot;. &quot;Corpus Christi Carol&quot; was sung nearly entirely in a high falsetto. The pitch and volume of his singing was also highly variable, showcased in songs &quot;Mojo Pin&quot; and &quot;Dream Brother&quot;, which began with mid-range quieter vocals, before reaching louder, higher peaks near the ending of the songs.

Buckley played guitar in a variety of styles, ranging from the distorted rock of &quot;Sky Is a Landfill&quot;, the jazz of &quot;Strange Fruit&quot;, the country styling of &quot;Lost Highway&quot;, and the guitar fingerpicking style in &quot;Hallelujah&quot;. He occasionally used a slide guitar in live performances as a solo act, as well as for the introduction of &quot;Last Goodbye&quot;, when playing with a full band. His songs were written in various guitar tunings which, apart from the EADGBE standard tuning, included drop D tuning and an open G tuning. His guitar playing style varied from highly melodic songs, such as &quot;The Twelfth of Never&quot;, to more percussive ones, such as &quot;New Year&#x27;s Prayer&quot;.

=== Equipment ===
Buckley mainly played a blonde 1983 Fender Telecaster, which he had re-fretted and modded with a Seymour Duncan Hot Lead Stack in the bridge and a mirror pick guard. In 2020, Matt Bellamy of Muse purchased the Telecaster and said it &quot;has a sound like nothing I&#x27;ve ever heard&quot;.&quot;&quot;

Buckley also played a Rickenbacker 360/12 along with several other guitars, including a black Gibson Les Paul Custom and a 1967 Guild F-50 acoustic. When on tour with his band, he used Fender amplifiers for a clean sound and Mesa Boogie amps for overdriven tones. While he was primarily a singer and guitarist, he also played other instruments on various studio recordings and sessions, including bass, dobro, mandolin, harmonium (heard on the intro to &quot;Lover, You Should&#x27;ve Come Over&quot;), organ, dulcimer (&quot;Dream Brother&quot; intro), tabla, esraj, and harmonica.

==Personal life==
Buckley was roommates with actress Brooke Smith from 1990 to 1991. During a tribute concert to his father, Tim Buckley, in April 1991, Buckley met artist Rebecca Moore, and the pair dated until 1993. This relationship became the inspiration for his record &quot;Grace&quot; and provoked his permanent move to New York. From 1994 to 1995, Buckley had an intense relationship with Elizabeth Fraser of Cocteau Twins. They wrote and recorded a duet together, &quot;All Flowers in Time Bend Towards the Sun&quot;, which has never been released commercially. In 1994, Buckley began a relationship with musician Joan Wasser, known professionally as Joan as Police Woman. He reportedly proposed marriage to her shortly before his death.

== Death ==

On the evening of May 29, 1997, Buckley&#x27;s band flew to Memphis to join him in his studio to work on his new material. Later that evening, Buckley spontaneously went swimming fully dressed in the Wolf River Harbor, a slack water channel of the Mississippi River, singing the chorus of Led Zeppelin&#x27;s &quot;Whole Lotta Love&quot; under the Memphis Suspension Railway.

Keith Foti, a roadie in Buckley&#x27;s band, remained on shore. After moving a radio and guitar out of reach from the wake from a passing tugboat, Foti looked up to see Buckley had vanished; the wake of the tugboat had swept him away from shore and under water. A rescue effort that night and the next morning by scuba teams and police was unsuccessful. On June 4, passengers on the &quot;American Queen&quot; riverboat spotted Buckley&#x27;s body in the Wolf River, caught in branches.

Buckley&#x27;s autopsy showed no signs of drugs or alcohol, and the death was ruled an accidental drowning. The official Jeff Buckley website published a statement saying his death was neither mysterious nor a suicide.

== Legacy ==
After Buckley&#x27;s death, a collection of demo recordings and a full-length album he had been reworking for his second album were released as a compilation album, titled &quot;Sketches for My Sweetheart the Drunk&quot;the compilation was overseen by his mother, Mary Guibert, band members and old friend Michael J. Clouse, as well as Chris Cornell. The album achieved gold sales in Australia in 1998. Three other albums composed of live recordings have also been released, along with a live DVD of a performance in Chicago. A previously unreleased 1992 recording of &quot;I Shall Be Released&quot;, sung by Buckley over the phone on live radio, was released on the album &quot;For New Orleans&quot;.

Since his death, Buckley has been the subject of numerous documentaries: &quot;Fall in Light&quot;, a 1999 production for French TV; &quot;Goodbye and Hello&quot;, a program about Buckley and his father produced for Netherlands TV in 2000; and &quot;Everybody Here Wants You&quot;, a documentary made in 2002 by the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC). An hour-long documentary about Buckley called &quot;Amazing Grace: Jeff Buckley&quot; has been shown at various film festivals to critical acclaim. The film was released worldwide in 2009 by Sony BMG Legacy as part of the &quot;Grace Around The World Deluxe Edition&quot;. In spring 2009, it was revealed that Ryan Jaffe, best known for scripting the movie &quot;The Rocker&quot;, had replaced Brian Jun as screenwriter for the upcoming film &quot;Mystery White Boy&quot;. Orion Williams is also set to co-produce the film with Michelle Sy. A separate project involving the book &quot;Dream Brother&quot; was allegedly cancelled.

In May and June 2007, Buckley&#x27;s life and music were celebrated globally with tributes in Australia, Canada, UK, France, Iceland, Israel, Ireland, Republic of Macedonia, Portugal, and the U.S. Many of Buckley&#x27;s family members attended various tribute concerts across the globe, some of which they helped organize. There are three annual Jeff Buckley tribute events: the Chicago-based &quot;Uncommon Ground&quot;, featuring a three-day concert schedule (&quot;Uncommon Ground&quot; hosted their 25th anniversary tribute in November 2022 ); &quot;An Evening With Jeff Buckley&quot;, an annual New York City tribute; and the Australia-based &quot;Fall In Light&quot;. The latter event is run by the Fall In Light Foundation, which in addition to the concerts, runs a &quot;Guitars for Schools&quot; program; the name of the foundation is taken from lyrics of Buckley&#x27;s &quot;New Year&#x27;s Prayer&quot;.

On 2 April 2013, it was announced that Buckley&#x27;s version would be inducted into the Library of Congress&#x27;s National Recording Registry. In 2015, tapes of a 1993 recording session for Columbia Records were discovered by Sony executives doing research for the 20th anniversary of &quot;Grace&quot;. The recordings were released on the album &quot;You and I&quot; in March 2016, featuring mostly covers of songs.

In 2012, &quot;Greetings from Tim Buckley&quot; premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival; the film explores Jeff Buckley&#x27;s relationship with his father. At a tribute concert honoring the deceased Foo Fighters drummer Taylor Hawkins in 2021, Foo Fighters lead singer David Grohl&#x27;s daughter Violet performed &quot;Last Goodbye&quot; and &quot;Grace&quot;, with Dave Grohl, Alain Johannes, Greg Kurstin, Chris Chaney, and Jason Falkner.

===Resurgence===
In 2002, Buckley&#x27;s cover of Leonard Cohen&#x27;s &quot;Hallelujah&quot; was used in the &quot;Posse Comitatus&quot; episode of &quot;The West Wing,&quot; for which the audio team received an Emmy Award.

On March 7, 2008, Buckley&#x27;s version of &quot;Hallelujah&quot; was number one on the iTunes chart, selling 178,000 downloads for the week, after being performed by Jason Castro on the seventh season of &quot;American Idol&quot;. The song also debuted at number one on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Hot Digital Songs chart, giving Buckley his first number one hit on any &quot;Billboard&quot; chart.

The 2008 UK &quot;X Factor&quot; winner Alexandra Burke released a cover of &quot;Hallelujah&quot;, with the intent to top the UK Singles Chart as the Christmas number one single. Buckley fans countered this, launching a campaign with the aim of propelling Buckley&#x27;s version to the number one spot; despite this, Burke&#x27;s version eventually reached the Christmas number one position on the UK charts in December 2008. Buckley&#x27;s version of the song entered the UK charts at number 49 on November 30, and by December 21, it had reached number 2, even though it had not been rereleased in a physical format.

=== Influence ===
Radiohead recorded their 1995 song &quot;Fake Plastic Trees&quot; after being inspired by Buckley&#x27;s performance at the Garage, London. The bassist, Colin Greenwood, said, &quot;He just had a Telecaster and a pint of Guinness. And it was just fucking amazing, really inspirational.&quot; The singer, Thom Yorke, said Buckley gave him the confidence to sing in falsetto. The singer and guitarist Matt Bellamy of Muse said he did not believe his singing would be suitable for rock music until he heard &quot;Grace&quot;, which made him confident that &quot;a high-pitched, softer voice can work very well&quot;. The Coldplay singer Chris Martin described the 2000 Coldplay single &quot;Shiver&quot; as a Buckley &quot;ripoff&quot;. Other musicians influenced by Buckley include Adele, Bat For Lashes, Lana Del Rey, Anna Calvi, Kiesza, Ben Folds, Jonny Lang, Eddie Vedder, Fran Healy, Chris Cornell, and Nelly Furtado.

=== Biographical film ===
According to &quot;Variety&quot;, a biographical film, &quot;Everybody Here Wants You,&quot; starring Reeve Carney as Buckley, was set to begin filming in late 2021. It was to be Orian Williams&#x27;s directorial debut and released by Culmination Productions. It was to be co-produced by Buckley&#x27;s mother, Mary Guibert, and access to his music was approved by Alison Raykovich, manager of Buckley&#x27;s estate. Buckley&#x27;s mother said &quot;this will be the only official dramatisation of Jeff&#x27;s story&quot;.

==See also==
*List of solved missing person cases

== Discography ==
* &quot;Grace&quot; (1994)

== Awards and nominations ==
* The Académie Charles Cros awarded Buckley the &quot;Grand Prix International Du Disque&quot; on April 13, 1995, in honor of his debut album &quot;Grace&quot;.
* MTV Video Music Award nomination for Best New Artist in a Video for &quot;Last Goodbye&quot;, 1995
* &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine nomination for Best New Artist, 1995
* Triple J Hottest 100 awarded number 14 best song for that year in the world&#x27;s largest voting competition for &quot;Last Goodbye&quot;, 1995
* Grammy Award nomination for Best Male Rock Vocal Performance for &quot;Everybody Here Wants You&quot;, 1998
* &quot;Grace&quot; was ranked number 303 of the 500 Greatest Albums by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; in 2003.
* Buckley&#x27;s cover of &quot;Hallelujah&quot; was ranked number 259 of the 500 Greatest Songs by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; in 2004.
* MOJO Awards nomination for Catalogue Release of the Year for &quot;Grace&quot;, 2005
* In 2006, &quot;Mojo&quot; named &quot;Grace&quot; the number one Modern Rock Classic of all Time. It was also rated as Australia&#x27;s second favorite album on &quot;My Favourite Album&quot;, a television special aired by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, on December 3, 2006.
* &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked Buckley number 39 in its 2008 list, The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time.
* On the Triple J Hottest 100 of All Time, 2009, Buckley&#x27;s version of &quot;Hallelujah&quot; was voted third place; &quot;Last Goodbye&quot; was seventh, &quot;Lover, You Should&#x27;ve Come Over&quot; was 56th, and &quot;Grace&quot; 69th.
* On the Triple J Hottest 100 of the Past 20 Years, 2013, Last Goodbye was voted third place and &quot;Hallelujah&quot; number 36.

== References ==
=== Sources ===
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* 
* 

== External links ==
* 
* &quot;Amazing Grace&quot; documentary
* Jeff Buckley Videos Official Sony BMG music videos
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215855" start="0" end="21" title="Jeff Buckley" label="Jeffrey Scott Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q215855" start="33" end="47" title="Jeff Buckley" label="Scott Moorhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="138" end="155" title="session guitarist" label="session guitarist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043326" start="245" end="268" title="East Village, Manhattan" label="East Village, Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521476" start="277" end="282" title="Sin-é" label="Sin-é"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="299" end="307" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q642737" start="369" end="374" title="Grace (Jeff Buckley album)" label="Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931220" start="557" end="580" title="My Sweetheart the Drunk" label="My Sweetheart the Drunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q285312" start="623" end="635" title="Tom Verlaine" label="Tom Verlaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="678" end="696" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="708" end="718" title="Multitrack recording" label="four-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="719" end="724" title="demo (music)" label="demos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538093" start="870" end="880" title="Wolf River (Tennessee)" label="Wolf River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="901" end="912" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q737872" start="1086" end="1099" title="Live at Sin-é" label="Live at Sin-é"/>
<link wikidata="Q188668" start="1224" end="1234" title="Thom Yorke" label="Thom Yorke"/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="1238" end="1247" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q190576" start="1252" end="1264" title="Matt Bellamy" label="Matt Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22151" start="1268" end="1272" title="Muse (band)" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="1280" end="1293" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="1352" end="1375" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="the 500 greatest albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276" start="1413" end="1426" title="Leonard Cohen" label="Leonard Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q969635" start="1438" end="1448" title="Hallelujah (Leonard Cohen song)" label="Hallelujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q286102" start="1462" end="1484" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Songs of All Time" label="the 500 greatest songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="1536" end="1567" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="1658" end="1677" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="1684" end="1711" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49247" start="1737" end="1756" title="Anaheim, California" label="Anaheim, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q378727" start="1828" end="1839" title="Tim Buckley" label="Tim Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073985" start="1858" end="1864" title="Zonian" label="Zonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="1895" end="1901" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="2170" end="2183" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832808" start="2241" end="2254" title="trailer trash" label="trailer trash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="2585" end="2598" title="drug overdose" label="drug overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="2894" end="2906" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="2908" end="2913" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="2915" end="2927" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="2929" end="2936" title="the Who" label="the Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="2942" end="2952" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q210809" start="2996" end="3013" title="Physical Graffiti" label="Physical Graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="3078" end="3082" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q322625" start="3409" end="3417" title="Gibson Les Paul" label="Les Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242578" start="3442" end="3459" title="Loara High School" label="Loara High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="3543" end="3559" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="3566" end="3570" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q151012" start="3572" end="3579" title="Genesis (band)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="3585" end="3588" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="3598" end="3609" title="jazz fusion" label="jazz fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q165634" start="3620" end="3631" title="Al Di Meola" label="Al Di Meola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857828" start="3641" end="3650" title="Much (TV channel)" label="MuchMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q205721" start="3758" end="3771" title="Joni Mitchell" label="Joni Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q180598" start="3784" end="3794" title="the Smiths" label="the Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="3799" end="3824" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="3914" end="3923" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles, California" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q679759" start="3938" end="3957" title="Musicians Institute" label="Musicians Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="4135" end="4147" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="4231" end="4236" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="4238" end="4247" title="Duke Ellington" label="Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="4249" end="4255" title="Béla Bartók" label="Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="4400" end="4406" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929352" start="4412" end="4422" title="roots rock" label="roots rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="4426" end="4437" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q474027" start="4458" end="4467" title="dancehall" label="dancehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482190" start="4482" end="4491" title="Shinehead" label="Shinehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="4514" end="4518" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="4523" end="4530" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="4538" end="4546" title="session musician" label="sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831381" start="4590" end="4607" title="Michael J. Clouse" label="Michael J. Clouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244062" start="4719" end="4732" title="John Humphrey (bass player)" label="John Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q184827" start="4744" end="4748" title="Tool (band)" label="Tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q447698" start="4756" end="4767" title="Danny Carey" label="Danny Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q798487" start="4800" end="4814" title="backing vocalist" label="backing vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q512410" start="4937" end="4944" title="Qawwali" label="Qawwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q299073" start="4989" end="5010" title="Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan" label="Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364121" start="5219" end="5228" title="Interview (magazine)" label="Interview"/>
<link wikidata="Q192133" start="5373" end="5387" title="Robert Johnson (musician)" label="Robert Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="5396" end="5409" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q798671" start="5415" end="5425" title="Bad Brains" label="Bad Brains"/>
<link wikidata="Q371743" start="5531" end="5541" title="Herb Cohen" label="Herb Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402657" start="5711" end="5723" title="Eternal Life (song)" label="Eternal Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494386" start="5737" end="5749" title="Last Goodbye (Jeff Buckley song)" label="Last Goodbye"/>
<link wikidata="Q447509" start="6080" end="6091" title="Hal Willner" label="Hal Willner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586980" start="6105" end="6126" title="St. Ann and the Holy Trinity Church" label="St. Ann&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="6130" end="6138" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q441904" start="6358" end="6368" title="Gary Lucas" label="Gary Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="6682" end="6692" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774063" start="7365" end="7370" title="Grace (Jeff Buckley song)" label="Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026010" start="7387" end="7395" title="Mojo Pin" label="Mojo Pin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576860" start="7460" end="7477" title="Gods and Monsters (band)" label="Gods and Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511813" start="7603" end="7633" title="Lower East Side" label="the Lower East Side, Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="7811" end="7826" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521476" start="7832" end="7837" title="Sin-é" label="Sin-é"/>
<link wikidata="Q174957" start="8139" end="8150" title="Nina Simone" label="Nina Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q104358" start="8152" end="8166" title="Billie Holiday" label="Billie Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q272203" start="8168" end="8180" title="Van Morrison" label="Van Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="8186" end="8198" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q299073" start="8318" end="8339" title="Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan" label="Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="8391" end="8400" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631" start="8457" end="8467" title="Édith Piaf" label="Édith Piaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q180598" start="8515" end="8525" title="the Smiths" label="the Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q798671" start="8569" end="8579" title="Bad Brains" label="Bad Brains"/>
<link wikidata="Q243041" start="8617" end="8631" title="Siouxsie Sioux" label="Siouxsie Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q623103" start="8850" end="8867" title="Fender Telecaster" label="Fender Telecaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="9070" end="9082" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101938" start="9120" end="9131" title="Clive Davis" label="Clive Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="9261" end="9277" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="9301" end="9318" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149689" start="9438" end="9451" title="Steve Addabbo" label="Steve Addabbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="9469" end="9476" title="Artists and repertoire" label="A&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759986" start="9629" end="9653" title="Wurlitzer electric piano" label="Wurlitzer electric piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q642737" start="9770" end="9775" title="Grace (Jeff Buckley album)" label="Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773898" start="9955" end="9978" title="The Way Young Lovers Do" label="The Way Young Lovers Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q737872" start="10004" end="10017" title="Live at Sin-é" label="Live at Sin-é"/>
<link wikidata="Q527921" start="10160" end="10172" title="Andy Wallace (producer)" label="Andy Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311726" start="10220" end="10233" title="Mick Grøndahl" label="Mick Grøndahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299487" start="10246" end="10258" title="Matt Johnson (drummer)" label="Matt Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876788" start="10330" end="10348" title="Bearsville Studios" label="Bearsville Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q608293" start="10352" end="10371" title="Woodstock (town), New York" label="Woodstock, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q871826" start="10596" end="10607" title="Karl Berger" label="Karl Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760913" start="10707" end="10718" title="overdubbing" label="overdubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q737872" start="11005" end="11018" title="Live at Sin-é" label="Live at Sin-é"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549480" start="11268" end="11275" title="So Real (Jeff Buckley song)" label="So Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q17306342" start="11322" end="11334" title="Clif Norrell" label="Clif Norrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q667389" start="11493" end="11507" title="The Pretenders" label="The Pretenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q239202" start="11514" end="11528" title="Chrissie Hynde" label="Chrissie Hynde"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="11530" end="11541" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q270935" start="11549" end="11562" title="Chris Cornell" label="Chris Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q714845" start="11568" end="11576" title="the Edge" label="the Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="11582" end="11584" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240765" start="11760" end="11770" title="Lilac Wine" label="Lilac Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172631" start="11853" end="11873" title="Corpus Christi Carol" label="Corpus Christi Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="11886" end="11902" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153523" start="11916" end="11930" title="A Boy was Born" label="A Boy was Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q969635" start="12045" end="12055" title="Hallelujah (Leonard Cohen song)" label="Hallelujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276" start="12065" end="12078" title="Leonard Cohen" label="Leonard Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q45909" start="12089" end="12098" title="John Cale" label="John Cale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486494" start="12151" end="12168" title="I&amp;#x27;m Your Fan" label="I&amp;#x27;m Your Fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="12312" end="12316" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q286102" start="12470" end="12504" title="The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time" label="The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q390216" start="12620" end="12645" title="The Sydney Morning Herald" label="The Sydney Morning Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="12786" end="12790" title="Music recording sales certification" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q275029" start="12906" end="12927" title="ARIA certifications" label="platinum in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="13090" end="13100" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="13191" end="13203" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="13235" end="13244" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="13751" end="13768" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="13776" end="13787" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q202246" start="13900" end="13909" title="Morrissey" label="Morrissey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022965" start="14650" end="14654" title="CBGB" label="CBGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796051" start="14853" end="14867" title="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s" label="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q138578" start="14871" end="14890" title="Hoboken, New Jersey" label="Hoboken, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="15046" end="15052" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q810700" start="15552" end="15560" title="Bataclan (theatre)" label="Bataclan"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="15664" end="15666" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701220" start="15674" end="15696" title="Live from the Bataclan" label="Live from the Bataclan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="15771" end="15780" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737423" start="15828" end="15835" title="The Grace EPs" label="So Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824526" start="15968" end="15973" title="Metro Chicago" label="Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6657536" start="16042" end="16057" title="Live in Chicago (Jeff Buckley)" label="Live in Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="16067" end="16070" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="16084" end="16087" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116865" start="16127" end="16145" title="Sony Music Studios" label="Sony Music Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q868557" start="16284" end="16299" title="music festivals" label="music festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="16315" end="16335" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q919794" start="16349" end="16366" title="Meltdown Festival" label="Meltdown Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q9695" start="16390" end="16403" title="Henry Purcell" label="Henry Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376991" start="16417" end="16435" title="Dido&amp;#x27;s Lament" label="Dido&amp;#x27;s Lament"/>
<link wikidata="Q206939" start="16463" end="16477" title="Elvis Costello" label="Elvis Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q915451" start="16532" end="16545" title="Paris Olympia" label="Paris Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631" start="16590" end="16600" title="Édith Piaf" label="Édith Piaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q936538" start="16928" end="16940" title="Alim Qasimov" label="Alim Qasimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="16945" end="16955" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474372" start="16957" end="16963" title="mugham" label="mugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001888" start="16972" end="16980" title="Sony BMG" label="Sony BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748682" start="17026" end="17047" title="Live a L&amp;#x27;Olympia" label="Live à L&amp;#x27;Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="17235" end="17244" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950996" start="17386" end="17403" title="Mystery White Boy" label="Mystery White Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="17500" end="17504" title="Gold album" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="17639" end="17650" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="17655" end="17664" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="17714" end="17721" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521476" start="17831" end="17836" title="Sin-é" label="Sin-é"/>
<link wikidata="Q772529" start="17874" end="17888" title="Mercury Lounge" label="Mercury Lounge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299487" start="18076" end="18088" title="Matt Johnson (drummer)" label="Matt Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737423" start="18299" end="18307" title="The Grace EPs" label="Grace EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q558325" start="18546" end="18564" title="bootleg recordings" label="bootleg recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386443" start="18923" end="18936" title="Nathan Larson (musician)" label="Nathan Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397099" start="18956" end="18972" title="Shudder to Think" label="Shudder to Think"/>
<link wikidata="Q557" start="19604" end="19615" title="Patti Smith" label="Patti Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930309" start="19640" end="19650" title="Gone Again" label="Gone Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q285312" start="19678" end="19690" title="Tom Verlaine" label="Tom Verlaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="19724" end="19732" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160206" start="19738" end="19748" title="Television (band)" label="Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q960682" start="20025" end="20035" title="Eric Eidel" label="Eric Eidel"/>
<link wikidata="Q736966" start="20134" end="20148" title="Parker Kindred" label="Parker Kindred"/>
<link wikidata="Q13561912" start="20208" end="20219" title="Inger Lorre" label="Inger Lorre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754544" start="20223" end="20233" title="the Nymphs" label="the Nymphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q160534" start="20354" end="20366" title="Jack Kerouac" label="Jack Kerouac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833854" start="20425" end="20439" title="Transcendental Medication" label="upcoming album"/>
<link wikidata="Q17037710" start="20547" end="20567" title="Yard of Blonde Girls" label="Yard of Blonde Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q838068" start="20772" end="20792" title="the Knitting Factory" label="the Knitting Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q189080" start="21026" end="21034" title="Lou Reed" label="Lou Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q736966" start="21138" end="21152" title="Parker Kindred" label="Parker Kindred"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792130" start="21176" end="21197" title="Arlene&amp;#x27;s Grocery" label="Arlene&amp;#x27;s Grocery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428637" start="21468" end="21479" title="spoken word" label="spoken word"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="21495" end="21510" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669652" start="21522" end="21529" title="Ulalume" label="Ulalume"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135348" start="21556" end="21583" title="Closed on Account of Rabies" label="Closed on Account of Rabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327541" start="21720" end="21743" title="Easley McCain Recording" label="Easley McCain Recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608959" start="21805" end="21813" title="Grifters (band)" label="Grifters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458835" start="21827" end="21840" title="shotgun house" label="shotgun house"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303503" start="22003" end="22019" title="Downtown Memphis, Tennessee" label="downtown Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q527921" start="22566" end="22578" title="Andy Wallace (producer)" label="Andy Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q27914" start="23369" end="23374" title="tenor" label="tenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395595" start="23375" end="23386" title="vocal range" label="vocal range"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="23409" end="23415" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q205721" start="23571" end="23584" title="Joni Mitchell" label="Joni Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q174957" start="23586" end="23597" title="Nina Simone" label="Nina Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q104358" start="23599" end="23613" title="Billie Holiday" label="Billie Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q557" start="23615" end="23626" title="Patti Smith" label="Patti Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q243041" start="23631" end="23645" title="Siouxsie Sioux" label="Siouxsie Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q193935" start="23982" end="23990" title="falsetto" label="falsetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="24352" end="24356" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q765709" start="24366" end="24379" title="Strange Fruit" label="Strange Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="24391" end="24398" title="country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140333" start="24451" end="24464" title="Fingerstyle guitar" label="fingerpicking"/>
<link wikidata="Q428152" start="24521" end="24533" title="slide guitar" label="slide guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818058" start="24696" end="24709" title="guitar tuning" label="guitar tuning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24733" end="24755" title="Guitar tunings#Standard" label="EADGBE standard tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142436" start="24766" end="24779" title="drop D tuning" label="drop D tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096054" start="24787" end="24800" title="open G tuning" label="open G tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770789" start="24875" end="24895" title="The Twelfth of Never" label="The Twelfth of Never"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="24911" end="24921" title="percussion" label="percussive"/>
<link wikidata="Q623103" start="25027" end="25044" title="Fender Telecaster" label="Fender Telecaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998755" start="25088" end="25102" title="Seymour Duncan" label="Seymour Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190576" start="25166" end="25178" title="Matt Bellamy" label="Matt Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22151" start="25182" end="25186" title="Muse (band)" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135543" start="25318" end="25337" title="Rickenbacker 360/12" label="Rickenbacker 360/12"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448320" start="25390" end="25412" title="Gibson Les Paul Custom" label="Gibson Les Paul Custom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028561" start="25424" end="25429" title="Guild Guitar Company" label="Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447428" start="25481" end="25498" title="Fender Amplifiers" label="Fender amplifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572433" start="25521" end="25532" title="Mesa Boogie" label="Mesa Boogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="25693" end="25697" title="Bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056351" start="25699" end="25704" title="dobro" label="dobro"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="25706" end="25714" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="25716" end="25725" title="Pump organ" label="harmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692334" start="25755" end="25790" title="Lover, You Should&amp;#x27;ve Come Over" label="Lover, You Should&amp;#x27;ve Come Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="25799" end="25804" title="organ (music)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145031" start="25806" end="25814" title="Appalachian dulcimer" label="dulcimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306317" start="25822" end="25835" title="Dream Brother" label="Dream Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q213100" start="25850" end="25855" title="tabla" label="tabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818847" start="25857" end="25862" title="esraj" label="esraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q51290" start="25868" end="25877" title="harmonica" label="harmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q235725" start="25933" end="25945" title="Brooke Smith (actress)" label="Brooke Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421717" start="26052" end="26065" title="Rebecca Moore (artist)" label="Rebecca Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q289569" start="26277" end="26293" title="Elizabeth Fraser" label="Elizabeth Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q588820" start="26297" end="26310" title="Cocteau Twins" label="Cocteau Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q447338" start="26540" end="26560" title="Joan as Police Woman" label="Joan as Police Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538093" start="26841" end="26858" title="Wolf River (Tennessee)" label="Wolf River Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q432343" start="26862" end="26873" title="slack water" label="slack water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="26889" end="26906" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="26930" end="26942" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q643423" start="26956" end="26972" title="Whole Lotta Love" label="Whole Lotta Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642260" start="26989" end="27015" title="Memphis Suspension Railway" label="Memphis Suspension Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430248" start="27032" end="27038" title="Road crew" label="roadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744778" start="27407" end="27421" title="American Queen" label="American Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41482" start="27521" end="27528" title="autopsy" label="autopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931220" start="27917" end="27953" title="Sketches for My Sweetheart the Drunk" label="Sketches for My Sweetheart the Drunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831381" start="28045" end="28062" title="Michael J. Clouse" label="Michael J. Clouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q270935" start="28075" end="28088" title="Chris Cornell" label="Chris Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044951" start="28313" end="28332" title="I Shall Be Released" label="I Shall Be Released"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942604" start="28418" end="28433" title="For New Orleans" label="For New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="28758" end="28790" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="British Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28850" end="28877" title="Amazing Grace: Jeff Buckley" label="Amazing Grace: Jeff Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755845" start="29161" end="29171" title="The Rocker (film)" label="The Rocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837260" start="29326" end="29337" title="Michelle Sy" label="Michelle Sy"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="30435" end="30489" title="National Recording Registry" label="Library of Congress&amp;#x27;s National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22674257" start="30700" end="30709" title="You and I (Jeff Buckley album)" label="You and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605187" start="30781" end="30807" title="Greetings from Tim Buckley" label="Greetings from Tim Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q390018" start="30831" end="30866" title="Toronto International Film Festival" label="Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="30979" end="30991" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q312395" start="31000" end="31014" title="Taylor Hawkins" label="Taylor Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q120238206" start="31077" end="31083" title="Violet Grohl" label="Violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494386" start="31100" end="31112" title="Last Goodbye (Jeff Buckley song)" label="Last Goodbye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774063" start="31129" end="31134" title="Grace (Jeff Buckley song)" label="Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="31147" end="31157" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q984115" start="31159" end="31173" title="Alain Johannes" label="Alain Johannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544942" start="31175" end="31187" title="Greg Kurstin" label="Greg Kurstin"/>
<link wikidata="Q598026" start="31189" end="31201" title="Chris Chaney" label="Chris Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11309120" start="31207" end="31220" title="Jason Falkner" label="Jason Falkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276" start="31273" end="31286" title="Leonard Cohen" label="Leonard Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577037" start="31378" end="31391" title="The West Wing" label="The West Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="31436" end="31446" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q9593" start="31538" end="31544" title="iTunes Store" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749084" start="31617" end="31629" title="Jason Castro (singer)" label="Jason Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583334" start="31661" end="31674" title="American Idol (season 7)" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="31727" end="31736" title="Billboard magazine" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q862769" start="31745" end="31762" title="Hot Digital Songs" label="Hot Digital Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431988" start="31865" end="31873" title="The X Factor (UK)" label="X Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q234161" start="31887" end="31902" title="Alexandra Burke" label="Alexandra Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="31974" end="31990" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601144" start="31998" end="32025" title="Christmas number-one singles in the UK" label="Christmas number one single"/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="32485" end="32494" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086905" start="32526" end="32544" title="Fake Plastic Trees" label="Fake Plastic Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735799" start="32609" end="32623" title="The Garage, London" label="Garage, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q842267" start="32638" end="32653" title="Colin Greenwood" label="Colin Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q188668" start="32789" end="32799" title="Thom Yorke" label="Thom Yorke"/>
<link wikidata="Q190576" start="32884" end="32896" title="Matt Bellamy" label="Matt Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22151" start="32900" end="32904" title="Muse (band)" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q45188" start="33103" end="33111" title="Coldplay" label="Coldplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q712860" start="33119" end="33131" title="Chris Martin" label="Chris Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q796554" start="33173" end="33179" title="Shiver (Coldplay song)" label="Shiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q23215" start="33265" end="33270" title="Adele" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q810695" start="33272" end="33286" title="Bat for Lashes" label="Bat For Lashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37150" start="33288" end="33300" title="Lana Del Rey" label="Lana Del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q262467" start="33302" end="33312" title="Anna Calvi" label="Anna Calvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730833" start="33314" end="33320" title="Kiesza" label="Kiesza"/>
<link wikidata="Q435681" start="33322" end="33331" title="Ben Folds" label="Ben Folds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703462" start="33333" end="33343" title="Jonny Lang" label="Jonny Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q221535" start="33345" end="33357" title="Eddie Vedder" label="Eddie Vedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q739915" start="33359" end="33369" title="Fran Healy (musician)" label="Fran Healy"/>
<link wikidata="Q270935" start="33371" end="33384" title="Chris Cornell" label="Chris Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q80424" start="33390" end="33403" title="Nelly Furtado" label="Nelly Furtado"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="33451" end="33458" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423039" start="33534" end="33546" title="Reeve Carney" label="Reeve Carney"/>
<link wikidata="Q99485149" start="33611" end="33625" title="Orian Williams" label="Orian Williams"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33970" end="34005" title="List of solved missing person cases: 1950–1999" label="List of solved missing person cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q642737" start="34033" end="34038" title="Grace (Jeff Buckley album)" label="Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q413881" start="34088" end="34109" title="Académie Charles Cros" label="Académie Charles Cros"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="34245" end="34266" title="MTV Video Music Award" label="MTV Video Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="34352" end="34365" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036134" start="34420" end="34440" title="Triple J Hottest 100" label="Triple J Hottest 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="34567" end="34579" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q953746" start="34595" end="34627" title="Best Male Rock Vocal Performance" label="Best Male Rock Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="34724" end="34743" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q286102" start="34860" end="34878" title="500 Greatest Songs" label="500 Greatest Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319330" start="34919" end="34930" title="MOJO Awards" label="MOJO Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q261633" start="35015" end="35031" title="Mojo (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Mojo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945440" start="35173" end="35191" title="My Favourite Album" label="My Favourite Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843442" start="35409" end="35447" title="Triple J Hottest 100 of All Time, 2009" label="Triple J Hottest 100 of All Time, 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036142" start="35654" end="35701" title="Triple J Hottest 100 of the Past 20 Years, 2013" label="Triple J Hottest 100 of the Past 20 Years, 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001888" start="35941" end="35949" title="Sony BMG" label="Sony BMG"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173702" wikidata="Q379688" url="?curid=173702" title="Advanced Photo System">
<text>Advanced Photo System (APS) is a film format for consumer still photography first marketed in 1996 and discontinued in 2011. It was sold by various manufacturers under several brand names, including Eastman Kodak (Advantix), FujiFilm (Nexia), Agfa (Futura) and Konica (Centuria). Development was led by Kodak starting in the mid-1980s.

Like prior attempts to displace 135 film from the amateur photography market, including 126 film (Instamatic), 110, and disc, APS used a film cartridge to reduce loading errors. APS also could reduce camera and lens size and weight by using a smaller image format; unlike the older amateur formats, image quality would be maintained by using newly-developed films, featuring emulsions with finer grain size and a flatter base material. The other major innovation delivered by APS was the &quot;information exchange&quot; process in which the camera recorded data directly on the film; this would simplify cropping prints to a desired aspect ratio and potentially could provide photofinishers with exposure data to optimize print quality. However, by the time APS was released in 1996, the first digital cameras had appeared, providing many of the same benefits with the additional convenience and economy of eliminating the developing process.

== History ==

Kodak began developing &quot;Project Orion&quot; in the mid-1980s and solicited partners starting in the late 1980s. In 1991, Canon, Fujifilm, Kodak, Minolta, and Nikon formed a consortium to complete the new photographic system, and the alliance was publicly announced in 1992. Initial testing of APS film cartridges with 40-exposure rolls started in 1994; details about the magnetic-stripe information encoding and formats were provided later that year, although the prototype &quot;Standard&quot; frame size, at that time, was narrower than the final APS-C frame, with a 7:5 aspect ratio, . APS was announced to the photofinishing market in October 1995 and officially launched at the Photo Marketing Association show in Las Vegas in February 1996. At that time, Kodak CEO George M. C. Fisher announced that US$500 million had been invested in the new system to date, and an equal expense would be required going forward.
The Advanced Photo System was an attempt at a major upgrade of photographic technology for amateurs, resulting in a new film cartridge to facilitate automation of film loading and rewinding; according to Kodak, of all film that it received for processing showed some defects attributable to loading error. In addition, the smaller film size potentially could result in APS point-and-shoot cameras with greater zoom ranges in the same size as existing 35 mm compact cameras, or more compact altogether. Accessories were made to facilitate digitization of APS film for use with computers, including a slideshow device for televisions and film scanner. At launch, all five manufacturers announced point-and-shoot APS cameras; the Canon ELPH (IXY/IXUS) drew particular attention and demand for its compact size and stylish all-metal body.

Despite the potential benefits, APS never really caught on with professional photographers because of the significantly smaller film area (58% of 135 film) and narrow selection of film types. In controlled testing, &quot;Popular Photography&quot; found that prints from one new emulsion developed for APS were significantly sharper than an equivalently-sized prints using a legacy 135 film emulsion, despite having to enlarge the APS frame by a greater magnification ratio. However, the new emulsion also could be (and later was) used for 35 mm film, eliminating the advantage of the smaller format. Film selection also hindered adoption of APS. Initially, only color print film was available, with a limited selection of film speeds. Color slide film, popular with professional photographers, proved unpopular in APS format and was soon discontinued, although chromogenic black-and-white IX240 film continued to be produced.

In January 2004, Kodak announced it was ceasing APS camera production.

Both Fuji and Kodak, the last two manufacturers of APS film, discontinued production in 2011.

== Design ==
The film is 24 mm wide, and has three selectable image formats:
The &quot;C&quot; and &quot;P&quot; formats are formed by cropping the 30.2 × 16.7 mm &quot;High Definition&quot; image, which uses the same 16:9 aspect ratio as high-definition television. The &quot;C&quot; format has the same 3:2 aspect ratio as a 135 film image. Most APS cameras (with the exception of some disposable cameras) can record all three formats.

The entire &quot;H&quot; frame is recorded on the film for each exposure, and information is recorded on the film to instruct the photofinsher to print the format selected by the photographer; an image recorded in one aspect ratio can be reprinted in another. In addition to the frame format, the &quot;information exchange&quot; (IX) standard included with APS identifies the film cartridge with a unique six-digit serial number. Some cameras can use IX to record additional metadata, including exposure information, onto the film, either optically or magnetically.

The format selection is indicated on the film by a series of exposed squares alongside the image area (optical recording) or in a thin, transparent magnetic coating (magnetic recording), depending on the camera. In the absence of an operator-specified format, the machine printing an APS roll will use these indicators to determine the output format of each print.

=== Updated usage ===
Presently the format names APS-C and APS-H are most often used in reference to various makes of digital SLR that contain imaging sensors that have approximately the same crop factor as those formats, albeit with different actual dimensions, as APS-H digital sensors have a 3:2 aspect ratio, not the 16:9 aspect ratio of the APS-H film frame. Some of the lenses originally released with the APS SLRs have survived and are now marketed towards use on &quot;APS&quot; digital SLRs for the same reason. In reference to digital cameras, &quot;APS&quot; may also mean active pixel sensor, a type of CMOS image sensor.

=== Film and cartridge ===
The film is on a polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) base, and is wound on a single spool, housed in a plastic cartridge long. The PEN base is both thinner and lies flatter than traditional film base. In cross section, the cartridge resembles a squircle with varying corner radii. The basic diameter across one diagonal is 21 mm, while the basic diameter across the opposite diagonal measures 30 mm, including the corner slot where the film exits. The slot is protected by a lightproof door. It is available in 40, 25 and 15 exposure lengths.

The film includes a transparent magnetic coating over the entire rear surface; information is recorded on narrow tracks near the edge of the film. Each frame has four tracks: two below the frame, reserved for the camera, and two above the frame, reserved for the photofinishing equipment. Some APS cameras use this coating to record exposure information via the IX system.

APS simplifies film handling by allowing the camera to wind the film automatically when loaded, and similarly by rewinding automatically after all the exposures have been taken; some cameras also can rewind partially exposed film cartridges, allowing them to be removed and used later. Numbered symbols (called &#x27;visual indicators&#x27;) on the cartridge end indicate the status of the film cartridge:

# Full circle: Unexposed
# Half circle: Partly exposed
# Cross sign: Fully exposed but not processed
# Rectangle: Processed

Additionally, a tab on one end of the cartridge indicates that the cartridge has been processed. On the end opposite the visual indicators, a reflective bar code-like system is used to indicate precise film speed (at release, coded from ISO 25 to 1600), type (reversal or negative), and number of exposures; for simpler cameras, a mechanical notch indicates if the film speed is greater than or less than ISO 200.

Kodak initially released its APS color print films under the Advantix brand, in ISO 100, 200, and 400 speeds; in July 1996, Kodak introduced ADVANTIX 200 Professional. By 2000, Kodak had introduced a monochrome print film.

In 1998, Fujifilm offered color print and slide film under the established Fujichrome (ISO 100) and Fujicolor brands (ISO 100, 200, and 400) along with a new &quot;SmartFilm&quot; brand; by 2002, Fujifilm had dropped the reversal film and was branding its APS color print film as Fujicolor Nexia, extending the range to ISO 800.

=== Information exchange (IX) ===

A major distinction of APS film is the ability to record information other than the image. This metadata information is most commonly used for print aspect ratio, but can also be used to record the date and time that the photograph was taken, store a caption, and record exposure data such as shutter speed and aperture setting. This information can be read by the photo printing equipment to determine the print aspect ratio, print information on the back (or, rarely, the front) of the photograph, or to improve print quality. The system was invented by four engineers at Kodak, who were awarded patents in 1992 and 1993 and who jointly were named the National Inventor of the Year in 1996.

Two methods for storing information on the film are employed: &quot;magnetic IX&quot; and &quot;optical IX&quot;. Optical IX is employed by less expensive cameras and disposable cameras, and employs a light source to expose a small section of the film, outside of the image negative area. This method is limited to determining the print aspect ratio of the finished print.

Magnetic IX is used in the more expensive cameras and allows for more information exchange. Most cameras with magnetic IX automatically record the exposure date and time on tracks in the magnetic layer, outside the visible area, with more advanced models allowing the user to specify a predetermined caption to be printed on the photo or record the exposure settings, as well as determine print aspect ratio. Kodak claimed that a 40-exposure roll could record more than 80 KB of data. Magnetic IX reportedly caused some problems for photo processors, who found their magnetic reading heads had to be cleaned frequently, or that their equipment&#x27;s ability to print this information was limited, but Kodak&#x27;s testing indicated magnetic deposits were not a concern.

=== Processing ===

After the film developing process, APS film is stored in the original cartridge, unlike 135 film. For identification, every cartridge is assigned a unique nine-digit cartridge identification (CID) code and the associated strip of APS film is assigned an identical filmstrip identification (FID) code; while the CID code has nine digits, the FID code has six human-readable digits and nine machine-readable digits. The six-digit FID code is printed on the cartridge label, at both ends of the processed negative, and also is stored magnetically (as a nine-digit code) in the IX layer. This FID is usually printed on the index print as well as the back of every individual print. The CID/FID system was designed to be an additional convenience both for the photoprocessor, who can easily match each processed film strip and prints with its cartridge, and each cartridge to a particular customer&#x27;s order, and for the consumer, who can easily locate the correct cartridge if reprints are desired.

To facilitate automatic processing of film, a unique DX number is assigned to the different types of film.

APS film is typically processed by using a small machine to transfer the exposed APS film from the original cartridge to a reloadable one, then re-attached to the original cartridge and rewound using another machine after processing. After support for APS was withdrawn in 2011, many film processors dispose of the APS cartridge and return the exposed film strip bare.

== Cameras ==

The format was introduced in 1996 by Kodak, Fujifilm, Minolta, Nikon, Canon and others. APS was mainly used for point and shoot amateur cameras, Several of the cameras at launch shared a common design, including the Fujifilm Endeavor 100 / Minolta Vectis UC / Nikon Nuvis Mini and Kodak Advantix 5600MRX / Minolta Vectis 40. The Canon ELPH drew attention for its stainless steel body and compact dimensions.

Camera manufacturers and their branded lines of APS point-and-shoot cameras included:
* Argus Inc. (APSxxx)
* Canon (ELPH (Americas) / IXUS (Europe) / IXY (Japan))
* Contax (T ix)
* Fujifilm (Endeavor, Nexia)
* Kodak (Advantix)
* Konica (BiG mini S, Revio)
* Minolta (Vectis)
* Nikon (Nuvis)
* Olympus (Centurion, iSnap, iZoom, Newpic)
* Pentax (efina)
* Samsung (Impax, Rocas)
* Vivitar
* Yashica (Acclaim)

Three SLR systems with interchangeable lenses also were released.

===APS SLR cameras===
Three APS SLR systems were released as:
* Canon EOS IX (EOS IX and IX Lite)
* Minolta Vectis (S-1 and S-100)
* Nikon Pronea (6i/600i and S) with Nikon IX lenses

In addition to these interchangeable-lens models, Olympus released the Centurion, a Zoom-lens reflex camera (ZLR), similar to an SLR, but fitted with a fixed zoom lens (25~100 mm ). Fujifilm also sold a rebranded version of the Centurion as the Endeavor 4000SL. Before the system was released, Herbert Keppler expressed doubt about the potential market for APS SLRs, as both professional and amateur photographers would be constrained by the format&#x27;s limitations, but thought the reduced size could appeal for niche uses such as photographers who want a more flexible lightweight travel option than a point-and-shoot. APS SLR cameras were not particularly successful; they were too expensive for the high-end amateur market when they first appeared, and professional photographers continued to use 35 mm cameras, which offered a wider choice of films, greater image quality and resolution.

Of these the Canon EOS IX and the Nikon Pronea SLRs could use existing 35 mm SLR lenses with Canon EF and Nikon F mount, respectively, whereas Minolta opted to create a new lens mount which later was shared with the Minolta Dimâge RD 3000, an early digital SLR (DSLR). Using existing lenses meant the field of view was reduced by around 1.6×, but had the advantage of a larger lens selection. Creating a new lens system on the other hand gave the possibility of creating smaller and lighter lenses as they had a smaller image circle to cover.

Concurrently with their APS SLR film cameras, Canon, Minolta, and Nikon released lenses specifically intended for use on APS film cameras; the APS-specific lenses have shorter focal lengths to compensate for the reduced image size. Canon&#x27;s lenses, which included the EF 24-85mm, EF 22-55mm, and EF 55-200mm lenses, were fully functional with 35 mm EOS SLRs; at least one (24–85mm) was available in silver finish to match the EOS IX camera.

Minolta released eight lenses for the Vectis V mount, with five zooms covering a range from 22 to 240 mm and three prime lenses at 17, 50 (macro), and 400 (catadioptric) mm focal lengths. An adapter was available to use 35 mm A-mount (Alpha / Dynax / Maxxum) lenses, with limited functionality.

To accompany the Pronea SLRs, Nikon released six &quot;IX-Nikkor&quot; zoom lenses, all designed by Haruo Sato, which were lighter and had a smaller image circle, similar in concept to the later Nikon DX format lenses released with the company&#x27;s DSLRs, starting in 2004. The Nikon IX series of lenses were not compatible with the existing line of Nikon 35 mm SLRs; as they were designed with a smaller image circle and had a shorter back-focus, the rear elements, protruding into the body, would foul the mirror. However, the Nikon Pronea cameras accepted lenses for Nikon 35 mm SLRs.

== See also ==

* Film format
* List of color film systems
* List of film formats
* Panoramic photography

== References ==

== External links ==
* Reviews and comments on APS
* Photos of disassembled APS cassette and Elph/Ixus camera
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q379688" start="0" end="21" title="Advanced Photo System" label="Advanced Photo System"/>
<link wikidata="Q379688" start="23" end="26" title="Advanced Photo System" label="APS"/>
<link wikidata="Q759853" start="33" end="44" title="film format" label="film format"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="64" end="75" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="199" end="212" title="Eastman Kodak" label="Eastman Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q379688" start="214" end="222" title="Advanced Photo System" label="Advantix"/>
<link wikidata="Q164740" start="225" end="233" title="FujiFilm" label="FujiFilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q379688" start="235" end="240" title="Advanced Photo System" label="Nexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q309245" start="243" end="247" title="Agfa-Gevaert" label="Agfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q379688" start="249" end="255" title="Advanced Photo System" label="Futura"/>
<link wikidata="Q354375" start="261" end="267" title="Konica" label="Konica"/>
<link wikidata="Q379688" start="269" end="277" title="Advanced Photo System" label="Centuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051557" start="369" end="377" title="135 film" label="135 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321314" start="425" end="433" title="126 film" label="126 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558535" start="435" end="445" title="Instamatic" label="Instamatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148317" start="448" end="451" title="110 film" label="110"/>
<link wikidata="Q661986" start="457" end="461" title="disc film" label="disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q62927" start="1132" end="1146" title="digital camera" label="digital camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187680" start="1985" end="2012" title="Photo Marketing Association" label="Photo Marketing Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541924" start="2073" end="2092" title="George M. C. Fisher" label="George M. C. Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q69827" start="2949" end="2959" title="Canon ELPH (series)" label="Canon ELPH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051557" start="3204" end="3212" title="135 film" label="135 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398016" start="3279" end="3298" title="Popular Photography" label="Popular Photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148638" start="3720" end="3736" title="color print film" label="color print film"/>
<link wikidata="Q166816" start="3799" end="3809" title="Reversal film" label="slide film"/>
<link wikidata="Q22315590" start="3919" end="3930" title="chromogenic" label="chromogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="4391" end="4417" title="high-definition television" label="high-definition television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051557" start="4479" end="4487" title="135 film" label="135 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q313658" start="4540" end="4557" title="disposable camera" label="disposable camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="5067" end="5075" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="5307" end="5315" title="magnetism" label="magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196193" start="5717" end="5728" title="crop factor" label="crop factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q210745" start="6109" end="6128" title="active pixel sensor" label="active pixel sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q173431" start="6140" end="6144" title="CMOS" label="CMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q209121" start="6145" end="6157" title="image sensor" label="image sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q411472" start="6204" end="6228" title="polyethylene naphthalate" label="polyethylene naphthalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="6285" end="6292" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645130" start="6427" end="6435" title="squircle" label="squircle"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="8732" end="8740" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q271960" start="8907" end="8915" title="exposure (photography)" label="exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q349600" start="8929" end="8942" title="shutter speed" label="shutter speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434802" start="8947" end="8955" title="aperture" label="aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q172839" start="10506" end="10521" title="film developing" label="film developing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132397" start="11548" end="11557" title="DX number" label="DX number"/>
<link wikidata="Q164740" start="12032" end="12040" title="Fujifilm" label="Fujifilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q354578" start="12042" end="12049" title="Minolta" label="Minolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218180" start="12051" end="12056" title="Nikon" label="Nikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q62621" start="12058" end="12063" title="Canon Inc." label="Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q209935" start="12100" end="12115" title="point and shoot camera" label="point and shoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q455595" start="12116" end="12123" title="amateur" label="amateur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789781" start="12485" end="12495" title="Argus (camera company)" label="Argus Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q69827" start="12514" end="12559" title="Canon ELPH (series)" label="ELPH (Americas) / IXUS (Europe) / IXY (Japan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321103" start="12777" end="12784" title="Vivitar" label="Vivitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q196353" start="12812" end="12815" title="Single-lens reflex camera" label="SLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035824" start="12937" end="12949" title="Canon EOS IX" label="Canon EOS IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q354621" start="12973" end="12987" title="Minolta Vectis" label="Minolta Vectis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218180" start="13006" end="13018" title="Nikon Pronea" label="Nikon Pronea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13040" end="13055" title="Nikon Corporation#Optics" label="Nikon IX lenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074132" start="13141" end="13164" title="Zoom-lens reflex camera" label="Zoom-lens reflex camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608592" start="13351" end="13366" title="Herbert Keppler" label="Herbert Keppler"/>
<link wikidata="Q209633" start="14046" end="14054" title="Canon EF mount" label="Canon EF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149640" start="14059" end="14072" title="Nikon F mount" label="Nikon F mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014695" start="14169" end="14191" title="Minolta Dimâge RD 3000" label="Minolta Dimâge RD 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q860894" start="14473" end="14485" title="image circle" label="image circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10887014" start="14769" end="14779" title="Canon EF 24-85mm lens" label="EF 24-85mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033203" start="14781" end="14791" title="Canon EF 22-55mm lens" label="EF 22-55mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326874" start="14797" end="14808" title="Canon EF 55-200mm lens" label="EF 55-200mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142960" start="15099" end="15111" title="catadioptric" label="catadioptric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15288" end="15321" title="Nikon F-mount#IX-Nikkor zooms" label="&amp;quot;IX-Nikkor&amp;quot; zoom lenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156235" start="15434" end="15442" title="Nikon DX" label="Nikon DX"/>
<link wikidata="Q759853" start="15848" end="15859" title="Film format" label="Film format"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922334" start="15862" end="15888" title="List of color film systems" label="List of color film systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q21067571" start="15891" end="15911" title="List of film formats" label="List of film formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014476" start="15914" end="15935" title="Panoramic photography" label="Panoramic photography"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173707" wikidata="Q346551" url="?curid=173707" title="Joseph Stilwell">
<text>Joseph Warren &quot;Vinegar Joe&quot; Stilwell (19 March 1883 – 12 October 1946) was a United States Army general who served in the China Burma India Theater during World War II. Stilwell was made the Chief of Staff to the Chinese Nationalist Leader, Chiang Kai-shek. He spent the majority of his tenure striving for a 90-division army trained by American troops, using American lend-lease equipment, and fighting to reclaim Burma from the Japanese. His efforts led to friction with Chiang, who viewed troops not under his immediate control as a threat, and who saw the Chinese communists as a greater rival than Japan. An early American popular hero of the war for leading a column walking out of Burma pursued by the victorious Imperial Japanese Armed Forces, Stilwell&#x27;s implacable demands for units debilitated by disease to be sent into heavy combat resulted in Merrill&#x27;s Marauders becoming disenchanted with him. The U.S. government was infuriated by the 1944 fall of Changsha to a Japanese offensive. Stilwell delivered a message to the Chinese Nationalist leader Chiang Kai-shek from President Roosevelt that threatened that lend-lease aid to China would be cut off. The resulting friction atop an already tense relationship made Ambassador Patrick J. Hurley advocate that Stilwell had to be replaced. Chiang had been intent on keeping Lend-Lease supplies to fight the Chinese Communist Party, but Stilwell had been obeying his instructions to get the Communists and the Nationalists to co-operate against Japan.

Influential voices such as the journalist Brooks Atkinson viewed the Communists as benign and Stilwell as a victim of a corrupt regime. The ousting of Stilwell fermented the disillusionment of US policymakers with Chiang that culminated in the 1947 end of American assistance to the Republic of China during the Chinese Civil War.

Stilwell&#x27;s admirers saw him as having been given inadequate resources and incompatible objectives. Critics viewed him as a hard-charging officer whose temperament and conduct towards Chiang contributed to the loss of China. Barbara Tuchman, who won the Pulitzer Prize for her work on Stillwell, concluded he failed to accomplish an impossible task notwithstanding his indomitable will, and the failure lay with the Chinese&#x27;s innate rejection of Western means.

==Early life and education==
Stilwell was born on 19 March 1883, in Palatka, Florida. His parents were Doctor Benjamin Stilwell and Mary A. Peene. Stilwell was an eighth-generation descendant of an English colonist who had arrived in America in 1638 and whose descendants remained in New York until the birth of Stilwell&#x27;s father. 
Named for a family friend and the doctor who delivered him, Stilwell, known as Warren by his family, grew up in Yonkers, New York, under a strict regimen from his father that included an emphasis on religion. Stilwell later admitted to his daughter that he picked up criminal instincts by &quot;being forced to go to Church and Sunday School, and seeing how little real good religion does anybody, I advise passing them all up and using common sense instead.&quot;

Stilwell&#x27;s rebellious attitude led him to a record of unruly behavior once he reached a postgraduate level at Yonkers High School. Prior to his last year, Stilwell had performed meticulously in his classes and had participated in football (as quarterback) and track. Under the discretion of his father, Stilwell was then placed into a postgraduate course and immediately formed a group of friends whose activities ranged from card playing to stealing the desserts from the senior dance in 1900. The last event in which an administrator was punched led to the expulsions and suspensions for Stilwell&#x27;s friends. Meanwhile, since he had already graduated, Stilwell was once again by his father&#x27;s guidance sent to attend the US Military Academy at West Point, rather than Yale University, as had been originally planned.

Despite missing the deadline to apply for congressional appointment to the military academy, Stilwell gained entry through the use of family connections, via which US President William McKinley was approached. In his first year, Stilwell underwent hazing as a plebe which he referred to as &quot;hell.&quot; At West Point, Stilwell showed an aptitude for languages such as French in which he ranked first in his class during his second year. In sports, Stilwell is credited with introducing basketball to the academy, participating in cross-country running as captain, and playing on the varsity football team. At West Point, he had two demerits for laughing during drill. Ultimately, Stilwell graduated with the class of 1904 and ranked 32nd out 124 cadets.

In 1910, he married Winifred Alison Smith (1889–1972). They were the parents of five children, including Brigadier General Joseph Stilwell Jr. (West Point 1933), who served in World War II, the Korean War, and the Vietnam War.

==Early military career==

Stilwell later taught at West Point and attended the Infantry Advanced Course and the Command and General Staff College. During World War I, he was the Fourth Corps intelligence officer and helped plan the St. Mihiel Offensive. He was awarded the Army Distinguished Service Medal for his service in France, the medal&#x27;s citation reading as follows:

Stilwell is often remembered by his sobriquet, &quot;Vinegar Joe,&quot; which he acquired as a commander at Fort Benning, Georgia. Stilwell often gave harsh critiques of performance in field exercises, and a subordinate, stung by the caustic remarks, drew a caricature of Stilwell rising out of a vinegar bottle. After discovering the caricature, Stilwell pinned it to a board and had the drawing photographed and distributed to friends. Yet another indication of his view of life was the motto he kept on his desk: &quot;Illegitimi non carborundum&quot;, a form of fractured Latin that translates as &quot;Don&#x27;t let the bastards grind you down.&quot;

==World War II==
Between the wars, Stilwell served three tours in China, where he mastered spoken and written Chinese and was the military attaché at the US legation in Beijing from 1935 to 1939. In 1939 and 1940 he was assistant commander of the 2nd Infantry Division and from 1940 to 1941 organized and trained the 7th Infantry Division at Fort Ord, California. It was there that his leadership style which emphasized concern for the average soldier and minimized ceremonies and officious discipline, earned him the nickname of &quot;Uncle Joe.&quot;

Just prior to the United States entering World War II, following the Imperial Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Stilwell had been recognized as the Army&#x27;s top corps commander, and he was initially selected to plan and command the Allied invasion of North Africa. However, he and the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff were skeptical about the operation and believed military planners underestimated the risk of submarine attacks interfering with the amphibious landings. He also believed that Allied military planners were too lenient towards Francoist Spain and underestimated the risk of it joining the Axis powers, writing &quot;The Boches own the country. Franco must pay the bill for his war.&quot; After Stilwell prepared a scathingly anti-British final report on the Arcadia Conference, his superiors decided to reassign him. When it became necessary to send a senior officer to China to keep it in the war, Stilwell was selected, over his own personal objections, by US President Franklin Roosevelt and his old friend, Army Chief of Staff George Marshall.

Stilwell became the chief of staff to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, served as US commander in the China Burma India Theater, was responsible for all Lend-Lease supplies going to China, and later became deputy commander of South East Asia Command. Despite his status and position in China, he became involved in conflicts with other senior Allied officers over the distribution of lend-lease materiel, Chinese political sectarianism and proposals to incorporate Chinese and US forces in the 11th Army Group under British command.

===Burma retreat and offensive===

In February 1942 Stilwell was promoted to lieutenant general and was assigned to the China-Burma-India Theater (CBI). In that position, Stilwell had three major roles: commander of all US forces in China, Burma, and India; deputy commander of the Burma-India Theater under Admiral Louis Mountbatten; and military advisor to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, the commander of all Nationalist Chinese forces as well as commander of the Chinese Theater.

The CBI was a geographical administrative command on the same level as the commands of Dwight Eisenhower and Douglas MacArthur, but unlike other combat theaters like the European Theater of Operations, the CBI was never formally designated a &quot;theater of operations&quot; and did not report to an overall American commander. The China Theater came under the operational command of Chiang, the commander of the National Revolutionary Army, and the Burma India Theater came under the operational command of the British (first GHQ India and later the Allied South East Asia Command whose supreme commander was Mountbatten). During his tenure, there were hardly any American combat forces in the theater, and Stilwell commanded Chinese troops almost exclusively.

The British and the Chinese were ill-equipped and more often than not on the receiving end of Japanese offensives. Chiang was interested in conserving his troops and Allied lend-lease supplies to be used against any sudden Japanese offensive and against Communist forces in a later civil war. His wariness increased after he had observed the disastrous Allied performance during the Japanese invasion of Burma. After fighting and resisting the Japanese for five years, many in the Nationalist government felt that it was time for the Allies to assume a greater burden in fighting the war.

The Allied forces were beset by a difference in strategies. Chiang, having fought against Japan since 1937, favored &quot;defense in depth&quot;, an approach partially adopted by the British later in 1944. During the early stages of the conflict both the British and the Americans underestimated the Japanese. Captain Evans Carlson, after observing the Battle of Shanghai in 1937, called the Imperial Japanese Army &quot;third rate&quot;, while Stilwell wanted to go on the offensive to save Burma. The Japanese divisions there were proficient in both jungle and offroad warfare. They successfully outmaneuvred the road-bound British, coordinated with air support, and exploited local anticolonial sentiments.

The situation was not helped by multiple incidents of miscommunication and insubordination. In February 1942, while retreating across the Sittaung River, the main British force left two brigades on the wrong side after prematurely blowing up the bridge. During an ambush against incoming Japanese at Pyinmana, only the Chinese 5th Army stayed in position. The British pulled back, fearing encirclement, while the Chinese 200th Division refused to rush in.

The first step to fighting the war for Stilwell was the reformation of the Chinese Army. The reforms clashed with the delicate balance of political and military alliances in China, which kept Chiang in power. Reforming the army meant removing men who maintained Chiang&#x27;s position as commander-in-chief. Chiang gave Stilwell technical overall command of some Chinese troops but worried that the new US-led forces would become yet another independent force outside of his control. Since 1942, members of his staff had continually objected to Chinese troops being used in Burma for what they viewed as returning the country to British colonial control.

Chiang therefore sided with Major General Claire Lee Chennault&#x27;s proposals for the war against the Japanese to be continued largely using existing Chinese forces supported by air forces, which Chennault assured Chiang to be feasible. The dilemma forced Chennault and Stilwell into competition for the valuable lend-lease supplies arriving over the Himalayas from British-controlled India, an obstacle referred to as &quot;The Hump.&quot;

George Marshall&#x27;s biennial report covering 1 July 1943 to 30 June 1945, acknowledged that he had given Stilwell &quot;one of the most difficult&quot; assignments of any theater commander.
After the collapse of the Allied defenses in Burma, which cut China off from all land and sea supply routes, Stilwell declined an airlift offer from General Chennault and led his staff of 117 out of Burma into Assam, India, on foot. They marched at what his men called the &quot;Stilwell stride&quot; of 105 paces per minute. Two of the men accompanying him, his aide Frank Dorn and the war correspondent Jack Belden, wrote about their experiences in &quot;Walkout with Stilwell in Burma&quot; (1971) and &quot;Retreat with Stilwell&quot; (1943) respectively. The Assam route was used by other retreating Allied and Chinese forces.

Stilwell&#x27;s walkout separated him from the approximately 100,000 Chinese troops still there. 25 thousand of them would later perish during their retreat due to the harsh jungle conditions, poor logistics, and Japanese military operations.

In India, Stilwell soon became well-known for his no-nonsense demeanor and his disregard for military pomp and ceremony. His trademarks were a battered Army campaign hat, GI shoes, and a plain service uniform with no insignia of rank. He frequently carried a Model 1903, .30–06 Caliber, Springfield rifle in preference to a sidearm. His hazardous march out of Burma and his bluntly honest assessment of the disaster captured the imagination of the American public: &quot;I claim we got a hell of a beating. We got run out of Burma and it is humiliating as hell. I think we ought to find out what caused it, go back and retake it.&quot;

Stilwell&#x27;s derogatory remarks castigating the ineffectiveness of what he termed &quot;Limey&quot; forces, which was often repeated by Stilwell&#x27;s staff, did not sit well with British and Commonwealth commanders.

After the Japanese occupied Burma, China was almost completely cut off from Allied aid and materiel except through the hazardous route of flying cargo aircraft over the Hump. Early on, Roosevelt and the US War Department had given priority to other theaters for US combat forces, equipment, and logistical support. The closure of the Burma Road and the fall of Burma made it extremely difficult even to replace Chinese war losses. This jeopardized the Allies&#x27; initial strategy, which was to maintain the Chinese resistance to the Japanese by providing logistical and air support.

In August 1942, Stilwell opened a training center in Ramgarh, India, west of Calcutta, to train Chinese troops which had retreated to Assam from Burma. Stilwell&#x27;s decision to establish the center at Ramgarh met with opposition from several senior British commanders, including Wavell, primarily due to logistical reasons. Chinese soldiers at the center received medical care along with new weapons and uniforms and were trained how to operate artillery, Universal Carriers, and M3 Stuart tanks. By the end of December 1942, 32,000 Chinese troops were being trained at the center to create the 22nd and 38th Divisions along with three artillery regiments and a tank battalion. From the outset, Stilwell&#x27;s primary goals were the opening of a land route to China from northern Burma and India by means of a ground offensive in northern Burma to allow more supplies to be transported to China and to organize, equip, and train a reorganized and competent Chinese army that would fight the Japanese in the China-Burma-India theater (CBI). Stilwell argued that the CBI was the only area with the possibility for the Allies to engage large numbers of troops against their common enemy, Japan. Unfortunately, the huge airborne logistical train of support from the US to British India was still being organized, and supplies being flown over the Hump were barely sufficient to maintain Chennault&#x27;s air operations and replace some of the Chinese war losses, let alone equip and supply an entire army.

Additionally, critical supplies intended for the CBI were being diverted to various crises in other combat theaters. Of the supplies that made it over the Hump, some were diverted by Chinese and American personnel to the black market for their personal enrichment. As a result, most Allied commanders in India, with the exception of General Orde Wingate and his Chindit operations, were focused on defensive measures.

===Disagreements with Chiang and British===

Stilwell left the defeated Chinese troops, and escaped Burma in 1942. Chiang had given him nominal command of these troops, though Chinese generals later admitted that they had considered Stilwell as an &quot;adviser&quot; and sometimes took orders directly from Chiang. Chiang was outraged by what he saw as Stilwell&#x27;s blatant abandonment of the 200th Division, his best army, without orders and began to question Stilwell&#x27;s capability and judgment as a military commander.

Chiang was also infuriated at Stilwell&#x27;s strict control of US lend lease supplies to China. Instead of confronting Stilwell or communicating his concerns to Marshall and Roosevelt when they asked Chiang to assess Stilwell&#x27;s leadership after the Allied disaster in Burma, Chiang reiterated his &quot;full confidence and trust&quot; in Stilwell but countermanded some of the orders to Chinese units issued by Stilwell in his capacity as Chief of Staff.

An outraged Stilwell began to call Chiang &quot;the little dummy&quot; or &quot;Peanut&quot; in his reports to Washington, D.C., &quot;Peanut&quot; being originally intended as a code word for Chiang in official radio messages. On the contrary, the term &quot;Peanut&quot; was first mentioned during Stilwell&#x27;s flight to the CBI Theater in March 1942. Col. Willard Wyman, a member of Stilwell&#x27;s staff on that flight mentioned Chiang &quot;...is like a peanut perched on top of a dung heap...&quot;. Chiang repeatedly expressed his pent-up grievances against Stilwell for his &quot;recklessness, insubordination, contempt, and arrogance&quot; to U.S. envoys to China and was angry at his obsession with going on the offensive in Burma when East China was falling into Japan&#x27;s hands.

Stilwell was infuriated by the rampant corruption of Chiang&#x27;s regime. Stilwell faithfully kept a diary in which he began to note the corruption and the amount of money ($380,584,000 in 1944 dollars) being wasted on the procrastinating Chiang and his government. The &quot;Cambridge History of China&quot;, for instance, estimates that 60%–70% of Chiang&#x27;s Nationalist conscripts did not make it through their basic training, with 40% deserting and the remaining 20% dying of starvation before their full induction into the military. Eventually, Stilwell&#x27;s belief that Chiang&#x27;s and his generals were incompetent and corrupt reached such proportions that Stilwell sought to cut off lend-lease aid to China. Stilwell, while attending the Cairo Conference, received a perceived and verbal order to plan an assassination of Chiang. Stilwell discussed this with his Aide, Col. Frank Dorn. Both were baffled, nevertheless, Stilwell delegated that task to Dorn. It was planned but was never carried out.

Stilwell pressed Chiang and the British to take immediate actions to retake Burma, but Chiang demanded impossibly large amounts of supplies before he would agree to take offensive action, and the British refused to meet their previous pledges to provide naval and ground troops because of Churchill&#x27;s &quot;Europe first&quot; strategy.

Eventually, Stilwell began to complain openly to Roosevelt that Chiang was hoarding U.S. Lend-Lease supplies because he wanted to keep the Nationalist forces ready to fight Mao Zedong&#x27;s Communists after the end of the war against the Japanese. From 1942 to 1944, however, 98% of US military aid over the Hump had gone directly to the 14th Air Force and US military personnel in China.

Stilwell also continually clashed with Field Marshal Archibald Wavell and apparently came to believe that the British in India were more concerned with protecting their colonial possessions than helping the Chinese fight the Japanese. In August 1943, as a result of constant feuding and conflicting objectives of British, American, and Chinese commands, along with the lack of a coherent strategic vision for the China Burma India (CBI) theater, the Combined Chiefs of Staff split the CBI command into separate Chinese and Southeast Asia Theaters.

Stilwell countered Mountbatten&#x27;s January 1944 attempt to once again change the plans to favor an amphibious assault in the Bay of Bengal and Sumatra. &quot;The limeys are welshing,&quot; he wrote in his diary and of the plan that seemed to him as nothing more than &quot;fancy charts, false figures and dirty intentions&quot;. He sent Brigadier General Boatner to brief the Joint Staffs and Roosevelt.

===Command of Chindits===

During his time in India, Stilwell became increasingly disenchanted with British forces and did not hesitate to voice criticisms of what he viewed as hesitant or cowardly behavior. Of the Chindit casualties, 90% were incurred in the last phase of the campaign from 17 May, while they were under Stilwell&#x27;s direct command. The British viewed the situation quite differently and pointed out that from 6 to 27 June, Michael Calvert&#x27;s 77th Brigade, which lacked heavy weapons, had taken Mogaung and suffered 800 casualties (50%) among those of the brigade involved in the operation.

Stilwell infuriated Calvert and the British by announcing via the BBC that Chinese troops had captured Mogaung but not referring to the British. The Chindits were outraged, and Calvert famously signaled to Stilwell&#x27;s headquarters, &quot;Chinese reported taking Mogaung. My Brigade now taking umbrage.&quot; Stilwell&#x27;s son was an intelligence officer and said that Umbrage was so small that he could not find it on the map.

Stilwell expected the 77th Brigade to join the siege of Myitkyina, but Calvert was so sickened by demands on his troops that he considered abusive that switched off his radios and withdrew to Stilwell&#x27;s base. A court-martial was likely until Stilwell and Calvert met in person, the latter being ready to trade punches. Stilwell finally appreciated the conditions under which the Chindits had been operating, apologized by blaming his staff officers for not receiving correct information, and allowed him and his men to withdraw. He finally said to Calvert, &quot;You and your boys have done a great job. I congratulate you&quot;. Stilwell also awarded number of medals including a Silver Star.

The 111th Brigade, after it rested, had orders to capture a hill known as Point 2171. That occurred, but the men were now utterly exhausted. Most of them were suffering from malaria, dysentery, and malnutrition. On 8 July, at the insistence of Mountbatten, doctors examined the brigade. Of the 2200 men present from four-and-a-half battalions, only 119 were declared fit. The brigade was evacuated. John Masters kept the fit men, sarcastically named &quot;111 Company,&quot; in the field until 1 August.

The portion of 111 Brigade east of the Irrawaddy River was known as Morris Force, after its commander, Lieutenant-Colonel &quot;Jumbo&quot; Morris. It had spent several months harassing Japanese traffic from Bhamo to Myitkyina. It had then attempted to complete the encirclement of Myitkyina. Stilwell was angered that it was unable to do so, but Slim pointed out that Stilwell&#x27;s Chinese 5,500 troops had also failed in that task. By 14 July, Morris Force was down to three platoons. A week later, it had only 25 men fit for duty. Morris Force was evacuated about the same time as 77th Brigade.

Captain Charlton Ogburn, Jr., a US Army Marauder officer, and Chindit Brigade Commanders John Masters and Michael Calvert, later recalled Stilwell&#x27;s appointment of a staff officer specially detailed by him to visit subordinate commands to chastise their officers and men as being &quot;yellow.&quot; In October 1943, after the Joint Planning Staff at GHQ India had rejected a plan by Stilwell to fly his Chinese troops to northern Burma, Field Marshal Archibald Wavell, asked whether Stilwell was satisfied on purely military grounds that the plan could not work. Stilwell replied that he was. Wavell then asked what Stilwell would say to Chiang, and Stilwell replied, &quot;I shall tell him the bloody British wouldn&#x27;t fight.&quot;

===Myitkyina Offensive and aftermath===

With the establishment of the new South East Asia Command in August 1943, Stilwell was appointed deputy supreme allied commander under Vice Admiral Mountbatten. Taking command of various Chinese and Allied forces, including a new US Army special operations formation, the 5307th Composite Unit (Provisional), later known as Merrill&#x27;s Marauders, Stilwell built up his Chinese forces for an eventual offensive in northern Burma. On 21 December 1943, Stilwell assumed direct control of planning for the invasion of northern Burma that culminated with the capture of the Japanese-held town of Myitkyina. In the meantime, Stilwell ordered General Frank Merrill and the Marauders to start long-range jungle penetration missions behind Japanese lines after the pattern of the British Chindits. In February 1944, three Marauder battalions marched into Burma. Stilwell was at the Ledo Road front when the Marauders arrived at their jump-off point, but the general did not walk out to the road to bid them farewell.
In April 1944, Stilwell launched his final offensive to capture the Burmese city of Myitkyina. In support of that objective, the Marauders were ordered to undertake a long flanking maneuver towards the town that involved a grueling 65-mile jungle march. Having been deployed since February in combat operations in the jungles of Burma, the Marauders were seriously depleted, suffered from both combat losses and disease, and lost additional men en route to the objective. A particularly devastating scourge was a severe outbreak of amoebic dysentery, which erupted shortly after the Marauders linked up with the Chinese Army in India, called X Force.

By then, the men of the Marauders had openly begun to suspect Stilwell&#x27;s commitment to their welfare and made no effort to hide their displeasure with their hard-driving commander. Despite their sacrifices, Stilwell appeared unconcerned about their losses and had rejected repeated requests for medals for individual acts of heroism. Initial promises of a rest and rotation were ignored, and the Marauders were not even air-dropped replacement uniforms or mail until late April.

On 17 May, the 1,310 remaining Marauders attacked Myitkyina airfield in concert with elements of two Chinese infantry regiments and a small artillery contingent. The airfield was quickly taken, but the town, which Stilwell&#x27;s intelligence staff had believed to be lightly defended, was garrisoned by significant numbers of well-equipped Japanese troops, who were steadily being reinforced. A preliminary attack on the town by two Chinese regiments was thrown back with heavy losses. The Marauders did not have the manpower to overwhelm Myitkyina and its defenses immediately. When additional Chinese forces had arrived in a position to attack, the Japanese forces totaled some 4,600 fanatical Japanese defenders.

During the siege, which took place during the height of the monsoon season, the Marauders&#x27; second-in-command, Colonel Hunter, and the unit&#x27;s regimental and battalion level surgeons, had urgently recommended for the entire 5307th to be relieved of duty and returned to rear areas for rest and recovery. By then, most of the men had fevers and continual dysentery, forcing the men to cut the seats out of their uniform trousers to fire their weapons and relieve themselves simultaneously. Stilwell rejected the evacuation recommendation but made a front line inspection of the Myitkyina lines. He then ordered all medical staff to stop returning combat troops suffering from disease or illness but to return them to combat status by using medications to keep down fevers. The feelings of many Marauders towards Stilwell were summed up by one soldier, who stated, &quot;I had him [Stilwell] in my sights. I coulda&#x27; squeezed one off and no one woulda&#x27; known it wasn&#x27;t a Jap who got that son of a bitch.&quot;

Stilwell also ordered that all Marauders evacuated from combat from wounds or fever first submit to a special medical &quot;examination&quot; by doctors appointed by his headquarters staff. These examinations passed many ailing soldiers as fit for duty; Stilwell&#x27;s staff roamed hospital hallways in search of any Marauder with a temperature lower than 103 degrees Fahrenheit. Some of the men who were passed and sent back into combat were immediately re-evacuated as unfit at the insistence of forward medical personnel. Later, Stilwell&#x27;s staff placed blame on Army medical personnel for over-zealously interpreting his return-to-duty order.

During the siege, Japanese soldiers resisted fiercely and generally fought to the last man. As a result, Myitkyina did not fall until 4 August 1944, after Stilwell was forced to send in thousands of Chinese reinforcements, but Stilwell was pleased that the objective had at last been taken (his notes from his personal diary contained &quot;Boy, will this burn up the Limeys!&quot;). Later, Stilwell blamed the length of the siege partly on British and Gurkha Chindit forces for not promptly responding to his demands to move north in an attempt to pressure Japanese troops, but the Chindits themselves had suffered grievous casualties in several fierce pitched battles against Japanese troops in the Burmese jungles, along with losses from illness and combat exhaustion. Stilwell also had not kept his British allies clearly informed of his force movements or coordinated his offensive plans with those of General Slim.

Bereft of further combat replacements for his hard-pressed Marauder battalions, Stilwell felt that he had no choice but to continue offensive operations with his existing forces by using the Marauders as &quot;the point of the spear&quot; until they had achieved all their objectives or been wiped out. He was also concerned that pulling out the Marauders, the only US ground unit in the campaign, would result in charges of favoritism and force him to evacuate the exhausted Chinese and British Chindit forces as well. When General William Slim, the commander of the British Commonwealth Fourteenth Army in Burma, informed Stilwell that his men were exhausted and should be withdrawn, Stilwell rejected the idea by insisting that his subordinate commanders simply did not understand enlisted men and their tendency to magnify physical challenges. Having made his own &quot;long march&quot; out of Burma under his own power by using jungle trails, Stilwell found it difficult to sympathize with those who had been in combat in the jungle for months on end without relief. In retrospect, his statements then revealed a lack of understanding of the limitations of lightly equipped unconventional forces that were used in conventional roles.

Myitkyina and the dispute over evacuation policy precipitated a hurried Army Inspector General investigation, followed by US congressional committee hearings, but no disciplinary measure was taken against Stilwell for his decisions as overall commander.

Only a week after the fall of Myitkyina in Burma, the 5307th Marauder force, down to only 130 combat-effective men of the original 2,997, was disbanded.

===Conflict with Chennault===
One of the most significant conflicts to emerge during the war was between General Stilwell and General Claire Chennault, the commander of the famed &quot;Flying Tigers&quot; and later air force commander. As adviser to the Republic of China Air Force, Chennault proposed a limited air offensive against the Japanese in China in 1943 by using a series of forward air bases. Stilwell insisted that the idea was untenable and that any air campaign should not begin until fully fortified air bases, supported by large ground forces, had been established. Stilwell then argued for all air resources to be diverted to his forces in India for an early conquest of northern Burma.

In following Chennault&#x27;s advice, Chiang rejected the proposal, and British commanders sided with Chennault since they were aware that they could not launch a co-ordinated Allied offensive into Burma in 1943 with the resources that were available. During the summer of 1943, Stilwell&#x27;s headquarters concentrated on plans to rebuild the Chinese Army for an offensive in northern Burma despite Chiang&#x27;s insistence on support to Chennault&#x27;s air operations.

Stilwell believed that after forcing a supply route through northern Burma by a ground offensive against the Japanese, he could train and equip 30 Chinese divisions with modern combat equipment. A smaller number of Chinese forces would transfer to India, where two or three new Chinese divisions would also be raised. That plan then remained only theoretical since the limited available airlift capacity for deliveries of supplies to China over the Hump was being used to sustain Chennault&#x27;s air operations, instead of equipping Chinese ground units.

In 1944, the Japanese launched the counteroffensive, Operation Ichi-Go, designed to knock China out of the war once and for all. It saw half a million men and 800 tanks, supplied by 70,000 to 100,000 horses dragging wagons and 12,000 to 15,000 vehicles. The operation quickly overran Chennault&#x27;s forward air bases and proved Stilwell to be correct. By then, Allied supply efforts via the Hump airlift were steadily improving in tonnage supplied per month. With the replacement of Chinese war losses, Chennault now saw little need for a ground offensive in northern Burma to reopen a ground supply route to China. Augmented with increased military equipment and additional troops and concerned about defense of the approaches to India, British authorities now sided with Stilwell.

In co-ordination with a southern offensive by Nationalist Chinese forces under General Wei Lihuang, Allied troops under Stilwell&#x27;s command launched the long-awaited invasion of northern Burma. After heavy fighting and casualties, both forces linked up in January 1945. Stilwell&#x27;s strategy remained unchanged: opening a new ground supply route from India to China would allow the Allies to equip and train new Chinese army divisions to be used against the Japanese. The new road network, later called the Ledo Road, would link the northern end of the Burma Road as the primary supply route to China. Stilwell&#x27;s staff planners had estimated the route would supply 65,000 tons of supplies per month.

Using those figures, Stilwell argued that the Ledo Road network would greatly surpass the tonnage being airlifted over the Hump. Chennault doubted that such an extended network of trails through difficult jungle could ever match the tonnage that could be delivered with modern cargo transport aircraft that were then being deployed in the theater. Progress on the Ledo Road was slow and could not be completed until the linkup of forces in January 1945.

In the end, Stilwell&#x27;s plans to train and to modernize 30 Chinese divisions in China and two or three divisions from forces that were already in India was never fully realized. As Chennault predicted, the supplies carried over the Ledo Road never approached in tonnage the levels of supplies airlifted monthly into China by the Hump. In July 1945, 71,000 tons of supplies were flown over the Hump, compared to 6,000 tons using the Ledo Road, and the airlift operation continued in operation until the end of the war.

When supplies were flowing over the Ledo Road in large quantities, operations in other theaters had shaped the course of the war against Japan. Stilwell&#x27;s drive into northern Burma, however, allowed Air Transport Command to fly supplies into China more quickly and safely by allowing American planes to fly a more southerly route without fear of Japanese fighters. American airplanes no longer had to make the dangerous venture over the Hump, which raised the delivery of supplies from 18,000 tons in June 1944 to 39,000 tons in November 1944. On 1 August 1945, planes crossed the Hump a minute and twelve seconds apart from one another.

In acknowledgment of Stilwell&#x27;s efforts, the Ledo Road was later renamed the Stilwell Road by Chiang.

===Recall from China===
Efforts to counter Operation Ichi-Go were hampered in part by disagreements between Chennault and Stilwell. Stilwell also clashed with Chiang over the question of Guilin, a city that was besieged by the Japanese. Chiang wanted Guilin defended to the last man, but Stilwell claimed that Guilin was a lost cause.

In his diary, Stilwell wrote: &quot;What they ought to do is to shoot the G-mo [Chiang] and Ho [General He Yingqin] and the rest of the gang.&quot; He ordered the American troops to pull out of Guilin and managed to persuade a reluctant Chiang to accept the loss of the city. The clash over Guilin was only a prelude to another clash in which Chiang demanded the return of the Y Force from Burma to defend Kunming, the capital of Yunnan Province, which was also being threatened by the Japanese advance. After meeting with Chiang, Stilwell wrote in his diary that Chiang was a &quot;crazy little bastard with that hickory nut he uses for a head... Usual cockeyed reasons and idiotic tactical and strategic conceptions. He is impossible!&quot;

Stilwell appealed directly to Roosevelt for help with his dispute with Chiang and so Roosevelt sent Chiang a message: &quot;I have urged time and again in recent months that you take drastic action to resist the disaster which has been moving closer to China and to you. Now, when you have not yet placed General Stilwell in command of all forces in China, we are faced with the loss of a critical area... with possible catastrophic consequences.&quot; Roosevelt ended his ultimatum to Chiang by the threat to end all American aid unless Chiang &quot;at once&quot; placed Stilwell &quot;in unrestricted command of all your forces.&quot;

Chennault later claimed that Stilwell had deliberately ordered Sino-American forces out of Guilin as a way of creating a crisis that would force Chiang to give up command of his armies to Stilwell. Stilwell&#x27;s diary supported Chennault&#x27;s claim, as Stilwell wrote that if a crisis emerged that was &quot;just sufficient to get rid of the Peanut without entirely wrecking the ship, it would be worth it.&quot; Stilwell went on to write that the entire Nationalist system had to be &quot;torn to bits&quot; and that Chiang would have to go.

An exultant Stilwell immediately delivered the letter to Chiang despite pleas from Patrick J. Hurley, Roosevelt&#x27;s special envoy in China, to delay in delivering the message and to work on a deal that would achieve Stilwell&#x27;s aim in a way that was more acceptable to Chiang. Stilwell wrote in his diary about handing over Roosevelt&#x27;s message: &quot;I handed this bundle of paprika to the Peanut and than sank back with a sigh. The harpoon hit the little bugger right in the solar plexus and went right through him. It was a clean hit, but beyond turning green and losing his powers of speech, he did not bat an eye.&quot; The British journalist Jonathan Fenby wrote about Roosevelt&#x27;s letter, &quot;Unless the President was ready for America to take over effective control of China, or halt Lend-Lease supplies and abandon the KMT to its fate, his stern words merely amounted to bluff.&quot;

Seeing that act as a move toward the complete subjugation of China, Chiang gave a formal reply in which he said that Stilwell must be replaced immediately and that Chiang would welcome any other qualified US general to fill Stilwell&#x27;s position.

Chiang called Roosevelt&#x27;s letter the &quot;greatest humiliation I have been subjected to in my life&quot; and stated that it was &quot;all too obvious that the United States intends to intervene in China&#x27;s internal affairs.&quot; Chiang told Hurley that the Chinese people were &quot;tired of the insults which Stilwell has seen fit to heap upon them.&quot; Chiang delivered a speech before the Central Executive Committee of the Nationalist Party that was leaked to the press and called Roosevelt&#x27;s letter a form of imperialism and stated that accepting Roosevelt&#x27;s demands would make him no different from the Japanese collaborator Wang Jingwei in Nanjing.

On 12 October 1944, Hurley reported to Washington that Stilwell was a &quot;fine man, but was incapable of understanding or co-operating with Chiang Kai-shek&quot; and went on to say that if Stilwell remained in command, all of China might be lost to the Japanese. Before sending his cable, Hurley showed it to Stilwell, who accused Hurley to his face of &quot;cutting my throat with a dull knife.&quot;

On 19 October 1944, Stilwell, who had been promoted to four-star general on 1 August 1944, was recalled from his command by Roosevelt. Partly as a result of controversy concerning the casualties suffered by US forces in Burma and partly because of the continuing difficulties with the British and Chinese commanders, Stilwell&#x27;s return to the US was not accompanied by the usual ceremony. Upon arrival, he was met by two army generals at the airport, who told him not to answer any of the media questions about China.

Stilwell was replaced by General Albert C. Wedemeyer, who received a telegram from Marshall on 27 October 1944, that directed him to proceed to China to assume command of the China Theatre and replace Stilwell. Wedemeyer later recalled his initial dread over the assignment, as service in the China Theater was considered to be a graveyard for American officials, both military and diplomatic.

When Wedemeyer actually arrived at Stilwell&#x27;s headquarters after the latter&#x27;s dismissal, Wedemeyer was dismayed to discover that Stilwell had intentionally departed without seeing him and had not left a single briefing paper for his guidance. Most other departing US military commanders greeted their replacement to have them thoroughly briefed on the strengths and the weaknesses of headquarters staff, the issues confronting the command, and the planned operations.

Searching the offices, Wedemeyer could find no documentary record of Stilwell&#x27;s plans or records of his former or future operations. General Wedemeyer then spoke with Stilwell&#x27;s staff officers but learned little from them because Stilwell, according to the staff, kept everything in his &quot;hip pocket&quot;.

Despite prompting by the news media, Stilwell never complained about his treatment by either Washington or Chiang.

==Reassignment==
After a three-month furlough, Stilwell, on 24 January 1945, assumed command of the Army Ground Forces with its headquarters at the Pentagon and oversaw all mobilization and training of army ground units in the United States.

On 23 June 1945, after the death of Lieutenant General Simon B. Buckner, Jr. on 18 June, Stilwell was appointed as commander of the Tenth United States Army shortly after the end of Japanese resistance in the Battle of Okinawa. The Tenth Army was slated to participate in Operation Olympic, the planned invasion of the island of Honshu, the largest Japanese home island. The Tenth Army was disbanded on 15 October 1945, after the surrender of Japan.

==Postwar career==
In November, Stilwell was appointed to lead a &quot;War Department Equipment Board&quot; in an investigation of the Army&#x27;s modernization in light of its recent experience. Among his recommendations was the establishment of a combined arms force to conduct extended service tests of new weapons and equipment and then formulate doctrine for its use, and the abolition of specialized anti-tank units. His most notable recommendation was for a vast improvement of the army&#x27;s defenses against all airborne threats, including ballistic missiles. In particular, he called for &quot;guided interceptor missiles, dispatched in accordance with electronically computed data obtained from radar detection stations.&quot;

On 1 March 1946, Stilwell assumed command of the Sixth US Army, with its headquarters at the Presidio of San Francisco. It had been reorganized as an administrative command in charge of army units in the Western United States. In May 1946, Stilwell and his former subordinate Frank Merrill led two US Marine platoons in suppressing a prison uprising, the Battle of Alcatraz.

==Death==
Stilwell died after surgery for stomach cancer on 12 October 1946, at the Presidio of San Francisco. He was still on active duty and five months short of reaching the army&#x27;s mandatory retirement age of 64. He was cremated, his ashes were scattered on the Pacific Ocean, and a cenotaph was placed at the West Point Cemetery. Among his military decorations are the Distinguished Service Cross, Distinguished Service Medal with one Oak Leaf Cluster, the Legion of Merit degree of Commander, the Bronze Star, and the Combat Infantryman Badge; the last award was given to him as he was dying.

==Political and personal views==
Barbara W. Tuchman recorded that Stilwell was a lifelong Republican: &quot;he retained the family Republicanism and joined naturally in the exhilarating exercise of Roosevelt-hating.&quot; Later, on the occasion that Stilwell met the president, she noted: &quot;At home, Stilwell was a conventional Republican who shared the sentiments and adopted the tone of the Roosevelt-haters, in which he was influenced by his brother John, an extremist of the species.&quot; Elsewhere she notes that in the view of an unnamed, close friend, &quot;Stilwell was liberal and sympathetic by instinct. But he was conservative in thought and politics.&quot;

Tuchman also noted Stilwell&#x27;s use in letters and diaries of a catalogue of now-insulting words: &quot;he used [them] easily and seemingly without pejorative content.&quot; These terms included &quot;limeys for the English, frogs for the French (&#x27;met a frog and his wife on shipboard&#x27;), huns and squareheads for Germans, wops for Italians, chinks or chinos for Chinese, googs for Filipinos, niggers or coons for Negroes.&quot; At the end of the war, Tuchman stated that he took &quot;a harsh pleasure in touring the gutted and burned-out districts of Yokohama and staring at the once arrogant [Japanese] now living in shanties of scrap lumber and tin and scratching in the dirt to plant onions.&quot;

His diary entry for 1 September 1945 (in Yokohama) stated in part, &quot;What a kick to stare at the arrogant, ugly, moon-faced, buck-toothed, bowlegged bastards, and realize where this puts them. Many newly demobilized soldiers around. Most police salute. People generally just apathetic. We gloated over the destruction &amp; came in at 3:00 am feeling fine.&quot;

During World War II, he praised the Soviet military and said that &quot;the Russian troops appeared to advantage, and those who believe the Red Army is rotten would do well to reconsider their views.&quot;

The content in Stilwell’s diaries is contradicted by his speaking out for Japanese-American servicemen threatened with racist incidents postwar. Because of his statements, Stilwell was recruited by the War Department to support Japanese-American servicemen. He attended rallies against racism and personally presented the family of 442nd Regimental Combat Team staff sergeant Kazuo Masuda, killed in action in Italy in 1944, with the Distinguished Service Cross. In an event at Santa Ana, California where actors Ronald Reagan and Robert Young also spoke, Stilwell praised Nisei soldiers. He remarked: &quot;Who after all is the real American? The real American is the man who calls it a fair exchange to lay down his life in order that American ideals may go on living. And judging by such a test, Sgt. Masuda was a better American than any of us today.&quot; Also in attendance at the event were actress Louise Allbritton, journalist Harry Flannery, former Congressman Will Rogers Jr., and actor Richard Loo.

==Legacy==

Stilwell was initiated to the Scottish Rite of Freemasonry.

In her book &quot;Stilwell and the American Experience in China, 1911-45&quot;, Tuchman wrote that Stilwell was sacrificed as a political expedient because of his inability to get along with his allies in the theater. Some historians, such as David Halberstam in his final book, &quot;The Coldest Winter: America and the Korean War&quot;, have theorized that Roosevelt was concerned that Chiang would sign a separate peace with Japan, which would free many Japanese divisions to fight elsewhere, and that Roosevelt wanted to placate Chiang. The power struggle over the China Theater that emerged among Stilwell, Chennault, and Chiang reflected US political divisions of the time.

A very different interpretation of events suggests that Stilwell, pressing for his full command of all Chinese forces, had made diplomatic inroads with the People&#x27;s Liberation Army commanded by Mao Zedong. Stilwell bypassed Chiang, his theater commander, and had gotten Mao to agree to follow an American commander. Stilwell&#x27;s confrontational approach in the power struggle with Chiang ultimately led to Chiang&#x27;s determination to have Stilwell recalled to the US.

According to Guan Zhong, the president of the Examination Yuan, Stilwell had once expressed his regret of never having the opportunity to fight alongside the Chinese Communists, especially with General Zhu De, before his death.

Stilwell did not appreciate the developments in warfare brought about by World War II, including strategic air power and the use of highly trained infantrymen as jungle guerrilla fighters. One of the disagreements was with the equally acerbic General Chennault, who Stilwell felt to overvalue the effectiveness of air power against massed ground troops, as was demonstrated by the fall of the 14th Air Force bases in eastern China (Hengyang, Guilin, etc.) during the Japanese offensive in eastern China in 1944.

Stilwell also clashed with other officers, including Orde Wingate, who led the Chindits, and Colonel Charles Hunter, who was in charge of Merrill&#x27;s Marauders. Stilwell could not appreciate the toll that constant jungle warfare took on even the most highly trained troops or the incapacity of lightly armed fast-moving jungle guerrilla forces to dislodge heavily armed regular infantry that was supported by artillery. Accordingly, Stilwell abused both Chindits and Marauders and earned the contempt of both units and their commanders.

In other respects, however, Stilwell was a skilled tactician in the US Army&#x27;s land warfare tradition, with a deep appreciation of the logistics required of campaigning in rough terrain, which caused his dedication to (perhaps even obsession with) the Ledo Road project for which he received several awards, including the Distinguished Service Cross and the US Army Distinguished Service Medal. The trust that Stilwell placed in men of real insight and character in understanding China, particularly the China Hands, John Stewart Service and John Paton Davies, Jr., confirms that assessment.

Arguably, if Stilwell had been given the number of American regular infantry divisions that he had continually requested, the US experience in China and Burma could have been very different. Certainly, his Army peers, General Douglas MacArthur and General George Marshall had the highest respect for his abilities, and both ensured that he replaced General Simon Bolivar Buckner, Jr. as commander of Tenth US Army at Okinawa after the latter&#x27;s death. During the last year of the war, however, the US was strained to meet all its military obligations. The cargo aircraft diverted to supply Stilwell, the 14th Air Force for the Chinese in the East made airdrop-dependent campaigns in the West, such as Operation Market Garden, woefully short of aircraft, although bad weather during the Arnhem Campaign may have been a more important factor.

Although Chiang succeeded in removing Stilwell, the public relations damage suffered by the Nationalist regime was irreparable. Right before Stilwell&#x27;s departure, &quot;The New York Times&quot; drama critic-turned-war correspondent Brooks Atkinson interviewed him in Chongqing and wrote:

The decision to relieve General Stilwell represents the political triumph of a moribund, anti-democratic regime that is more concerned with maintaining its political supremacy than in driving the Japanese out of China. The Chinese Communists... have good armies that are now fighting guerrilla warfare against the Japanese in North China... The Generalissimo regards these armies as the chief threat to his supremacy... has made no sincere attempt to arrange at least a truce with them for the duration of the war... No diplomatic genius could have overcome the Generalissimo&#x27;s basic unwillingness to risk his armies in battle with the Japanese.
Atkinson, who had visited Mao in Yan&#x27;an, saw the Communist forces as a democratic movement. After Atkinson visited Mao, his article on his visit was &quot;Yenan: A Chinese Wonderland City&quot;. The Nationalists were in turn viewed as hopelessly reactionary and corrupt, a view that was then shared by many of the US press corps in China. The negative image of the Nationalists in the US played a significant factor in President Harry Truman&#x27;s decision to end all aid to Chiang at the height of the Chinese Civil War.

The British historian Andrew Roberts quoted Stilwell&#x27;s disparaging remarks about the British war effort in Asia to illustrate his strong Anglophobia, which became a stumbling block to smooth co-operation between American and British forces in Asia. The British historian Rana Mitter argued that Stilwell never appreciated that his position as Chiang&#x27;s chief of staff to Chiang did not give him as much authority as Marshall had in his position as army chief of staff. Chiang, not Stilwell, was the Chinese forces&#x27; commander-in chief, and Chiang resisted Stilwell&#x27;s initiatives if they involved committing Chinese forces to do-or-die engagements or if Chinese troops were removed from his immediate control to bases in India. Mitter viewed Chiang as correct in attempting to husband China&#x27;s resources after the serious losses in 1937 to 1941. Mitter also supported the view that Chennault could have accomplished much more if Stilwell had not diverted a large proportion of lend-lease equipment to the Chinese troops in India. Mitter factored in the impact of the collaborationist Wang Jingwei as yet another major force in China. Stilwell&#x27;s mastery of written and spoken Chinese made him the default American choice for the China command. Mitter projected that his talents could have been far better employed in North Africa, as Marshall had originally planned.

The General Joseph Stilwell House was built between 1933 and 1934, located at 26218 Inspiration Avenue, in Carmel Point, at the southern city limits of Carmel-by-the-Sea, California. The large, two-story Spanish Eclectic-style house remains a private residence. A commemorative stone plaque has been placed on the left-hand side of the house.

A number of streets, buildings, and areas across the country have been named for Stilwell over the years, including Joseph Stilwell Middle School in Jacksonville, Florida. The Soldiers&#x27; Club that he envisioned in 1940, when there was no such thing as a soldiers&#x27; club in the army, was completed in 1943 at Fort Ord on the bluffs overlooking Monterey Bay. Many years later, the building was renamed to Stilwell Hall in his honor, but because of the erosion of the bluffs over the decades, the building was taken down in 2003. Stilwell&#x27;s former residence in Chongqing, a city along the Yangtze River to which Chiang&#x27;s government retreated after it had been forced from Nanjing by Japanese troops, has been converted to the General Joseph W. Stilwell Museum in his honor.

==In popular culture==
Stilwell is portrayed on film by Erville Alderson in &quot;Objective, Burma!&quot; (1945), by John Hoyt in Samuel Fuller&#x27;s &quot;Merrill&#x27;s Marauders&quot; (1962), by Robert Stack in Steven Spielberg&#x27;s &quot;1941&quot; (1979), and by Yachun Dong in &quot;Chinese Expeditionary Force (TV series)&quot; (2011).

On 24 August 2000, the US Postal Service issued the first 10¢ Distinguished Americans series postage stamp honoring Stilwell.

The award for the Outstanding Overall Cadet, Senior Division, in the California Cadet Corps is the General Joseph W. Stilwell Award.

Streets in Marina, California, Kendall Park, New Jersey Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Albuquerque, New Mexico, and the Presidio of San Francisco are named for him.

==Awards and decorations==
His awards include:

*General Stilwell is one of five general officers who have been awarded the honorary Combat Infantryman Badge (CIB) for service while a general officer, along with General Matthew Ridgway, Major General William F. Dean, General of the Army Omar Bradley, and General of the Army Douglas MacArthur. Generals are not allowed to be awarded the CIB. The CIB is only available to colonels and below.

===Distinguished Service Cross citation===

Stillwell&#x27;s official Distinguished Service Cross citation reads:

The President of the United States of America, authorized by Act of Congress, 9 July 1918, takes pleasure in presenting the Distinguished Service Cross to Lieutenant General Joseph Warren Stilwell, United States Army, for extraordinary heroism and conspicuous bravery in action while in command of the Chinese Forces in Burma during the Spring of 1942. General Stilwell&#x27;s presence and personal example in an exposed position in the front lines of a Chinese division on 23 April 1942, inspired the unit to a renewed effort which resulted in the capture of Taunggyi. While at this position, General Stilwell was exposed to concentrated rifle, machine gun and mortar fire which inflicted heavy casualties on the Chinese troops in the immediate vicinity. On 28 April, while visiting the entire front of two Chinese divisions, he spent considerable time with one of them and, while on the ground, directed the readjustment of the forces. During the entire campaign he personally directed operations in positions which were subjected to continuous enemy aerial strafing and frequent air bombardment, with utter disregard for his own personal safety. General Stilwell&#x27;s outstanding example of courage and leadership in direct contact with the enemy prolonged, at a critical time and place, the resistance of the forces of the United Nations against a better armed and determined enemy, who still maintained the powerful impetus of initial assault against the Allied forces.

==Dates of rank==

==See also==

*Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945)
*Whampoa Military Academy
*History of the Republic of China
*Military of the Republic of China
*Y Force
*Charles N. Hunter

==References==


==Sources==
*Jack Belden, &quot;Retreat With Stilwell&quot;, New York: Alfred A Knopf, 1943. Sympathetic eyewitness account.
*Frank Dorn, &quot;Walkout: With Stilwell in Burma&quot;, Pyramid Books 1973. By his principal aide.
* Fred Eldridge, &#x27;Wrath in Burma The Uncensored Story of Gen. Stilwell&quot; Doubleday &amp; Co., 1946.
*Eric Larrabee, &quot;Commander In Chief&quot;, New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1987. 
*Jon Latimer, &quot;Burma: The Forgotten War&quot;, London: John Murray, 2004. 
*Barbara Tuchman, &quot;Stilwell and the American Experience in China, 1911–45&quot;, Macmillan 1970. Grove Press 2001. British edition: &quot;Sand Against the Wind: Stilwell and the American Experience in China 1911–45&quot;, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 2001. . Sympathetic full scale biography.
*John Masters, &quot;The Road Past Mandalay&quot;, London: Michael Joseph, 1961. First-hand account of the fighting in Burma by a Chindit officer.
* Pfefer, Nathan &quot;Vinegar Joe&#x27;s War&quot; Presidio Press, 2000, .
* Charles F. Romanus Riley Sunderland, &quot;Stilwell&#x27;s Command Problems&quot; (Washington: Department of the Army, Historical Division, 1956). Official Army history with extensive documentation.
* Rooney, D.D. &quot;Stilwell&quot; Pan Macmillan, 1973, .
* Stilwell, Joseph; White, Theodore, Ed. &quot;The Stilwell Papers&quot; Da Capo Press, 1991, . Stilwell&#x27;s wartime diaries.
* Hans Van de Ven, &quot;Stilwell in the Stocks: The Chinese Nationalists and the Allied Powers in the Second World War,&quot; &quot;Asian Affairs&quot; 34.3 (November 2003): 243–259. Revisionist study argues that Stilwell misunderstood Chiang&#x27;s military strategy, which was actually flexible and well founded in Chinese realities.
* Hans J. Van de Ven, &quot;War and Nationalism in China, 1925–1945&quot; (London; New York: RoutledgeCurzon, 2003). Expands revisionist view including longer period of time.
* Andrew Roberts, &quot;Masters and Commanders: How Four Titans Won the War in the West, 1941–1945&quot; (New York: Harper Perennial. 2010). Presents a harsher picture of Stilwell in course of examining Churchill, Roosevelt, Brook, and Marshall.
* Rana Mitter, &quot;Forgotten Ally: China&#x27;s World War II. 1937–1945&quot; (Boston; New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. 2013). Complete re-examination of the Chinese wars with Japan which argues that the memory of &#x27;betrayals&#x27; by Britain, America, and Russia continues to influence China&#x27;s worldview today.

==External links==

* The Stilwell Pages
* The Carmel I Knew by Easterbrook, Nancy Stilwell
* Annals of the Flying Tigers
*Stilwell&#x27;s basketball biography on Hoopedia
* Transcribed copies of Stilwell&#x27;s diaries, 1900–1946, and other documents online, with the originals among the Joseph Warren Stilwell papers at the Hoover Institution Archives, Stanford University.
* Transcribed copies of the World War II diaries of Ernest F. Easterbrook, Stilwell&#x27;s executive assistant in Burma (as of 1944) and son-in-law, are online, with the originals among the Ernest Fred Easterbrook papers at the Hoover Institution Archives.
*United States Army Officers 1939–1945
*Generals of World War II
*Stilwell Board Report, 1946



|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q346551" start="0" end="46" title="Joseph Stilwell" label="Joseph Warren &amp;quot;Vinegar Joe&amp;quot; Stilwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="87" end="105" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608441" start="106" end="113" title="General (United States)" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q715314" start="132" end="157" title="China Burma India Theater" label="China Burma India Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="165" end="177" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="251" end="266" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139796" start="730" end="760" title="Imperial Japanese Armed Forces" label="Imperial Japanese Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813193" start="871" end="895" title="Merrill&amp;#x27;s Marauders" label="Merrill&amp;#x27;s Marauders"/>
<link wikidata="Q174091" start="983" end="991" title="Changsha" label="Changsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q471955" start="997" end="1015" title="Battle of Changsha (1944)" label="Japanese offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="1080" end="1095" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="1142" end="1152" title="lend-lease" label="lend-lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q708797" start="1258" end="1275" title="Patrick J. Hurley" label="Patrick J. Hurley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="1386" end="1409" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="1488" end="1500" title="Kuomintang" label="Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q343916" start="1573" end="1588" title="Brooks Atkinson" label="Brooks Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="1814" end="1831" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="1843" end="1860" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328177" start="2077" end="2090" title="loss of China" label="loss of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q59112" start="2092" end="2107" title="Barbara Tuchman" label="Barbara Tuchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617351" start="2140" end="2148" title="Stilwell and the American Experience in China, 1911–45" label="her work"/>
<link wikidata="Q955907" start="2402" end="2418" title="Palatka, Florida" label="Palatka, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="2437" end="2443" title="Physician" label="Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q128114" start="2783" end="2800" title="Yonkers, New York" label="Yonkers, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055083" start="3252" end="3271" title="Yonkers High School" label="Yonkers High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="3372" end="3380" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="3385" end="3396" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="3402" end="3407" title="Track and field" label="track"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="3873" end="3892" title="US Military Academy" label="US Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="3920" end="3935" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="4147" end="4163" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q879295" start="4218" end="4224" title="hazing" label="hazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="4230" end="4235" title="plebe" label="plebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="4461" end="4471" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q500050" start="4505" end="4526" title="cross-country running" label="cross-country running"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433767" start="4558" end="4565" title="varsity team" label="varsity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287801" start="4853" end="4872" title="Joseph Warren Stilwell Jr." label="Joseph Stilwell Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="4924" end="4934" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="4944" end="4955" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115050" start="5071" end="5104" title="Command and General Staff College" label="Command and General Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5113" end="5124" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095345" start="5191" end="5211" title="Battle of Saint-Mihiel" label="St. Mihiel Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774648" start="5232" end="5264" title="Distinguished Service Medal (U.S. Army)" label="Army Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438462" start="5447" end="5468" title="Fort Benning, Georgia" label="Fort Benning, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5999076" start="5861" end="5887" title="Illegitimi non carborundum" label="Illegitimi non carborundum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12899682" start="5905" end="5920" title="dog Latin" label="fractured Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="6166" end="6173" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q210607" start="6244" end="6265" title="2nd Infantry Division (United States)" label="2nd Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q261179" start="6314" end="6335" title="7th Infantry Division (United States)" label="7th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q943136" start="6339" end="6359" title="Fort Ord, California" label="Fort Ord, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6592" end="6604" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="6648" end="6660" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="6785" end="6816" title="Operation Torch" label="Allied invasion of North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="7090" end="7105" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="7152" end="7163" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="7207" end="7213" title="Francisco Franco" label="Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="7236" end="7243" title="Spanish Civil War" label="his war"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774120" start="7288" end="7300" title="Anti-British sentiment" label="anti-British"/>
<link wikidata="Q631382" start="7321" end="7339" title="Arcadia Conference" label="Arcadia Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="7535" end="7553" title="Franklin Roosevelt" label="Franklin Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="7594" end="7609" title="George Marshall" label="George Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q191079" start="7650" end="7663" title="Generalissimo" label="Generalissimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="7664" end="7679" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q715314" start="7711" end="7736" title="China Burma India Theater" label="China Burma India Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="7762" end="7772" title="Lend-Lease" label="Lend-Lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431442" start="7835" end="7858" title="South East Asia Command" label="South East Asia Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547812" start="8103" end="8118" title="11th Army Group" label="11th Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q715314" start="8263" end="8288" title="China-Burma-India Theater" label="China-Burma-India Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="8459" end="8476" title="Louis Mountbatten" label="Louis Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="8516" end="8531" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="8714" end="8731" title="Dwight Eisenhower" label="Dwight Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="8736" end="8753" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060817" start="8797" end="8827" title="European Theater of Operations" label="European Theater of Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q718893" start="8875" end="8896" title="theater of operations" label="theater of operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q714843" start="9041" end="9068" title="National Revolutionary Army" label="National Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305650" start="9155" end="9164" title="GHQ India" label="GHQ India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431442" start="9186" end="9209" title="South East Asia Command" label="South East Asia Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q685181" start="9774" end="9800" title="Japanese invasion of Burma" label="Japanese invasion of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="9872" end="9894" title="Nationalist government" label="Nationalist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q750633" start="10103" end="10119" title="defense in depth" label="defense in depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298477" start="10299" end="10312" title="Evans Carlson" label="Evans Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q254599" start="10334" end="10352" title="Battle of Shanghai" label="Battle of Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="10373" end="10395" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075555" start="10830" end="10844" title="Sittaung River" label="Sittaung River"/>
<link wikidata="Q833073" start="10992" end="11000" title="Pyinmana" label="Pyinmana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814448" start="11105" end="11127" title="200th Division (National Revolutionary Army)" label="Chinese 200th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q468716" start="11847" end="11867" title="Claire Lee Chennault" label="Claire Lee Chennault"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="12158" end="12167" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q718274" start="12232" end="12240" title="The Hump" label="The Hump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="12652" end="12657" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12810" end="12820" title="Frank Dorn" label="Frank Dorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676975" start="12847" end="12858" title="Jack Belden" label="Jack Belden"/>
<link wikidata="Q573063" start="13476" end="13488" title="campaign hat" label="campaign hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q217153" start="13578" end="13623" title="M1903 Springfield" label="Model 1903, .30–06 Caliber, Springfield rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="14381" end="14398" title="US War Department" label="US War Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026876" start="14817" end="14831" title="Ramgarh Cantonment" label="Ramgarh, India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="14841" end="14849" title="Kolkata" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q662078" start="15223" end="15240" title="Universal Carrier" label="Universal Carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q502910" start="15247" end="15256" title="M3 Stuart" label="M3 Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q451466" start="16612" end="16624" title="Orde Wingate" label="Orde Wingate"/>
<link wikidata="Q873549" start="16633" end="16640" title="Chindits" label="Chindit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814448" start="17087" end="17101" title="200th Division" label="200th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="17794" end="17810" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q557479" start="19809" end="19821" title="Europe first" label="Europe first"/>
<link wikidata="Q714843" start="19978" end="19996" title="National Revolutionary Army" label="Nationalist forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="20012" end="20022" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034707" start="20178" end="20192" title="14th Air Force" label="14th Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q315540" start="20283" end="20299" title="Archibald Wavell, 1st Earl Wavell" label="Archibald Wavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="20907" end="20920" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="20925" end="20932" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313250" start="21632" end="21647" title="Michael Calvert" label="Michael Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643607" start="21655" end="21667" title="77th Indian Infantry Brigade" label="77th Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043375" start="21707" end="21714" title="Mogaung" label="Mogaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="21870" end="21873" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062370" start="22294" end="22303" title="Myitkyina" label="Myitkyina"/>
<link wikidata="Q852071" start="22924" end="22935" title="Silver Star" label="Silver Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547339" start="22942" end="22955" title="111th Indian Infantry Brigade" label="111th Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="23112" end="23119" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="23121" end="23130" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="23136" end="23148" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q469250" start="23337" end="23349" title="John Masters" label="John Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q26076" start="23482" end="23497" title="Irrawaddy River" label="Irrawaddy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q854791" start="23651" end="23656" title="Bhamo" label="Bhamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q335033" start="23790" end="23794" title="William Slim, 1st Viscount Slim" label="Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086326" start="24052" end="24067" title="Charlton Ogburn" label="Charlton Ogburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q469250" start="24133" end="24145" title="John Masters" label="John Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313250" start="24150" end="24165" title="Michael Calvert" label="Michael Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305650" start="24400" end="24409" title="GHQ India" label="GHQ India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902790" start="24964" end="24976" title="Vice Admiral (Royal Navy)" label="Vice Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813193" start="25153" end="25177" title="Merrill&amp;#x27;s Marauders" label="Merrill&amp;#x27;s Marauders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062370" start="25423" end="25432" title="Myitkyina" label="Myitkyina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443784" start="25476" end="25489" title="Frank Merrill" label="Frank Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q873549" start="25611" end="25619" title="Chindits" label="Chindits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062370" start="25924" end="25933" title="Myitkyina" label="Myitkyina"/>
<link wikidata="Q949694" start="26372" end="26389" title="amoebic dysentery" label="amoebic dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076843" start="26452" end="26473" title="Chinese Army in India" label="Chinese Army in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081192" start="27810" end="27824" title="Charles Newtown Hunter" label="Colonel Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q335033" start="30834" end="30846" title="William Slim, 1st Viscount Slim" label="William Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918766" start="30890" end="30905" title="Fourteenth Army (United Kingdom)" label="Fourteenth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q468716" start="32084" end="32100" title="Claire Chennault" label="Claire Chennault"/>
<link wikidata="Q467249" start="32135" end="32148" title="Flying Tigers" label="Flying Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q702659" start="32204" end="32231" title="Republic of China Air Force" label="Republic of China Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q696448" start="33739" end="33756" title="Operation Ichi-Go" label="Operation Ichi-Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q716429" start="34559" end="34570" title="Wei Lihuang" label="Wei Lihuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q716640" start="34986" end="34995" title="Ledo Road" label="Ledo Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q478684" start="35032" end="35042" title="Burma Road" label="Burma Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q716640" start="36857" end="36866" title="Ledo Road" label="Ledo Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q696448" start="36958" end="36975" title="Operation Ichi-Go" label="Operation Ichi-Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q189633" start="37102" end="37108" title="Guilin" label="Guilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046124" start="37628" end="37635" title="Y Force" label="Y Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q182852" start="37657" end="37664" title="Kunming" label="Kunming"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="37681" end="37696" title="Yunnan Province" label="Yunnan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q708797" start="39264" end="39281" title="Patrick J. Hurley" label="Patrick J. Hurley"/>
<link wikidata="Q22303" start="40997" end="41009" title="Wang Jingwei" label="Wang Jingwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="41013" end="41020" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608441" start="41483" end="41500" title="general (United States)" label="four-star general"/>
<link wikidata="Q644730" start="41984" end="42003" title="Albert C. Wedemeyer" label="Albert C. Wedemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153086" start="43363" end="43381" title="Army Ground Forces" label="Army Ground Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="43407" end="43419" title="the Pentagon" label="the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q704763" start="43561" end="43582" title="Simon B. Buckner, Jr." label="Simon B. Buckner, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1775742" start="43638" end="43662" title="Tenth United States Army" label="Tenth United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q192660" start="43715" end="43732" title="Battle of Okinawa" label="Battle of Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q300879" start="43778" end="43795" title="Operation Olympic" label="Operation Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13989" start="43835" end="43841" title="Honshu" label="Honshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="43936" end="43954" title="surrender of Japan" label="surrender of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="44363" end="44372" title="anti-tank warfare" label="anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="44507" end="44524" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q574594" start="44562" end="44589" title="anti-ballistic missile" label="guided interceptor missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q246612" start="44746" end="44759" title="Sixth US Army" label="Sixth US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755360" start="44790" end="44815" title="Presidio of San Francisco" label="Presidio of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="44901" end="44922" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443784" start="44973" end="44986" title="Frank Merrill" label="Frank Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="44995" end="45004" title="US Marine" label="US Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081278" start="45052" end="45070" title="Battle of Alcatraz" label="Battle of Alcatraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q189588" start="45115" end="45129" title="stomach cancer" label="stomach cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104487" start="45262" end="45282" title="mandatory retirement" label="mandatory retirement"/>
<link wikidata="Q321053" start="45364" end="45372" title="cenotaph" label="cenotaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687434" start="45391" end="45410" title="West Point Cemetery" label="West Point Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q833376" start="45451" end="45478" title="Distinguished Service Cross (United States)" label="Distinguished Service Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q571544" start="45517" end="45533" title="Oak Leaf Cluster" label="Oak Leaf Cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q724443" start="45539" end="45554" title="Legion of Merit" label="Legion of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q928314" start="45580" end="45591" title="Bronze Star Medal" label="Bronze Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192947" start="45601" end="45625" title="Combat Infantryman Badge" label="Combat Infantryman Badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q59112" start="45710" end="45728" title="Barbara W. Tuchman" label="Barbara W. Tuchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q38283" start="46918" end="46926" title="Yokohama" label="Yokohama"/>
<link wikidata="Q49244" start="48122" end="48143" title="Santa Ana, California" label="Santa Ana, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="48157" end="48170" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q516390" start="48175" end="48187" title="Robert Young (actor)" label="Robert Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158071" start="48217" end="48231" title="Japanese-American service in World War II" label="Nisei soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15060610" start="48550" end="48567" title="Louise Allbritton" label="Louise Allbritton"/>
<link wikidata="Q29855696" start="48580" end="48594" title="Harry Flannery" label="Harry Flannery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541984" start="48615" end="48630" title="Will Rogers Jr." label="Will Rogers Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q352701" start="48642" end="48653" title="Richard Loo" label="Richard Loo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764682" start="48698" end="48711" title="Scottish Rite" label="Scottish Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="48715" end="48726" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617351" start="48747" end="48801" title="Stilwell and the American Experience in China, 1911-45" label="Stilwell and the American Experience in China, 1911-45"/>
<link wikidata="Q467156" start="48972" end="48988" title="David Halberstam" label="David Halberstam"/>
<link wikidata="" start="49014" end="49060" title="The Coldest Winter: America and the Korean War" label="The Coldest Winter: America and the Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300991" start="49137" end="49151" title="separate peace" label="separate peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="49566" end="49595" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="49609" end="49619" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q718405" start="49936" end="49952" title="Examination Yuan" label="Examination Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22513" start="50092" end="50098" title="Zhu De" label="Zhu De"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="50288" end="50297" title="guerrilla" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034707" start="50512" end="50526" title="Fourteenth Air Force" label="14th Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062525" start="50536" end="50549" title="East China" label="eastern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q144663" start="50551" end="50559" title="Hengyang" label="Hengyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q189633" start="50561" end="50567" title="Guilin" label="Guilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q451466" start="50685" end="50697" title="Orde Wingate" label="Orde Wingate"/>
<link wikidata="Q873549" start="50711" end="50719" title="Chindits" label="Chindits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813193" start="50770" end="50794" title="Merrill&amp;#x27;s Marauders" label="Merrill&amp;#x27;s Marauders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190467" start="50849" end="50863" title="jungle warfare" label="jungle warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q716640" start="51429" end="51438" title="Ledo Road" label="Ledo Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099717" start="51681" end="51692" title="China Hands" label="China Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371471" start="51694" end="51714" title="John Stewart Service" label="John Stewart Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701344" start="51719" end="51741" title="John Paton Davies, Jr." label="John Paton Davies, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="51996" end="52013" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="52026" end="52041" title="George Marshall" label="George Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q704763" start="52127" end="52153" title="Simon Bolivar Buckner, Jr." label="Simon Bolivar Buckner, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1775742" start="52170" end="52183" title="Tenth United States Army" label="Tenth US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q189930" start="52475" end="52498" title="Operation Market Garden" label="Operation Market Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="52790" end="52808" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q343916" start="52853" end="52868" title="Brooks Atkinson" label="Brooks Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="52888" end="52897" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q515388" start="53594" end="53605" title="Yan&amp;#x27;an" label="Yan&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="53995" end="54007" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="54070" end="54087" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758403" start="54112" end="54126" title="Andrew Roberts (historian)" label="Andrew Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734988" start="54232" end="54243" title="Anglophobia" label="Anglophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911063" start="54366" end="54377" title="Rana Mitter" label="Rana Mitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q22303" start="55195" end="55207" title="Wang Jingwei" label="Wang Jingwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q49874807" start="55590" end="55602" title="Carmel Point" label="Carmel Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q625458" start="55635" end="55664" title="Carmel-by-the-Sea, California" label="Carmel-by-the-Sea, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479493" start="55687" end="55703" title="Eclecticism in architecture" label="Spanish Eclectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="55976" end="55997" title="Jacksonville, Florida" label="Jacksonville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q584588" start="56178" end="56190" title="Monterey Bay" label="Monterey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617345" start="56238" end="56251" title="Stilwell Hall" label="Stilwell Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9593846" start="56568" end="56601" title="General Joseph W. Stilwell Museum" label="General Joseph W. Stilwell Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057512" start="56673" end="56689" title="Erville Alderson" label="Erville Alderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194211" start="56699" end="56716" title="Objective, Burma!" label="Objective, Burma!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700513" start="56734" end="56743" title="John Hoyt" label="John Hoyt"/>
<link wikidata="Q262479" start="56747" end="56760" title="Samuel Fuller" label="Samuel Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752724" start="56774" end="56798" title="Merrill&amp;#x27;s Marauders (film)" label="Merrill&amp;#x27;s Marauders"/>
<link wikidata="Q355153" start="56816" end="56828" title="Robert Stack" label="Robert Stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="56832" end="56848" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q207482" start="56862" end="56866" title="1941 (film)" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56909" end="56948" title="Chinese Expeditionary Force (TV series)" label="Chinese Expeditionary Force (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="56987" end="57004" title="US Postal Service" label="US Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282976" start="57026" end="57056" title="Distinguished Americans series" label="Distinguished Americans series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020298" start="57160" end="57182" title="California Cadet Corps" label="California Cadet Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q985077" start="57236" end="57254" title="Marina, California" label="Marina, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088989" start="57256" end="57280" title="Kendall Park, New Jersey" label="Kendall Park, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="57281" end="57305" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="57307" end="57330" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755360" start="57340" end="57365" title="Presidio of San Francisco" label="Presidio of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q494930" start="57606" end="57621" title="Matthew Ridgway" label="Matthew Ridgway"/>
<link wikidata="Q488483" start="57637" end="57652" title="William F. Dean" label="William F. Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q207955" start="57674" end="57686" title="Omar Bradley" label="Omar Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="57712" end="57729" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075566" start="58504" end="58512" title="Taunggyi" label="Taunggyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="59456" end="59485" title="Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945)" label="Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242140" start="59487" end="59511" title="Whampoa Military Academy" label="Whampoa Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151968" start="59513" end="59545" title="History of the Republic of China" label="History of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q714843" start="59547" end="59580" title="National Revolutionary Army" label="Military of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046124" start="59582" end="59589" title="Y Force" label="Y Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081192" start="59591" end="59608" title="Charles Newtown Hunter" label="Charles N. Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676975" start="59640" end="59651" title="Jack Belden" label="Jack Belden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59753" end="59763" title="Frank Dorn" label="Frank Dorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271103" start="60046" end="60057" title="Jon Latimer" label="Jon Latimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q59112" start="60126" end="60141" title="Barbara Tuchman" label="Barbara Tuchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q469250" start="60428" end="60440" title="John Masters" label="John Masters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173708" wikidata="Q1436115" url="?curid=173708" title="Sīrah">
<text>Al-Sīra al-Nabawiyya (), commonly shortened to Sīrah and translated as prophetic biography, are the traditional biographies of the Islamic prophet Muhammad written by Muslim historians, from which, in addition to the Qurʾān and &quot;ḥadīth&quot; literature, most historical information about his life and the early history of Islam is derived.

==Etymology==
In the Arabic language the word &quot;sīrah&quot; or &quot;sīrat&quot; () comes from the verb &quot;sāra,&quot; which means &quot;to travel&quot; or &quot;to be on a journey&quot;. A person&#x27;s sīrah is that person&#x27;s journey through life, or biography, encompassing their birth, events in their life, manners and characteristics, and their death. In modern usage it may also refer to a person&#x27;s resume. It is sometimes written as &quot;seerah&quot;, &quot;sirah&quot; or &quot;sirat&quot;, all meaning &quot;life&quot; or &quot;journey&quot;. In Islamic literature, the plural form, &quot;siyar&quot;, could also refer to the rules of war and dealing with non-Muslims.

==Content==
The sīrah literature includes a variety of heterogeneous materials, containing mainly narratives of military expeditions undertaken by Muhammad and his companions. These stories are intended as historical accounts and are used for veneration. The sīrah also includes a number of written documents, such as political treaties (e.g., Treaty of Hudaybiyyah or Constitution of Medina), military enlistments, assignments of officials, letters to foreign rulers, and so forth. It also records some of the speeches and sermons made by Muhammad, like his speech at the Farewell Pilgrimage. Some of the sīrah accounts include verses of poetry commemorating certain events and battles.

At later periods, certain type of stories included in sīrah developed into their own separate genres. One genre is concerned with stories of prophetic miracles, called &quot;aʿlām al-nubuwa&quot; (literally, &quot;proofs of prophethood&quot;—the first word is sometimes substituted for &quot;amārāt&quot; or &quot;dalāʾil&quot;). Another genre, called &quot;faḍāʾil wa mathālib&quot; — tales that show the merits and faults of individual companions, enemies, and other notable contemporaries of Muhammad. Some works of sīrah also positioned the story of Muhammad as part of a narrative that includes stories of earlier prophets, Persian Kings, pre-Islamic Arab tribes, and the Rashidun.

Parts of sīrah were inspired by, or elaborate upon, events mentioned in the Qur&#x27;an. These parts were often used by writers of tafsir and asbab al-nuzul to provide background information for events mentioned in certain ayat.
The phrase , or , refers to the study of the life of Muhammad. The term sīrah was first linked to the biography of Muhammad by Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri ( 124/741–2), and later popularized by the work of Ibn Hisham ( 833). In the first two centuries of Islamic history, was more commonly known as (literally, &#x27;stories of military expeditions&#x27;), which is now considered to be only a subset of —one that concerns the military campaigns of Muhammad.

Early works of sīrah consist of multiple historical reports, or , and each report is called a . Sometimes the word &quot;tradition&quot; or &quot;hadith&quot; is used instead.

==Comparison to hadith ==
In terms of structure, a hadith and a historical report (&quot;khabar&quot;) are very similar; they both contain isnads (chains of transmission). The main difference between a hadith and a khabar is that a hadith is not concerned with an event as such, and normally does not specify a time or place. Rather the purpose of hadith is to record a religious doctrine as an authoritative source of Islamic law. By contrast, while a khabar may carry some legal or theological implications, its main aim is to convey information about a certain event. 

Starting from the 8th and 9th century, many scholars have devoted their efforts to both kinds of texts equally. Some historians consider the sīrah and &quot;maghāzī&quot; literature to be a subset of Hadith.

== Reception ==
The main feature of the information that formed the basis of early historiography in Islam was that this information emerged as the irregular products of storytellers (&quot;qāṣṣ&quot;, pl. &quot;quṣṣāṣ&quot;) without details. While the narratives were initially in the form of a kind of heroic epics called magāzī, details were added later, edited and transformed into sirah compilations. In Umayyad times, storytellers used to tell stories of Muhammad and earlier prophets in private gatherings and mosques, given they obtained permission from the authorities. Many of these storytellers are now unknown. After the Umayyad period, their reputation deteriorated because of their inclination to exaggerate and fantasize, and for relying on the Isra&#x27;iliyat. Thus they were banned from preaching at mosques. In later periods, however, works of sīrah became more prominent.

During the early centuries of Islam, the sīrah literature was taken less seriously compared to the hadiths.
Today, although the orthodox Islamic approach frequently uses sirah material in its sermons, Qur&#x27;anism and the academic community (including those called hadith or khabar and whose chain of transmission are labeled as sound by their authors) approach this material with suspicion. While Yaşar Nuri Öztürk notes that the hadiths, which have now reached millions, were initially limited to a few hundred, Mehmet Özdemir (prof.dr.) draws attention to the almost non-existent number of miracles (&quot;dalāʾil al-nubuwwa&quot;) in the first records and the hundreds of additions made in later periods.

Lawrence Conrad Lawrence Conrad examines the early sirah books and sees that the dates of Muhammad&#x27;s birth span a period of up to 85 years. Conrad defines this as &quot;the fluidity (evolutionary process) continued even in the written period.&quot;
Another striking example is the Qurayza massacre, which is attributed to Muhammad by various chains of attribution in sources considered authentic; The brutality of the event led researchers skeptics of traditional sources such as İhsan Eliaçık and Mustafa İslamoğlu to think that the story of 960 Jews who destroyed themselves by refusing to surrender to the Romans in the clashes between Jews and Romans believed to have taken place at Masada was adapted to Muhammad. İhsan Eliaçık states that 3-5 Jews who were considered guilty may have been killed as a result of this incident. Regarding the Qurayza massacre, Sami Aldeeb states that the incident is included in the Jewish holy texts, but according to these sources, Jews killed non-Jews.

Many Western scholars suspect that there was widespread fabrication of hadith (either entirely or by the misattribution of the views of early Muslim religious and legal thinkers to Muhammad) in the early centuries of Islam to support certain theological and legal positions. In addition to fabrication, it is possible for the meaning of a hadith to have greatly drifted from its original telling through the different interpretations and biases of its varying transmitters, even if the chain of transmission is authentic. While some hadith may genuinely originate from firsthand observation of Muhammad (particularly personal traits that were not of theological interest, like his fondness for tharid and sweets), Western scholars suggest that it is extraordinarily difficult if not impossible to determine which hadith accurately reflect the historical Muhammad.

More recently, western historical criticism and debate concerning sīrah have elicited a defensive attitude from some Muslims who wrote apologetic literature defending its content. Some researchers, such as Volker Popp, have gone further and argued that names such as Muhammad and Ali were not names but titles.

==Authenticity==

For centuries, Muslim scholars have recognized the problem of authenticity of hadith. Thus they have developed sophisticated methods (see Hadith studies) of evaluating &quot;isnāds&quot; (chains of transmission). This was done in order to classify each hadith into &quot;sound&quot; (&quot;ṣaḥīḥ&quot;) for authentic reports, as opposed to &quot;weak&quot; (&quot;ḍaʿīf&quot;) for ones that are probably fabricated, in addition to other categories. Since many sīrah reports also contain isnād information and some of the sīrah compilers (&quot;akhbārīs&quot;) were themselves practicing jurists and hadīth transmitters (&quot;muḥaddiths&quot;), it was possible to apply the same methods of hadīth criticism to the sīrah reports. However, some sīrah reports were written using an imprecise form of isnād, or what modern historians call the &quot;collective isnād&quot; or &quot;combined reports&quot;. The use of collective isnād meant that a report may be related on the authority of multiple persons without distinguishing the words of one person from another. This lack of precision led some hadith scholars to take any report that used a collective isnād to be lacking in authenticity.

According to Wim Raven, it is often noted that a coherent image of Muhammad cannot be formed from the literature of sīra, whose authenticity and factual value have been questioned on a number of different grounds. He lists the following arguments against the authenticity of sīra, followed here by counter arguments:

# Hardly any sīrah work was compiled during the first century of Islam. However, Fred Donner points out that the earliest historical writings about the origins of Islam first emerged in AH 60–70, well within the first century of Hijra (see also List of biographies of Muhammad). Furthermore, the sources now extant, dating from the second, third, and fourth centuries AH, are mostly compilations of material derived from earlier sources.
# The many discrepancies exhibited in different narrations found in sīrah works. Yet, despite the lack of a single orthodoxy in Islam, there is still a marked agreement on the most general features of the traditional origins story.
# Later sources claiming to know more about the time of Muhammad than earlier ones. Scholar Patricia Crone found a pattern, where the farther a commentary was removed in time from the life of Muhammad and the events in the Quran, the more information it provided, despite the fact it depended on the earlier sources for its content. Crone attributed this phenomenon to storytellers&#x27; embellishment.If one storyteller should happen to mention a raid, the next storyteller would know the date of this raid, while the third would know everything that an audience might wish to hear about. In the case of Ibn Ishaq, there are no earlier sources we can consult to see if and how much embroidering was done by him and other earlier transmitters, but, Crone argues, &quot;it is hard to avoid the conclusion that in the three generations between the Prophet and Ibn Ishaq&quot; fictitious details were not also added.
# Discrepancies compared to non-Muslim sources. But there are also similarities and agreements both in information specific to Muhammad, and concerning Muslim tradition at large.
# Some parts or genres of sīra, namely those dealing with miracles, do not qualify as sources for scientific historiographical information about Muhammad, except for showing the beliefs and doctrines of his community.

Nevertheless, other content of sīra, like the Constitution of Medina, are generally considered to be authentic.

==Early compilations of sīra==
The following is a list of some of the early Hadith collectors who specialized in collecting and compiling sīrah and maghāzī reports:
* ʿUrwa ibn al-Zubayr (d. 713). He wrote letters replying to inquiries of the Umayyad caliphs, Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan and al-Walid I, involving questions about certain events that happened in the time of the Prophet. Since Abd al-Malik did not appreciate the maghāzī literature, these letters were not written in story form. He is not known to have written any books on the subject.
* Wahb ibn Munabbih (d. during 725 to 737). Several books were ascribed to him but none of them are now extant. Some of his works survive as quotations found in works by Ibn Ishaq, Ibn Hisham, Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, and Abū Nuʿaym al-Iṣfahānī.
* Ibn Shihāb al-Zuhrī (d. ), a central figure in sīrah literature, who collected both ahadith and akhbār. His akhbār also contain chains of transmissions, or isnad. He was sponsored by the Umayyad court and asked to write two books, one on genealogy and another on maghāzī. The first was canceled and the one about maghāzī is either not extant or has never been written.
* Musa ibn ʿUqba, a student of al-Zuhrī, wrote &quot;Kitāb al-Maghāzī&quot;, a notebook used to teach his students. The work was lost but a manuscript of Kitab al-maghazi was recently rediscovered. Some of his traditions have been preserved, although their attribution to him is disputed.
* Muhammad ibn Ishaq (d. 767 or 761), another student of al-Zuhrī, who collected oral traditions that formed the basis of an important biography of the Prophet. His traditions survived through a number of sources, most notably Ibn Hisham and Ibn Jarir al-Tabari.

== Number of prophetic biographies ==
The sīrah literature is important: in the Urdu language alone, a scholar from Pakistan in 2024 produced a bibliography of more than 10,000 titles, counting multivolume works as a single book and without integrating articles, short essays and unpublished manuscripts, with the researcher also precising that the literature in Arabic is even more important.

==See also==

* Biographical evaluation (ʿIlm al-rijāl)
* Hadith
* Historiography of early Islam
* List of biographies of Muhammad
* List of hadith collections
* Sunnah

==Notes==
==References==
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* Hagen, Gottfried, &quot;Sira, Ottoman Turkish,&quot; in Muhammad in History, Thought, and Culture: An Encyclopedia of the Prophet of God (2 vols.), Edited by C. Fitzpatrick and A. Walker, Santa Barbara, ABC-CLIO, 2014, Vol. II, pp. 585–597. .
* Jarar, Maher, &quot;Sira&quot; (Biography), in Muhammad in History, Thought, and Culture: An Encyclopedia of the Prophet of God (2 vols.), Edited by C. Fitzpatrick and A. Walker, Santa Barbara, ABC-CLIO, 2014, Vol. II, pp. 568–582. .
* Williams, Rebecca, Sira, Modern English, in Muhammad in History, Thought, and Culture: An Encyclopedia of the Prophet of God (2 vols.), Edited by C. Fitzpatrick and A. Walker, Santa Barbara, ABC-CLIO, 2014, Vol. II, pp. 582–585. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1436115" start="0" end="20" title="Sīrah" label="Al-Sīra al-Nabawiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436115" start="47" end="52" title="Sīrah" label="Sīrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436115" start="71" end="90" title="Sīrah" label="prophetic biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q168827" start="131" end="146" title="Prophets and messengers in Islam" label="Islamic prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="147" end="155" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617025" start="167" end="184" title="List of Muslim historians" label="Muslim historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="217" end="223" title="Quran" label="Qurʾān"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="228" end="257" title="Hadith" label="&amp;quot;ḥadīth&amp;quot; literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q642379" start="310" end="332" title="early history of Islam" label="early history of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="367" end="382" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="610" end="619" title="biography" label="biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q950511" start="768" end="774" title="Résumé" label="resume"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="1190" end="1198" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q188711" start="1207" end="1217" title="Sahabah" label="companions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647162" start="1387" end="1408" title="Treaty of Hudaybiyyah" label="Treaty of Hudaybiyyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q158687" start="1412" end="1434" title="Constitution of Medina" label="Constitution of Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352027" start="1616" end="1635" title="Farewell Pilgrimage" label="Farewell Pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q188711" start="2170" end="2180" title="Sahaba" label="companions"/>
<link wikidata="Q168827" start="2343" end="2359" title="Prophets in Islam" label="earlier prophets"/>
<link wikidata="Q733253" start="2361" end="2374" title="Persian Kings" label="Persian Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q47855" start="2376" end="2392" title="pre-Islamic Arabia" label="pre-Islamic Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q180465" start="2409" end="2417" title="Rashidun" label="Rashidun"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="2496" end="2507" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q335414" start="2551" end="2557" title="tafsir" label="tafsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915658" start="2562" end="2576" title="asbab al-nuzul" label="asbab al-nuzul"/>
<link wikidata="Q188219" start="2643" end="2647" title="ayat" label="ayat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791575" start="2776" end="2795" title="Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri" label="Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri"/>
<link wikidata="Q461096" start="2847" end="2857" title="Ibn Hisham" label="Ibn Hisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q642379" start="2896" end="2911" title="Islamic history" label="Islamic history"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="3329" end="3335" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674390" start="3417" end="3423" title="isnads" label="isnads"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="3697" end="3708" title="Sharia" label="Islamic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793040" start="4230" end="4285" title="Qāṣṣ" label="storytellers (&amp;quot;qāṣṣ&amp;quot;, pl. &amp;quot;quṣṣāṣ&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="4469" end="4476" title="Umayyad" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q168827" start="4534" end="4550" title="Prophets of Islam" label="earlier prophets"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="4577" end="4584" title="mosques" label="mosques"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046554" start="4820" end="4836" title="Isra&amp;#x27;iliyat" label="Isra&amp;#x27;iliyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="5052" end="5058" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q60797" start="5145" end="5151" title="sermon" label="sermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021580" start="5154" end="5168" title="Qur&amp;#x27;anism" label="Qur&amp;#x27;anism"/>
<link wikidata="Q343026" start="5353" end="5370" title="Yaşar Nuri Öztürk" label="Yaşar Nuri Öztürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q170774" start="5548" end="5556" title="miracles" label="miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503936" start="5665" end="5680" title="Lawrence Conrad" label="Lawrence Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500115" start="5951" end="5967" title="Siege of Banu Qurayza" label="Qurayza massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021580" start="6110" end="6141" title="Quranism" label="skeptics of traditional sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q6066053" start="6150" end="6163" title="İhsan Eliaçık" label="İhsan Eliaçık"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180110" start="6168" end="6185" title="Mustafa İslamoğlu" label="Mustafa İslamoğlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q186312" start="6357" end="6363" title="Masada" label="Masada"/>
<link wikidata="Q123354" start="6534" end="6545" title="Sami Aldeeb" label="Sami Aldeeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509400" start="7358" end="7364" title="tharid" label="tharid"/>
<link wikidata="Q26495438" start="7544" end="7583" title="Revisionist school of Islamic studies" label="western historical criticism and debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q191776" start="7664" end="7674" title="apologetic" label="apologetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="7809" end="7812" title="Ali" label="Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q129677237" start="7997" end="8011" title="Hadith studies" label="Hadith studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637909" start="8290" end="8306" title="Hadith terminology" label="other categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q680793" start="9448" end="9459" title="Fred Donner" label="Fred Donner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607568" start="9612" end="9643" title="List of biographies of Muhammad" label="List of biographies of Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q286019" start="10129" end="10143" title="Patricia Crone" label="Patricia Crone"/>
<link wikidata="Q989963" start="10406" end="10417" title="Storytelling" label="storyteller"/>
<link wikidata="Q158687" start="11395" end="11417" title="Constitution of Medina" label="Constitution of Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q423774" start="11629" end="11648" title="ʿUrwa ibn al-Zubayr" label="ʿUrwa ibn al-Zubayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="11705" end="11712" title="Umayyad" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q36788" start="11722" end="11745" title="Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan" label="Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q284003" start="11750" end="11760" title="al-Walid I" label="al-Walid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q439374" start="12013" end="12030" title="Wahb ibn Munabbih" label="Wahb ibn Munabbih"/>
<link wikidata="Q334847" start="12181" end="12190" title="Ibn Ishaq" label="Ibn Ishaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q461096" start="12192" end="12202" title="Ibn Hisham" label="Ibn Hisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q192124" start="12204" end="12223" title="Ibn Jarir al-Tabari" label="Ibn Jarir al-Tabari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822174" start="12229" end="12251" title="Abū Nuʿaym al-Iṣfahānī" label="Abū Nuʿaym al-Iṣfahānī"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791575" start="12255" end="12274" title="Ibn Shihāb al-Zuhrī" label="Ibn Shihāb al-Zuhrī"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674390" start="12411" end="12416" title="isnad" label="isnad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="12442" end="12449" title="Umayyad" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q47307" start="12493" end="12502" title="genealogy" label="genealogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18397639" start="12626" end="12640" title="Musa ibn ʿUqba" label="Musa ibn ʿUqba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791575" start="12655" end="12663" title="Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri" label="al-Zuhrī"/>
<link wikidata="Q334847" start="12915" end="12933" title="Muhammad ibn Ishaq" label="Muhammad ibn Ishaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791575" start="12970" end="12978" title="Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri" label="al-Zuhrī"/>
<link wikidata="Q461096" start="13140" end="13150" title="Ibn Hisham" label="Ibn Hisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q192124" start="13155" end="13174" title="Ibn Jarir al-Tabari" label="Ibn Jarir al-Tabari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="13257" end="13270" title="Urdu language" label="Urdu language"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="13293" end="13301" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="13540" end="13546" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q423731" start="13588" end="13611" title="Biographical evaluation" label="Biographical evaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="13630" end="13636" title="Hadith" label="Hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363789" start="13639" end="13668" title="Historiography of early Islam" label="Historiography of early Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607568" start="13671" end="13702" title="List of biographies of Muhammad" label="List of biographies of Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3602186" start="13705" end="13731" title="List of hadith collections" label="List of hadith collections"/>
<link wikidata="Q234764" start="13734" end="13740" title="Sunnah" label="Sunnah"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173709" wikidata="Q380134" url="?curid=173709" title="Edwin H. Land">
<text>Edwin Herbert Land, ForMemRS, FRPS, Hon.MRI (May 7, 1909 – March 1, 1991) was an American scientist and inventor, best known as the co-founder of the Polaroid Corporation. He invented inexpensive filters for polarizing light, a practical system of in-camera instant photography, and the retinex theory of color vision, among other things. His Polaroid instant camera went on sale in late 1948 and made it possible for a picture to be taken and developed in 60 seconds or less.

== Life and career ==

Edwin Land was born to Jewish parents in Bridgeport, Connecticut, to Matie () and Harry Land, a scrap-metal dealer from a village near Kyiv (Ukraine). Growing up, he was known to take apart household appliances, such as a mantel clock and the family&#x27;s new gramophone, as well as blowing all the house&#x27;s fuses when he was six years old. He was scolded by his father when taking apart a phonograph and he vowed that
&quot;nothing or nobody could stop me from carrying through the execution of an experiment&quot; He had an elder sister named Helen who had a difficult time pronouncing Edwin&#x27;s name, so she called him &quot;Din&quot; a nickname that stuck throughout the rest of his childhood and was used among his closest friends.

Land attended the Norwich Free Academy at Norwich, Connecticut, a semi-private high school, and graduated in the class of 1927 with honors. The library there was posthumously named for him, having been funded by grants from his family.

He studied physics at Harvard College, more specifically, optics, but left after his freshman year, moving to New York City. There he invented the first inexpensive filters capable of polarizing light, which he called Polaroid film. He was not associated with an educational institution and lacked the tools of a proper laboratory, making this a difficult endeavor, so he would sneak into a laboratory at Columbia University late at night to use their equipment. He also availed himself of the New York Public Library to scour the scientific literature for prior work on polarizing substances. His breakthrough came when he realized that, instead of attempting to grow a large single crystal of a polarizing substance, he could manufacture a film with millions of micron-sized polarizing crystals that were coaxed into perfect alignment with each other.

Land returned to Harvard University after developing the polarizing film, but he did not finish his studies or receive a degree. Despite not receiving a college degree, he was still referred to from many as Dr. Land. According to biographer Peter Wensberg, once Land could see the solution to a problem in his head, he lost all motivation to write it down or prove his vision to others. Often his wife, Terre, would extract from him the answers to homework problems, at the prodding of his instructor. She would then write up the homework and hand it in so that he could receive credit and not fail the course.

===Polaroid===

In 1932, he established the Land-Wheelwright Laboratories together with his Harvard physics professor, George Wheelwright III, to commercialize his polarizing technology. Wheelwright came from a family of financial means and agreed to fund the company. After a few early successes developing polarizing filters for sunglasses and photographic filters, Land obtained funding from a series of Wall Street investors for further expansion.

The company was renamed the Polaroid Corporation in 1937.

Land further developed and produced the sheet polarizers under the Polaroid trademark. Although the initial major application was for sunglasses and scientific work, it quickly found many additional applications: for color animation in the Wurlitzer 850 Peacock jukebox of 1942, for glasses in full-color stereoscopic (3-D) movies, to control brightness of light through a window, as a necessary component of all LCDs, and many more.

During World War II, he worked on military tasks, which included developing dark-adaptation goggles, target finders, the first passively guided smart bombs, and a special stereoscopic viewing system called the Vectograph, co-invented with Czech refugee Joseph Mahler, which revealed camouflaged enemy positions in aerial photography. With all this, he was also a consultant to the National Research Defense Committee which focused its efforts on non-governmental scientific research.

On a vacation to Santa Fe, New Mexico, with his three-year-old eldest daughter, Jennifer, he took a picture of her. After she asked why she could not see the picture her father just took of her, within an hour he already had the idea for an instant film camera. His patent attorney, Donald Brown, was also there at the time visiting Santa Fe and he quickly approached him with this idea and Brown agreed on the idea. After this trip, research for the development of this idea began immediately.

A little more than three years later, on February 21, 1947, Land demonstrated an instant camera and associated film to the Optical Society of America. Called the Land Camera, it was in commercial sale less than two years later. Polaroid originally manufactured sixty units of this first camera. Fifty-seven were put up for sale at the Jordan Marsh department store in Boston before the 1948 Christmas holiday. Polaroid marketers incorrectly guessed that the camera and film would remain in stock long enough to manufacture a second run based on customer demand. All fifty-seven cameras and all of the film were sold on the first day of demonstrations.

During his time at Polaroid, Land was notorious for his marathon research sessions. When Land conceived of an idea, he would experiment and brainstorm until the problem was solved with no breaks of any kind. He needed to have food brought to him and to be reminded to eat. He once wore the same clothes for eighteen consecutive days while solving problems with the commercial production of polarizing film. As the Polaroid company grew, Land had teams of assistants working in shifts at his side. As one team wore out, the next team was brought in to continue the work.

Elkan Blout, a close colleague of Edwin Land at Polaroid, wrote: &quot;What was Land like? Knowing him was a unique experience. He was a true visionary; he saw things differently from other people, which is what led him to the idea of instant photography. He was a brilliant, driven man who did not spare himself and who enjoyed working with equally driven people.&quot;

===Contributions to photo intelligence===
Beginning in the early years of the Cold War, Land played a major role in the development of photographic reconnaissance and intelligence gathering efforts. Projects included the Genetrix balloon borne cameras, the U-2 program, Corona and Samos photographic satellites, and the Manned Orbiting Laboratory. He was a frequent advisor to President Dwight D. Eisenhower on photographic reconnaissance matters.

===Later years===
In the 1950s, James G. Baker, Land, and his team helped design the optics of the revolutionary Lockheed U-2 spy plane. He also contributed to the design of the plane with Kelly Johnson. Also in this decade, Land first discovered a two-color system for projecting the entire spectrum of hues with only two colors of projecting light (he later found more specifically that one could achieve the same effect using very narrow bands of 579 nm and 599 nm light). Some of this work was later incorporated in his Retinex theory of color vision.

In 1957, Harvard University awarded him an honorary doctorate, and Edwin H. Land Blvd., a street in Cambridge, Massachusetts, was later named in his memory. The street is at one end of Memorial Drive, in Cambridge, where the Polaroid company headquarters building was located (over a mile west on Memorial Drive from Land Blvd.). Polaroid occupied several buildings in various places in Cambridge.

In the early 1970s, starting with the previously known phenomenon of color constancy, Land developed a new Retinex Theory of color vision. His popular demonstrations of color constancy raised much interest in the concept. He considered his leadership towards the development of integral instant color photography – the SX-70 film and camera – to be his crowning achievement.

Although he led the Polaroid Corporation as a chief executive, Land was a scientist first and foremost, and as such made sure that he performed &quot;an experiment each day&quot;. Despite holding no formal degree, employees, friends, and the press respected his scientific accomplishments by calling him Dr. Land. The only exception was &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, which refused to use that honorific title throughout his lifetime.

Land often made technical and management decisions based on what he felt was right as both a scientist and a humanist, much to the chagrin of Wall Street and his investors. From the beginning of his professional career, he hired women and trained them to be research scientists. Following the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. in 1968, he led Polaroid to the forefront of the affirmative action movement.

He had an artistic vision. In his laboratory, he built giant studio cameras the size of bedroom closets that produced large format (20 x 24 inch) prints. He gave photographers free access to these cameras in return for some of the prints they produced. This practice was continued by the company; the result was the Polaroid Collection. Compiled since the 1970s, the collection grew to between 16,000 and 24,000 photos shot by some of the world&#x27;s greatest artists and photographers, including Ansel Adams, Chuck Close, Robert Frank and Andy Warhol. The collection, an asset of the Polaroid Corporation, remained intact until 2010 when, in controversial circumstances, it was broken up and put up for sale in lots.

Land resigned from his role as Presidential Advisor during Nixon&#x27;s Watergate scandal in 1973. He was one of the names in Nixon&#x27;s &quot;political opponents&quot; (following the original top 20 enemies)

Despite the tremendous success of his instant cameras, Land&#x27;s Polavision instant movie system was a financial disaster, and he resigned as Chairman of Polaroid on July 27, 1982. When he retired, he had 535 patents to his name, only surpassed by Thomas Edison and Elihu Thomson. While he was set for retirement years, this did not mean the end of his passion in research and decided to continue with his interest in color vision. From 1978, he was a regular visitor to the laboratory of Semir Zeki at University College London, to attend Zeki&#x27;s experiments on color vision. Although they never published together, Land was to design the gelatin filters to accompany the paper on the physiology of color vision published by Zeki in &quot;Nature&quot; in 1980. These filters, and especially the long-wave one, were later used to study details of the structure of DNA. Before Land died, Zeki negotiated with the Royal Society to take a page of the Royal Society Fellows Book for Land to sign in the United States, since he was too ill to attend the signing ceremony in London. It was signed at a small private ceremony in Land&#x27;s home in Cambridge, Mass., attended by his son-in-law; the citations were read by Zeki and Hugh Huxley admitted Land formally to the Society. The other Foreign Member of the Royal Society who also signed the book on the same occasion was Ed Purcell, the discoverer of nuclear magnetic resonance and a friend of Edwin Land. It is reputed that the only other times that the book (or in this case a page of it) of the Royal Society was taken outside its house in London was when it was signed by Sigmund Freud and Winston Churchill, both in their homes in London. In his later years, Land founded the Rowland Institute for Science where he found a vacant lot besides Charles River at Kendall Square.

===Death===
Land died on March 1, 1991, in Cambridge, Massachusetts, at the age of 81. Land&#x27;s family, his wife, Helen, and two daughters, Jennifer and Valerie declined to disclose the cause of his death. Land himself disliked being written about, wanting to leave behind a legacy of published scientific work, rather than a cult of personality, and so, on his death, Land&#x27;s family had a laboratory associate shred his personal papers and notes, a task that would take three years to complete.

He is buried in Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge, Massachusetts.

===Public service===
Land was:
* A member of the President&#x27;s Science Advisory Committee (PSAC) 1957–59 and a Consultant-at-Large of PSAC from 1960 to 1973.
* A member of the President&#x27;s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board (PFIAB) 1961–77.
* A member of the National Commission on Technology, Automation and Economic Progress 1964–66.
* A member of the Carnegie Commission on Educational Television 1966–67.
* A Trustee of the Ford Foundation 1967–1975.

==Honors==

* 1935 Hood Medal of the Royal Photographic Society of Great Britain
* 1938 Elliott Cresson Medal, Franklin Institute of Philadelphia
* 1940 National Modern Pioneer Award, National Association of Manufacturers
* 1943 elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences
* 1945 Rumford Medal, American Academy of Arts and Sciences
* 1948 Holley Medal, American Society of Mechanical Engineers
* 1949 Duddell Medal, Physical Society of Great Britain
* 1953 elected to the United States National Academy of Sciences
* 1956 Howard N. Potts Medal
* 1957 elected to the American Philosophical Society
* 1963 Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest award given to a U.S. citizen, for his work in optics.
* 1965 IRI Medal from the Industrial Research Institute
* 1966 Albert A. Michelson Award from the Case Institute of Technology
* 1967 Frederic Ives Medal by the Optical Society of America.
* 1967 National Medal of Science
* 1967 The Cultural Award from the German Society for Photography (DGPh), with Henri Cartier-Bresson
* 1972 Founders Medal, National Academy of Engineering
* 1972 Elected an Honorary Member of The Optical Society.
* 1974 Vermilye Medal
* 1977 inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame
* 1988 National Medal of Technology for &quot;the invention, development and marketing of instant photography&quot;.
* 1991 inducted into the International Photography Hall of Fame and Museum
* Although Land never received a formal degree, he received honorary degrees from Harvard University, Yale University, Columbia University, Carnegie Mellon University, Willams College, Tufts College, Washington University in St. Louis, Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn, University of Massachusetts, Brandeis University and many others.
* He held 535 patents, compared with Thomas Edison&#x27;s 1,097 American patents.
* Land&#x27;s development of instant photography was designated a National Historic Chemical Landmark by the American Chemical Society on August 13, 2015.
* Land is referenced in the Lego set based on the Polaroid OneStep SX-70 Camera.

==Bibliography==

== Notes ==
==References==
==Sources==
* Earls, Alan R. and Rohani, Nasrin (2005), &quot;Polaroid&quot; Arcadia Publishing, Charleston, S.C., 
* Wensberg, P. C. (1987) &quot;Land&#x27;s Polaroid: a company and the man who invented it&quot; Houghton Mifflin, New York, 
* McElheny, Victor K. (1999) &quot;Edwin Herbert Land: May 7, 1909 – March 1, 1991&quot; National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 

== Further reading ==
* Bonanos, Christopher, New York Times: &quot;Man who inspired Apple&#x27;s Steve Jobs&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, October 7, 2011
* McElheny, Victor K., &quot;Biographical Memoirs: Edwin Herbert Land May 7, 1909 – March 1, 1991&quot;, &quot;National Academies Press&quot;
* &quot;Generation of Greatness: The Idea of a University in an Age of Science&quot;, Ninth Annual Arthur Dehon Little Memorial Lecture at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. May 22, 1957

== External links ==
* Land with Self Photo from VintageCameraClub.com

Patents
* —&quot;Apparatus for exposing and processing photographic film&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q380134" start="0" end="18" title="Edwin H. Land" label="Edwin Herbert Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="20" end="28" title="Royal Society" label="ForMemRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q969196" start="30" end="34" title="Royal Photographic Society" label="FRPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171086" start="36" end="43" title="Royal Institution" label="Hon.MRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="90" end="99" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q494389" start="150" end="170" title="Polaroid Corporation" label="Polaroid Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942175" start="196" end="203" title="Polarizer" label="filters"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="208" end="218" title="polarized light" label="polarizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q313702" start="248" end="277" title="Instant film" label="in-camera instant photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563885" start="287" end="294" title="retinex" label="retinex"/>
<link wikidata="Q374259" start="305" end="317" title="color vision" label="color vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856492" start="343" end="366" title="Land Camera" label="Polaroid instant camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q172839" start="444" end="453" title="Photographic processing" label="developed"/>
<link wikidata="Q49174" start="542" end="565" title="Bridgeport, Connecticut" label="Bridgeport, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="762" end="772" title="Phonograph" label="gramophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061501" start="1265" end="1285" title="Norwich Free Academy" label="Norwich Free Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q631402" start="1289" end="1309" title="Norwich, Connecticut" label="Norwich, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q49123" start="1506" end="1521" title="Harvard College" label="Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1594" end="1607" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="1668" end="1678" title="polarized light" label="polarizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q958131" start="1702" end="1715" title="Polaroid (polarizer)" label="Polaroid film"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="1889" end="1908" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="1978" end="2001" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="3358" end="3369" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q494389" start="3432" end="3452" title="Polaroid Corporation" label="Polaroid Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q958131" start="3530" end="3538" title="Polaroid (polarizer)" label="Polaroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078587" start="3703" end="3712" title="Wurlitzer" label="Wurlitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q815249" start="3725" end="3732" title="jukebox" label="jukebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q35158" start="3768" end="3780" title="stereoscopic" label="stereoscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="3876" end="3880" title="Liquid crystal display" label="LCDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3905" end="3917" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q13494477" start="4042" end="4053" title="smart bombs" label="smart bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555177" start="4108" end="4118" title="Vectograph" label="Vectograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="4400" end="4420" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q313695" start="4960" end="4974" title="instant camera" label="instant camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856492" start="5041" end="5052" title="Land Camera" label="Land Camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6276787" start="5214" end="5226" title="Jordan Marsh" label="Jordan Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="5247" end="5253" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364176" start="6103" end="6114" title="Elkan Blout" label="Elkan Blout"/>
<link wikidata="Q189064" start="6732" end="6743" title="Lockheed U-2" label="U-2 program"/>
<link wikidata="Q256812" start="6745" end="6751" title="Corona (satellite)" label="Corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q948200" start="6795" end="6821" title="Manned Orbiting Laboratory" label="Manned Orbiting Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="6862" end="6882" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q337213" start="6956" end="6970" title="James Gilbert Baker" label="James G. Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q189064" start="7037" end="7049" title="Lockheed U-2" label="Lockheed U-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q596353" start="7113" end="7126" title="Kelly Johnson (engineer)" label="Kelly Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939297" start="7173" end="7189" title="two-color system" label="two-color system"/>
<link wikidata="Q374259" start="7466" end="7478" title="color vision" label="color vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="7490" end="7508" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="7581" end="7605" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q614507" start="7666" end="7680" title="Memorial Drive (Cambridge)" label="Memorial Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563885" start="7949" end="7964" title="color constancy" label="color constancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166509" start="8175" end="8192" title="color photography" label="color photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394062" start="8199" end="8204" title="Polaroid SX-70" label="SX-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="8599" end="8622" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q757963" start="8991" end="9030" title="assassination of Martin Luther King Jr." label="assassination of Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q214244" start="9080" end="9098" title="affirmative action" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209169" start="9165" end="9185" title="Polaroid 20×24 camera" label="giant studio cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357368" start="9422" end="9445" title="Polaroid Collection" label="the Polaroid Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q60809" start="9608" end="9619" title="Ansel Adams" label="Ansel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q453883" start="9621" end="9632" title="Chuck Close" label="Chuck Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q467574" start="9634" end="9646" title="Robert Frank" label="Robert Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="9651" end="9662" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="9889" end="9919" title="Watergate scandal" label="Nixon&amp;#x27;s Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394071" start="10109" end="10119" title="Polavision" label="Polavision"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="10292" end="10305" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q559794" start="10310" end="10323" title="Elihu Thomson" label="Elihu Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183270" start="11419" end="11429" title="Edward Mills Purcell" label="Ed Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372153" start="11779" end="11808" title="Rowland Institute for Science" label="Rowland Institute for Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="11922" end="11946" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950363" start="12399" end="12420" title="Mount Auburn Cemetery" label="Mount Auburn Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241184" start="12500" end="12543" title="President&amp;#x27;s Science Advisory Committee" label="President&amp;#x27;s Science Advisory Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402416" start="12630" end="12682" title="President&amp;#x27;s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board" label="President&amp;#x27;s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043883" start="12813" end="12858" title="Carnegie Commission on Educational Television" label="Carnegie Commission on Educational Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313036" start="12887" end="12902" title="Ford Foundation" label="Ford Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q969196" start="12934" end="12944" title="Hood Medal" label="Hood Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q969196" start="12952" end="12995" title="Royal Photographic Society of Great Britain" label="Royal Photographic Society of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332315" start="13003" end="13024" title="Elliott Cresson Medal" label="Elliott Cresson Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q339484" start="13026" end="13044" title="Franklin Institute" label="Franklin Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13068" end="13097" title="National Modern Pioneer Award" label="National Modern Pioneer Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336837" start="13099" end="13136" title="National Association of Manufacturers" label="National Association of Manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="13159" end="13196" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q285167" start="13204" end="13217" title="Rumford Medal" label="Rumford Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="13219" end="13256" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q21531768" start="13264" end="13276" title="Holley Medal" label="Holley Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q466950" start="13278" end="13318" title="American Society of Mechanical Engineers" label="American Society of Mechanical Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311657" start="13326" end="13339" title="Duddell Medal and Prize" label="Duddell Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3390455" start="13341" end="13357" title="Physical Society of London" label="Physical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="13411" end="13439" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q817496" start="13447" end="13468" title="The Franklin Institute Awards" label="Howard N. Potts Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="13491" end="13521" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="13529" end="13558" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13589" end="13593" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="13594" end="13601" title="citizen" label="citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973543" start="13634" end="13643" title="IRI Medal" label="IRI Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027726" start="13653" end="13682" title="Industrial Research Institute" label="Industrial Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837331" start="13690" end="13715" title="Michelson–Morley Award" label="Albert A. Michelson Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047060" start="13725" end="13753" title="Case Institute of Technology" label="Case Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027280" start="13788" end="13814" title="Optical Society of America" label="Optical Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="13823" end="13848" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202955" start="13884" end="13914" title="German Society for Photography" label="German Society for Photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q156567" start="13928" end="13949" title="Henri Cartier-Bresson" label="Henri Cartier-Bresson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13957" end="13971" title="Founders Medal" label="Founders Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493021" start="13973" end="14004" title="National Academy of Engineering" label="National Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027280" start="14042" end="14061" title="Optica (society)" label="The Optical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q817496" start="14070" end="14084" title="The Franklin Institute Awards" label="Vermilye Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366018" start="14110" end="14141" title="National Inventors Hall of Fame" label="National Inventors Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q937629" start="14149" end="14177" title="National Medal of Technology" label="National Medal of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060764" start="14284" end="14333" title="International Photography Hall of Fame and Museum" label="International Photography Hall of Fame and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="14416" end="14434" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="14436" end="14451" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="14453" end="14472" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="14474" end="14500" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49166" start="14502" end="14517" title="Williams College" label="Willams College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49120" start="14519" end="14532" title="Tufts University" label="Tufts College"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="14534" end="14568" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q75478" start="14570" end="14603" title="Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn" label="Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061122" start="14605" end="14632" title="University of Massachusetts" label="University of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49119" start="14634" end="14653" title="Brandeis University" label="Brandeis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="14685" end="14692" title="patents" label="patents"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="14708" end="14721" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336888" start="14819" end="14854" title="National Historic Chemical Landmarks" label="National Historic Chemical Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q247556" start="14862" end="14887" title="American Chemical Society" label="American Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q170484" start="14936" end="14940" title="Lego" label="Lego"/>
<link wikidata="Q80106288" start="15279" end="15298" title="Victor McElheny" label="McElheny, Victor K."/>
<link wikidata="Q6970107" start="15685" end="15709" title="National Academies Press" label="National Academies Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173710" wikidata="Q317742" url="?curid=173710" title="Johnny Marr">
<text>John Martin Marr (né Maher; born 31 October 1963) is a musician, songwriter and singer. He first achieved fame as the guitarist and co-songwriter of the Smiths, who were active from 1982 to 1987. He has since performed with numerous other bands and embarked on a solo career.

Born and raised in Manchester, England, Marr formed his first band at the age of 13. He was part of several bands with Andy Rourke before forming the Smiths with Morrissey in 1982. The Smiths attained commercial success and were critically acclaimed, with Marr&#x27;s jangle pop guitar style becoming a distinctive part of the band&#x27;s sound, but separated in 1987 due to personal differences between Marr and Morrissey. Since then, Marr has been a member of the Pretenders, the The, Electronic, Modest Mouse, and the Cribs, and he has become a prolific session musician, working with names such as Kirsty MacColl, Pet Shop Boys, Talking Heads, Bryan Ferry and Hans Zimmer.

Having released an album titled &quot;Boomslang&quot; in 2003 under the name Johnny Marr and the Healers, Marr released his first solo album, &quot;The Messenger&quot;, in 2013. His second solo album, &quot;Playland&quot;, was released in 2014, followed by a third, &quot;Call the Comet&quot;, in 2018. Marr&#x27;s autobiography, &quot;Set the Boy Free&quot;, was published in 2016.

Described by Alexis Petridis of &quot;The Guardian&quot; as &quot;the 1980s&#x27; most inventive and distinctive guitarist&quot;, Marr was voted the fourth-best guitarist of the last 30 years in a poll conducted by the BBC in 2010. Phil Alexander, editor-in-chief of &quot;Mojo&quot;, described him as &quot;arguably Britain&#x27;s last great guitar stylist&quot;. In 2013, &quot;NME&quot; honoured Marr with its &quot;Godlike Genius&quot; award.

==Early life==
Marr was born on 31 October 1963 in Saint Mary&#x27;s Hospital in Manchester, son of John Joseph Maher and Frances Patricia Doyle, Irish emigrants to England from County Kildare. The family lived in Ardwick Green and moved to Wythenshawe in 1972. Marr attended St Aloysius Primary School in Ardwick before moving to Sacred Heart Primary School. From 1975, he attended St Augustine&#x27;s Catholic Grammar School, which in 1977 merged with other schools to form St John Plessington High School. Marr had aspirations to be a professional football player. He was approached by Nottingham Forest and had trials with Manchester City&#x27;s youth team.

Marr&#x27;s said his family&#x27;s move to Wythenshawe was &quot;like we&#x27;d moved to Beverly Hills&quot;, and that the move led to him meeting &quot;a bunch of guitar players&quot; which &quot;changed his life&quot;. Guitarist Billy Duffy, later a member of the Cult, was in a high school band that practised across the street from Marr&#x27;s new house, and Marr would hang out listening to them rehearsing. He learned to play the guitar with LP vinyl records and a guitar chords dictionary without a teacher. Marr formed his first band, the Paris Valentinos, at the age of 13, with Andy Rourke (who had gone to the same high school as Duffy) and Kevin Williams (later an actor, known as Kevin Kennedy), performing for the first time at a Jubilee party in Benchill in June 1977, playing Rolling Stones and Thin Lizzy covers.

In 1979, he played a single gig at Wythenshawe Forum with a band called Sister Ray and re-united with Rourke in a band called White Dice. White Dice entered a demo-tape competition organised by &quot;NME&quot; and won an audition for F-Beat Records, which they attended in April 1980 but were not signed. Around the age of 14, he began spelling his name &quot;Marr&quot; to simplify the pronunciation for those who had difficulty with his birth name &quot;Maher&quot;, and to avoid confusion with Buzzcocks drummer John Maher.

In October 1980, Marr enrolled at Wythenshawe College, and was President of the school&#x27;s Student Union. White Dice dissolved in 1981. Marr and Rourke then formed a funk band, Freak Party, with Simon Wolstencroft on drums. Around this time, Marr first met Matt Johnson, with whom he later collaborated.

==The Smiths==

By early 1982, Freak Party had fizzled out, being unable to find a singer. Marr approached Rob Allman, singer in White Dice, who suggested Steven Morrissey, a singer with the short-lived punk band the Nosebleeds. Marr approached a mutual friend asking to be introduced and they visited Morrissey at his house in Kings Road, Stretford, in May.

Marr&#x27;s jangly Rickenbacker and Fender Telecaster guitar playing became synonymous with the Smiths&#x27; sound. Marr&#x27;s friend Andy Rourke joined as bass player and Mike Joyce was recruited as drummer. Signing to indie label Rough Trade Records, they released their first single, &quot;Hand in Glove&quot;, on 13 May 1983. By February 1984, the Smiths&#x27; fanbase was sufficiently large to launch the band&#x27;s long-awaited debut album to number two in the UK chart. Early in 1985, the band released their second album, &quot;Meat Is Murder&quot;. It was more strident and political than its predecessor, and it was the band&#x27;s only album (barring compilations) to reach number one in the UK charts. During 1985 the band completed lengthy tours of the UK and the US while recording the next studio record, &quot;The Queen Is Dead&quot;.

In 1989 &quot;Spin&quot; magazine rated &quot;The Queen is Dead&quot; as number one of &quot;The Greatest Albums Ever Made&quot;. Spin was not alone in this designation—numerous periodicals rank the Smiths and their albums, especially &quot;The Queen is Dead&quot;, high on their best ever lists. &quot;NME&quot;, for example, has dubbed the Smiths the most important rock band of all time. A legal dispute with Rough Trade had delayed the album by almost seven months (it had been completed in November 1985), and Marr was beginning to feel the stress of the band&#x27;s exhausting touring and recording schedule. He later told &quot;NME&quot;, &quot;&#x27;Worse for wear&#x27; wasn&#x27;t the half of it: I was extremely ill. By the time the tour actually finished it was all getting a little bit... dangerous. I was just drinking more than I could handle.&quot; Meanwhile, Rourke was fired from the band in early 1986 due to his use of heroin, although he was reinstated in short order. Despite their continued success, personal differences within the band—including the increasingly strained relationship between Morrissey and Marr—saw them on the verge of splitting.

In July 1987, Marr left the group, and auditions to find a replacement for him proved fruitless. By the time &quot;Strangeways, Here We Come&quot; (named after Strangeways Prison, Manchester) was released in September, the band had split up. The breakdown in the relationship has been primarily attributed to Morrissey&#x27;s becoming annoyed by Marr&#x27;s work with other artists and Marr&#x27;s growing frustration with Morrissey&#x27;s musical inflexibility. Referring to the songs recorded in the band&#x27;s last session together (B-sides for the &quot;Girlfriend in a Coma&quot; single, which preceded the album&#x27;s release), Marr said &quot;I wrote &#x27;I Keep Mine Hidden&#x27;, but &#x27;Work Is a Four-Letter Word&#x27; I hated. That was the last straw, really. I didn&#x27;t form a group to perform Cilla Black songs.&quot; In 1989, in an interview with young fan Tim Samuels, later a BBC journalist, Morrissey said the lack of a managerial figure and business problems were to blame for the band&#x27;s eventual split. In a 2016 interview, Marr agreed with this.

In 1996, Smiths&#x27; drummer Mike Joyce took Morrissey and Marr to court, arguing that he had not received his fair share of recording and performance royalties. Morrissey and Marr had received most of the Smiths&#x27; recording and performance royalties, and allowed ten per cent each to Joyce and Rourke. Composition royalties were not an issue, as Rourke and Joyce had never been credited as composers for the band. Morrissey and Marr said the other two members of the band had always agreed to that split of the royalties, but the court found in favour of Joyce and ordered that he be paid over £1 million in back pay and receive 25% thenceforth.

Marr and Morrissey have repeatedly stated they will not reunite the band. In 2005, VH1 attempted to get the band back together on its &quot;Bands Reunited&quot; show but abandoned its attempt after the show&#x27;s host, Aamer Haleem, failed to corner Morrissey before a show. In December 2005 it was announced that Johnny Marr and the Healers would play at Manchester v Cancer, a benefit show for cancer research being organised by Andy Rourke and his production company, Great Northern Productions. Rumours suggested that a Smiths reunion would occur at this concert but were dispelled by Marr on his website.

In an October 2007 interview on BBC Radio 5 Live, Marr hinted at a potential reformation in the future, saying that &quot;stranger things have happened so, you know, who knows?&quot; Marr went on to say that &quot;It&#x27;s no biggy. Maybe we will in 18 or 32 years&#x27; time when we all need to for whatever reasons, but right now Morrissey is doing his thing and I&#x27;m doing mine, so that&#x27;s the answer really.&quot; This was the first indication of a possible Smiths reunion from Marr, who previously had said that reforming the band would be a bad idea. In 2008 Marr and Morrissey met and discussed the possibility of a reunion, but after initial enthusiasm from both parties, neither pursued the idea.

Marr&#x27;s guitar playing &quot;was a huge building block&quot; for more Manchester bands that followed the Smiths. The Stone Roses guitarist John Squire has stated that Marr was a major influence. Oasis lead guitarist Noel Gallagher credited the Smiths as an influence, especially Marr, whom he described as a &quot;fucking wizard&quot;, also stating that &quot;he&#x27;s unique, you can&#x27;t play what he plays.&quot;

In August 2024, Morrissey said in a post on his website that he and Marr had received a &quot;lucrative offer&quot; to tour as the Smiths in 2025. The singer said he had accepted the invitation, but that Marr did not respond. Marr did not publicly comment, but had recently posted a picture of Reform UK leader Nigel Farage to rebuke calls to reunite in the aftermath of Oasis&#x27;s reunion. Marr previously said in 2016 that Morrissey&#x27;s politics aligned with Farage&#x27;s, joking that any potential Smiths reunion would feature the politician as their replacement guitarist. Weeks later, on Marr&#x27;s official Instagram, Marr&#x27;s management issued an official statement in response to Morrissey&#x27;s claims that Marr ignored the offer: &quot;As for the offer to tour, I didn&#x27;t ignore the offer - I said no.&quot;

Marr&#x27;s statement also clarified other claims made by Morrissey&#x27;s team on Morrissey&#x27;s website such as that Marr had filed for 100% ownership of the Smiths&#x27; intellectual property and trademark rights without having consulted with Morrissey despite the fact that &quot;Morrissey alone created the musical unit name &quot;The Smiths&#x27; in May 1982&quot;. In Marr&#x27;s statement, it was clarified that Marr discovered that the band did not own the trademark, and in an effort to protect the trademark from a third party attempt made in 2018 to use the band&#x27;s name, Marr registered the trademark solely under his name after a failure to receive a response from Morrissey and his representatives. In January 2024, Marr signed an agreement to share ownership of the name with Morrissey, an agreement Morrissey has yet to follow up on. Marr further clarified that the efforts to take the trademark were not to tour under the Smiths&#x27; name with a singer of Marr&#x27;s choice (contrary to the claims made by Morrissey&#x27;s team), but rather simply to protect the band&#x27;s name and use of the name.

==Post-Smiths==
===The Pretenders, The The, Electronic (1987–1999)===
In August 1987, Marr was very briefly an official member of the Pretenders. In late 1987, he toured with the band and appeared on the single &quot;Windows of the World&quot; b/w &quot;1969&quot;. He then left the Pretenders, and recorded and toured with The The from 1988 to 1994, recording two albums with the group. He simultaneously formed Electronic with New Order&#x27;s Bernard Sumner. Electronic were intermittently active throughout the 1990s, releasing their final album in 1999.

===Session work (1987–2002)===
In 1992 Marr and Billy Duffy recorded a cover version of Ennio Morricone&#x27;s &quot;The Good, the Bad and the Ugly&quot; for the NME compilation album &quot;Ruby Trax&quot;.

Marr has worked as a session musician and writing collaborator for artists including Pet Shop Boys, Bryan Ferry, Billy Bragg, Kirsty MacColl, Black Grape, Jane Birkin, Talking Heads, and Beck. Marr played guitar on four songs on Talking Heads&#x27; final album &quot;Naked&quot;, including the single &quot;(Nothing But) Flowers&quot;, and he prominently appears in that song&#x27;s music video. 

Marr played guitar on several Pet Shop Boys songs; he continues to have guest appearances on their albums, with his most significant contribution on &quot;Release&quot; (2002). The only remix that Marr has ever done was for Pet Shop Boys—it was a mix of his favourite track from their 1987 album, &quot;Actually&quot;, called &quot;I Want to Wake Up&quot;, and was released as the b-side to 1993&#x27;s &quot;Can You Forgive Her?&quot;. He later worked as a guest musician on the Oasis album &quot;Heathen Chemistry&quot;.

===Johnny Marr and the Healers (2000–present)===
In 2000, Marr recruited drummer Zak Starkey (son of Ringo Starr), Cavewaves guitarist Lee Spencer and former Kula Shaker bassist Alonza Bevan for his new project, Johnny Marr and the Healers. The band had taken two years to form as Marr had wanted members to be chosen &quot;by chemistry&quot;. Their debut album &quot;Boomslang&quot; was released in 2003, with all lyrics and lead vocals by Marr. Their most recent release was a free downloadable track called &quot;Free Christmas&quot; in December 2011, while the album was re-released in 2024.

===7 Worlds Collide (2001–2009)===

Marr performed two Smiths songs and music by others with a supergroup called 7 Worlds Collide consisting of members from Pearl Jam, Radiohead, Split Enz and others, assembled by Neil Finn of Split Enz and Crowded House in 2001. A second set of concerts took place in December 2008/January 2009, and an album of new studio material titled &quot;The Sun Came Out&quot; was released in August 2009 to raise money for Oxfam.

===Modest Mouse (2006–2009)===
In addition to his work as a recording artist, Marr has worked as a record producer. In 2006, he began work with Modest Mouse&#x27;s Isaac Brock on songs that eventually were featured on the band&#x27;s 2007 release, &quot;We Were Dead Before the Ship Even Sank&quot;. The band subsequently announced that Marr was a fully fledged member, and the reformed line-up toured extensively throughout 2006–07.

The new album reached number one on the American &quot;Billboard&quot; charts in late March 2007. For Marr, this was the first time he had had a number one record in the US. The highest chart position before that was with Electronic, who made the Top 40 in the singles chart with &quot;Getting Away With It&quot;.

While touring in Los Angeles with Modest Mouse, Marr spent a day in John Frusciante&#x27;s home studio and contributed to Frusciante&#x27;s album &quot;The Empyrean&quot;. He recorded several guitar tracks on songs &quot;Enough of Me&quot; and &quot;Central&quot;.

===The Cribs (2008–2011)===

Marr joined the Cribs in 2008, after meeting Gary Jarman when they were both in Portland, Oregon. In 2009 they recorded the album &quot;Ignore the Ignorant&quot;, which was released on 7 September that year and peaked at No. 8 on the UK charts. Marr has said the album is &quot;as good as anything I&#x27;ve done&quot;.

In April 2011 it was confirmed that Marr would no longer be part of the band. Marr, who had been understood to officially leave the band in January, released a statement in which he affirmed that he would be working on solo material &quot;over the next year or so&quot;.

Marr returned to play with the Cribs during the second of two special Christmas shows at Leeds Academy on 19 December 2013.
===Further session work and solo albums (2011–present)===
In the late 2007, Marr&#x27;s daughter Sonny performed backing vocals on the track &quot;Even a Child&quot; on Crowded House&#x27;s album &quot;Time on Earth&quot;, on which her father Marr played guitars. He played a large role in making the score for the 2010 science-fiction/drama film &quot;Inception&quot;, which was written and directed by Christopher Nolan. Using a 12-string-guitar, he produced repetitive, simple melancholic tones that became a character theme for the protagonist, played by Leonardo DiCaprio. &quot;I kept coming up with this phrase &#x27;churned-up,&#x27;&quot; Marr said, &quot;You&#x27;ve got this character who all the way through the film has this underlying turmoil.&quot; Longtime Nolan collaborator, composer Hans Zimmer, penned the soundtrack. Marr has been working since 2007 with Fender to develop and design his own guitar. &quot;American Songwriter&quot; wrote that &quot;Fender had to modify their manufacturing process due to some of Marr&#x27;s changes, but it will still sell for around the same price as other American-made Fenders.&quot;
On 25 February 2013, Marr released his début solo album, &quot;The Messenger&quot;, in the UK through Warner Bros. and on 26 February in the US through Sire. The album was preceded by the single &quot;Upstarts&quot;, released in the UK on 18 February 2013. Marr recorded music for the film &quot;The Amazing Spider-Man 2&quot; with Hans Zimmer, Pharrell Williams, Michael Einziger and David A. Stewart. 

Marr&#x27;s second solo album, entitled &quot;Playland&quot;, was released on 6 October 2014. He also announced a worldwide tour around the release of the &quot;Playland&quot; album that commenced in the UK on 13 October 2014. The album&#x27;s lead single was &quot;Easy Money&quot;. In October 2014, Marr appeared as a guest musician for Hans Zimmer at his two concerts, Hans Zimmer: Revealed, at London&#x27;s Hammersmith Apollo. In December 2014, Marr announced the cancellation of the remainder of his US tour, in support of Playland, due to a close family illness. In January 2016, Marr announced new and rescheduled dates as part of his West Coast &#x27;California Jam&#x27; tour, which took place in the US throughout February and March 2016.

Marr features on &quot;Ballad of the Mighty I&quot;, the second single from Noel Gallagher&#x27;s High Flying Birds&#x27; &quot;Chasing Yesterday&quot;, playing lead guitar, and joined the band for this song at a concert in Manchester. Marr contributed the track &quot;My Monster&quot; for the Blondie album &quot;Pollinator&quot;, released on 5 May 2017. On 12 March 2018 Marr announced his third solo album, &quot;Call the Comet&quot;.

Marr performed a set on The Other Stage at the 2019 Glastonbury Festival on 29 June, and later joined the Killers during their headline set on the Pyramid Stage to play guitar on &quot;This Charming Man&quot; and &quot;Mr. Brightside&quot; as part of the band&#x27;s encore.

As Hans Zimmer composed for the &quot;James Bond&quot; film &quot;No Time to Die&quot;, Marr was brought in to perform in the score. He also played guitar in the theme song performed by Billie Eilish, and was present during the track&#x27;s live debut at the 2020 Brit Awards. In August 2021, Marr signed a new worldwide album deal with BMG and on 31 August he debuted a new single titled &quot;Spirit Power &amp; Soul&quot; on his social media platforms, a song taken from his EP, &quot;Fever Dreams Pt 1&quot;, that was released on 15 October 2021. His fourth solo album, &quot;Fever Dreams Pts 1-4,&quot; which is also his first double LP, was released on 25 February 2022. Marr would join the Killers for their 2022 tour to promote the 2020 album &quot;Imploding the Mirage&quot;, providing an opening act for the American tour dates and also joining the Killers for a Smiths cover and &quot;Mr. Brightside&quot; in the encore. The Los Angeles tour date saw the Killers and Marr also performing on stage with former Fleetwood Mac guitarist Lindsey Buckingham.

In November 2023, the album &quot;Spirit Power: The Best Of Johnny Marr&quot; was released that included highlights from his four solo albums plus two new studio recordings. An accompanying UK tour was also announced, with gigs played in Newcastle, Glasgow, Leeds, Liverpool, Wolverhampton, Cardiff, Bristol, London, Brighton and Nottingham during April 2024.

==Style and influences==
Marr&#x27;s three biggest influences on guitar were Nile Rodgers, Bert Jansch, and James Williamson from the Stooges. His jangly guitar-playing in the Smiths was influenced by James Honeyman-Scott of the Pretenders. During his time in the band, Marr often tuned his guitar up a full step to F to accommodate Morrissey&#x27;s vocal range, and also used open tunings. He is known for creating arpeggio melodies and (sometimes) unusual chord progressions, and makes wide use of open strings while chording to create chiming. When performing with the Smiths, he wanted to play music which was pop. &quot;100% of my focus was on providing interesting guitar hooks and putting some kind of space-age twist on the guitarist&#x27;s role. The pop guitarist crossed with the mad professor. That&#x27;s how I thought of myself.&quot; In a 2007 interview for the BBC, Marr said that his goal with the Smiths was to &quot;pare down&quot; his style and avoid rock guitar clichés. 

Citing producer Phil Spector as an influence, Marr said, &quot;I like the idea of records, even those with plenty of space, that sound &#x27;symphonic&#x27;. I like the idea of all the players merging into one atmosphere&quot;. Marr was also influenced by Rory Gallagher, Pete Townshend of the Who, Jimi Hendrix, John McGeoch of Magazine and Siouxsie and the Banshees, and John McLaughlin, who he called &quot;the greatest guitar player that&#x27;s ever lived&quot;. When forming the Smiths, the Velvet Underground was a key influence, along with Keith Richards of the Rolling Stones. Marc Bolan of T. Rex also had a strong impact on him because of the groove and the sound that put the listener in a daze. He explained, &quot;I try to think about the guitar along the spectrum of James Williamson, who was in the Stooges during the &quot;Raw Power&quot; era, on the one hand to John McLaughlin and his solo record, &quot;My Goal&#x27;s Beyond&quot;. I like all the spectrum in between, and that might be – and is – Richard Lloyd of Television, John McGeoch from Siouxsie and the Banshees, Nile Rodgers. To me these people are magicians and artists.&quot; 

When Marr started to sing as a solo artist in 2012, he said, &quot;[The frontpersons] I related to were Peter Perrett, Colin Newman, Pete Shelley, Siouxsie Sioux. They were singing from the mind and had integrity.&quot; He added, &quot;I&#x27;m absolutely not interested in being the frontman in a band that bares my soul or feelings in song. Siouxsie Sioux, or Ray Davies, or Howard Devoto don&#x27;t sing from some weird, shlocky, sentimental place. What&#x27;s wrong with singing from the brain?&quot;.

==Guitars==
Marr has used a variety of guitars throughout his career, but these are his most notable instruments:
*Fender Jaguar – He has played a Jaguar since 2005, and in 2012 Fender issued the Johnny Marr Signature Fender Jaguar, which has several modifications, including specially voiced Johnny Marr custom pickups by Bare Knuckle Pickups and a four position blade switch.
*Rickenbacker 330 – This guitar is most often associated with Marr due to its &#x27;jangly&#x27; sound for which he is known. He played it with the Smiths and it can also be seen in the promotional video for &quot;Vivid&quot; by Electronic. He also owns a &quot;360&quot; 12-string model that belonged to Pete Townshend. Marr acknowledged that many of the songs that were thought to have been recorded on this Rickenbacker were, in fact, recorded on a Fender Telecaster.
* Fender Stratocaster - Marr used a 1962 Fender Stratocaster to record &quot;There Is a Light That Never Goes Out&quot; and for much of the Smiths&#x27; 1986 UK and US tours. He also used a 1963 Fender Stratocaster to record &quot;The Boy with a Thorn in his Side&quot; which was one of his main guitars on the 1986 tour. Marr also owned a sunburst 1965 Fender Stratocaster, serial number L68296, that eventually wound up in the possession of Oasis guitarist Noel Gallagher.
* Fender Telecaster - while Marr was associated with the Rickenbacker 330, he admitted that many of the &quot;jangly&quot; songs that were recorded by the Smiths were in fact done with John Porter&#x27;s 1954 Telecaster, including &quot;This Charming Man&quot;.
*Gibson Les Paul – Marr owns several, including a rare 1960 model. His cardinal red Les Paul was acquired in 1984 and was used extensively with the Smiths and with The The, appearing in the video for &quot;Dogs of Lust&quot;. He has now added a Bigsby tremolo system to this guitar as well as Seymour Duncan pick-ups with coil taps. He gave his 1960 model (also previously owned by Pete Townshend) to Noel Gallagher during Oasis&#x27;s formative years. Gallagher broke the guitar&#x27;s neck hitting a fan who jumped on stage. Marr then gave Gallagher yet another vintage (black) Gibson Les Paul (used on much of &quot;The Queen is Dead&quot;) so Oasis could carry on touring.
*Gibson ES-355 – His cherry red model was used heavily with the Smiths during 1984 and inspired Suede guitarist Bernard Butler and Noel Gallagher to buy one for themselves. It was bought for him by Seymour Stein in New York as an incentive for the Smiths to sign to his label, Sire Records. He also owns a black model, which appears in the videos for &quot;Forbidden City&quot; and &quot;For You&quot; by Electronic, and a sunburst, 12-string model that was used heavily on the Smiths&#x27; final LP, &quot;Strangeways, Here We Come&quot;. This 12 string model was later given to Bernard Butler.
*Gibson SG – Marr used a cherry red SG as his main guitar when playing with the Healers. He also owns a unique, blonde SG.
*Fender Jazzmaster – Marr used several Jazzmasters while he was a member of Modest Mouse.

Marr owns 132 guitars. In September 2023, a book titled &quot;Marr&#x27;s Guitars&quot; was published, showcasing 53 of his favourite electric and acoustic guitars.

===Amplifiers and effects===
Marr has used Fender Amplifiers almost exclusively throughout his career. During his time with the Smiths, he used a Twin Reverb, a Deluxe Reverb and a Bassman amongst others. He also used a Fender Champ with and the Cribs. When playing with the Cribs, he used a Super Reverb. Marr&#x27;s love of the Fender sound continues to this day with his Deluxe Reverb. He has used other amps, including the Roland JC-120, Vox AC30, Mesa Boogie and Marshall cabinets. Marr typically uses Boss effects units, notably that company&#x27;s CE-2 chorus effect, the TW-1 touch wah wah pedal, and the OD-2 overdrive pedal.

== Recognition ==

In 2007 Marr was appointed as a visiting professor in music at the University of Salford, where he delivered an inaugural lecture (on 4 November 2008), and a series of workshops and masterclasses to students on the BA (Hons) Popular Music and Recording programme.

On 19 July 2012, he received an honorary doctorate from the University of Salford for &quot;outstanding achievements&quot; and &quot;changing the face of British guitar music&quot;. In 2013, Marr received &quot;NME&quot;&#x27;s &quot;Godlike Genius&quot; award. The magazine stated, &quot;Not content with rewriting the history of music with one of the world&#x27;s greatest-ever bands, the Smiths, he&#x27;s continued to push boundaries and evolve throughout his career, working with some of the best and most exciting artists on the planet.&quot;

On 3 November 2018, Marr unveiled a plaque in his parents&#x27; hometown of Athy in County Kildare, Ireland. This was part of the Made of Athy project. 
On 19 January 2021, Marr received the Boss Lifetime Achievement Award as part of the NAMM music industry trade show.

== In popular culture ==
Marr was the titular subject of the 2007 single &quot;Johnny Marr&quot; by the Canadian singer Carole Pope, formerly of the band Rough Trade. Pope described her inspiration and choice of Marr thus: &quot;I was actually getting nostalgic, which I never really do, about living on a certain street in Toronto in the &#x27;80s. The Smiths were the soundtrack of that time. I love [...] Morrissey, but I know he&#x27;s trouble.&quot;

Marr is the subject of &quot;Johnny Marr Is Dead&quot; by the Brian Jonestown Massacre, but he is not mentioned in the lyrics. He is also the subject of Clear&#x27;s 2003 single satirising the music industry, &quot;Johnny Marr Was a Mistake&quot;. He is mentioned in the 1988 single &quot;John Kettley Is a Weatherman&quot; by British band A Tribe of Toffs.

Marr is portrayed by Laurie Kynaston in the Morrissey biopic &quot;England Is Mine&quot; (2017).

==Personal life==
Marr and his wife Angie have been together since 1979, before the Smiths formed. They have two children, Sonny and Nile Marr. Nile is also a musician, and was frontman of the band Man Made before going solo. After residing in Portland, Oregon, for more than five years, the family returned to Britain for Marr to record his solo album in Manchester.

Marr gave up eating meat around 1985 in solidarity with Morrissey and Angie. He stated: &quot;It&#x27;s not a good idea to have a number one album called &quot;Meat Is Murder&quot; and be seen eating a bacon sarnie.&quot; After meeting American rap group Naughty by Nature, he was inspired by their philosophy of strength through health, and soon after quit drinking and smoking, and converted to veganism. Marr is a keen runner, and completed the 2010 New York Marathon in a time of 3:54:18. Marr has been a supporter of Manchester City F.C. since 1972, and has been seen attending games. Marr is a patron of the Manchester Modernist Society.

Marr has said that he does not consider himself English or British, saying, &quot;Anyone who looks back on the past 30 years of my career will know that I&#x27;ve always described myself as Mancunian Irish. I was the first of my family to be born in England. I&#x27;ve never described myself as British or English. I&#x27;m either Mancunian or Mancunian Irish – that is a culture and a nationality that is a thing unto itself.&quot;

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
===Live albums===
===Compilation albums===
===Albums (as band member)===

The Smiths

* &quot;The Smiths&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Meat Is Murder&quot; (1985)
* &quot;The Queen Is Dead&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Strangeways, Here We Come&quot; (1987)

The The

* &quot;Mind Bomb&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Dusk&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Solitude&quot; (1993)

Electronic

* &quot;Electronic&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Raise the Pressure&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Twisted Tenderness&quot; (1999)

7 Worlds Collide

* &quot;7 Worlds Collide&quot; (2001)
* &quot;The Sun Came Out&quot; (2009)

Johnny Marr and the Healers

* &quot;Boomslang&quot; (2003)

Modest Mouse

* &quot;We Were Dead Before the Ship Even Sank&quot; (2007)
* &quot;No One&#x27;s First and You&#x27;re Next&quot; (2009)

The Cribs

* &quot;Ignore the Ignorant&quot; (2009)

===Albums (as a guest musician)===

In the 1980s and 1990s, Marr played on three Billy Bragg recordings. In the late 1980s, he performed on albums by Bryan Ferry and Talking Heads. In the 1990s and 2000s, he performed on three Pet Shop Boys albums, and also plays guitar and harmonica on their Xenomania-produced album, &quot;Yes&quot;, released in 2009. In the 1990s, he also performed on albums by M People, Beck and Tom Jones. In the 2000s, he played on albums by bands such as Noel Gallagher&#x27;s High Flying Birds, Pearl Jam, Jane Birkin, Lisa Germano and Crowded House. He also plays guitar on Girls Aloud&#x27;s fifth album, &quot;Out of Control&quot;, on a track entitled &quot;Rolling Back the Rivers in Time&quot;, as well as harmonica on the track &quot;Love Is the Key&quot;. He also appeared on two tracks (&quot;Enough of Me&quot; and &quot;Central&quot;) on John Frusciante&#x27;s album &quot;The Empyrean&quot; which was released January 2009.

===Albums (as producer)===
As well as his solo albums he has also produced albums for The Smiths, Electronic and Johnny Marr + The Healers.

===Albums (other appearances)===
===Extended plays===
===Singles===
Marr&#x27;s recording of &quot;Life Is Sweet&quot;, the theme song he wrote for the Channel Four Sitcom &quot;The Increasingly Poor Decisions of Todd Margaret&quot;, was released on Echo Records.

Marr&#x27;s cover version of the Depeche Mode track “I Feel You” was in support of Record Store Day. Its B-side was a version of &quot;Please, Please, Please Let Me Get What I Want&quot; (live).

The non-album single &quot;Armatopia&quot; was selected for the soundtrack for &quot;eFootball Pro Evolution Soccer 2020&quot;.

===Singles (as a guest musician)===
===Singles and other songs (as producer)===
As well as his solo singles he has also produced singles for The Smiths, Electronic and Johnny Marr + The Healers.

===Singles (remixes)===
===References===
===Sources===
* 

==External links==
* 
* Official The Smiths Website
* Discogs (Johnny Marr Discography)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q317742" start="0" end="16" title="Johnny Marr" label="John Martin Marr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18" end="20" title="Birth name#Maiden and married names" label="né"/>
<link wikidata="Q317742" start="21" end="26" title="Johnny Marr" label="Maher"/>
<link wikidata="Q180598" start="149" end="159" title="the Smiths" label="the Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="296" end="306" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q527320" start="396" end="407" title="Andy Rourke" label="Andy Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q202246" start="439" end="448" title="Morrissey" label="Morrissey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190565" start="545" end="555" title="jangle pop" label="jangle pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q667389" start="739" end="753" title="the Pretenders" label="the Pretenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354463" start="755" end="762" title="the The" label="the The"/>
<link wikidata="Q624661" start="764" end="774" title="Electronic (band)" label="Electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q431355" start="776" end="788" title="Modest Mouse" label="Modest Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146764" start="794" end="803" title="the Cribs" label="the Cribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="834" end="850" title="session musician" label="session musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q444671" start="879" end="893" title="Kirsty MacColl" label="Kirsty MacColl"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="895" end="908" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="910" end="923" title="Talking Heads" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q216179" start="925" end="936" title="Bryan Ferry" label="Bryan Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q76364" start="941" end="952" title="Hans Zimmer" label="Hans Zimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943538" start="993" end="1002" title="Boomslang (album)" label="Boomslang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751145" start="1103" end="1116" title="The Messenger (Johnny Marr album)" label="The Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163187" start="1156" end="1176" title="Playland (album)" label="&amp;quot;Playland&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q55389814" start="1227" end="1241" title="Call the Comet" label="Call the Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721514" start="1352" end="1367" title="Alexis Petridis" label="Alexis Petridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="1377" end="1389" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1558" end="1561" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q261633" start="1612" end="1616" title="Mojo (magazine)" label="Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="1719" end="1722" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594497" start="1838" end="1864" title="Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s Hospital, Manchester" label="Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="1868" end="1878" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q173332" start="1965" end="1979" title="County Kildare" label="County Kildare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860767" start="2001" end="2014" title="Ardwick" label="Ardwick Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570246" start="2028" end="2039" title="Wythenshawe" label="Wythenshawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18211040" start="2263" end="2294" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Catholic High School" label="St John Plessington High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="2376" end="2393" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="2414" end="2436" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q863086" start="2681" end="2692" title="Billy Duffy" label="Billy Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q887376" start="2712" end="2720" title="the Cult" label="the Cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q527320" start="3038" end="3049" title="Andy Rourke" label="Andy Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5999672" start="3143" end="3156" title="Kevin Kennedy (actor)" label="Kevin Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516094" start="3194" end="3201" title="Silver Jubilee of Elizabeth II" label="Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886941" start="3211" end="3219" title="Benchill" label="Benchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="3242" end="3256" title="Rolling Stones" label="Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q202314" start="3261" end="3271" title="Thin Lizzy" label="Thin Lizzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="3481" end="3484" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423610" start="3515" end="3529" title="F-Beat Records" label="F-Beat Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q939329" start="3778" end="3787" title="Buzzcocks" label="Buzzcocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246430" start="3796" end="3806" title="John Maher (Buzzcocks drummer)" label="John Maher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750158" start="3843" end="3862" title="The Manchester College" label="Wythenshawe College"/>
<link wikidata="Q877998" start="3903" end="3916" title="Students&amp;#x27; union" label="Student Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="3978" end="3982" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520075" start="4007" end="4025" title="Simon Wolstencroft" label="Simon Wolstencroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909207" start="4069" end="4081" title="Matt Johnson (singer)" label="Matt Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q202246" start="4272" end="4288" title="Morrissey" label="Steven Morrissey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754405" start="4330" end="4344" title="the Nosebleeds" label="the Nosebleeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q374458" start="4457" end="4466" title="Stretford" label="Stretford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190565" start="4489" end="4495" title="Jangle pop" label="jangly"/>
<link wikidata="Q41014" start="4496" end="4508" title="Rickenbacker" label="Rickenbacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q623103" start="4513" end="4530" title="Fender Telecaster" label="Fender Telecaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933243" start="4650" end="4660" title="Mike Joyce (musician)" label="Mike Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q385558" start="4710" end="4729" title="Rough Trade Records" label="Rough Trade Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705605" start="4771" end="4784" title="Hand in Glove" label="Hand in Glove"/>
<link wikidata="Q974045" start="4913" end="4924" title="The Smiths (album)" label="debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065599" start="5015" end="5029" title="Meat Is Murder" label="Meat Is Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q853308" start="5305" end="5322" title="The Queen Is Dead" label="The Queen Is Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="5345" end="5349" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065130" start="6619" end="6644" title="Strangeways, Here We Come (album)" label="Strangeways, Here We Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635233" start="6664" end="6682" title="Strangeways Prison" label="Strangeways Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020933" start="7170" end="7188" title="I Keep Mine Hidden" label="I Keep Mine Hidden"/>
<link wikidata="Q286525" start="7319" end="7330" title="Cilla Black" label="Cilla Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804225" start="7384" end="7395" title="Tim Samuels" label="Tim Samuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="8321" end="8324" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854705" start="8378" end="8392" title="Bands Reunited" label="Bands Reunited"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854705" start="8458" end="8470" title="Aamer Haleem" label="Aamer Haleem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747594" start="8595" end="8614" title="Manchester v Cancer" label="Manchester v Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q795588" start="8882" end="8898" title="BBC Radio 5 Live" label="BBC Radio 5 Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q29606" start="9683" end="9698" title="The Stone Roses" label="The Stone Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342312" start="9709" end="9720" title="John Squire" label="John Squire"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="9765" end="9770" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193459" start="9786" end="9800" title="Noel Gallagher" label="Noel Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q104721252" start="10284" end="10293" title="Reform UK" label="Reform UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q318471" start="10301" end="10313" title="Nigel Farage" label="Nigel Farage"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="10361" end="10366" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="11025" end="11034" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q667389" start="12082" end="12096" title="the Pretenders" label="the Pretenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354463" start="12276" end="12283" title="The The" label="The The"/>
<link wikidata="Q624661" start="12365" end="12375" title="Electronic (band)" label="Electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214990" start="12381" end="12390" title="New Order (band)" label="New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q438885" start="12398" end="12412" title="Bernard Sumner" label="Bernard Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q863086" start="12560" end="12571" title="Billy Duffy" label="Billy Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23848" start="12600" end="12615" title="Ennio Morricone" label="Ennio Morricone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41483" start="12629" end="12659" title="The Good, the Bad and the Ugly" label="The Good, the Bad and the Ugly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376398" start="12702" end="12711" title="Ruby Trax" label="Ruby Trax"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="12741" end="12757" title="session musician" label="session musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="12805" end="12818" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q216179" start="12820" end="12831" title="Bryan Ferry" label="Bryan Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q508412" start="12833" end="12844" title="Billy Bragg" label="Billy Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q444671" start="12846" end="12860" title="Kirsty MacColl" label="Kirsty MacColl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500994" start="12862" end="12873" title="Black Grape" label="Black Grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q212873" start="12875" end="12886" title="Jane Birkin" label="Jane Birkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="12888" end="12901" title="Talking Heads" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q11901" start="12907" end="12911" title="Beck" label="Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281531" start="12987" end="12992" title="Naked (Talking Heads album)" label="Naked"/>
<link wikidata="Q4544837" start="13027" end="13048" title="(Nothing But) Flowers" label="(Nothing But) Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782557" start="13273" end="13280" title="Release (Pet Shop Boys album)" label="Release"/>
<link wikidata="Q214272" start="13304" end="13309" title="remix" label="remix"/>
<link wikidata="Q344590" start="13421" end="13429" title="Actually (album)" label="Actually"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="13499" end="13505" title="b-side" label="b-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q255517" start="13527" end="13547" title="Can You Forgive Her? (song)" label="Can You Forgive Her?"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="13598" end="13603" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063052" start="13616" end="13633" title="Heathen Chemistry" label="Heathen Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q144589" start="13723" end="13734" title="Zak Starkey" label="Zak Starkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="13743" end="13754" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q611878" start="13800" end="13811" title="Kula Shaker" label="Kula Shaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734519" start="13820" end="13832" title="Alonza Bevan" label="Alonza Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943538" start="14010" end="14019" title="Boomslang (album)" label="Boomslang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545862" start="14352" end="14368" title="7 Worlds Collide" label="7 Worlds Collide"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="14396" end="14405" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="14407" end="14416" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813605" start="14418" end="14427" title="Split Enz" label="Split Enz"/>
<link wikidata="Q550436" start="14453" end="14462" title="Neil Finn" label="Neil Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128045" start="14480" end="14493" title="Crowded House" label="Crowded House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767329" start="14619" end="14635" title="The Sun Came Out" label="The Sun Came Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q267941" start="14689" end="14694" title="Oxfam" label="Oxfam"/>
<link wikidata="Q431355" start="14841" end="14853" title="Modest Mouse" label="Modest Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q580169" start="14861" end="14872" title="Isaac Brock (musician)" label="Isaac Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175298" start="14951" end="14989" title="We Were Dead Before the Ship Even Sank" label="We Were Dead Before the Ship Even Sank"/>
<link wikidata="Q188980" start="15515" end="15530" title="John Frusciante" label="John Frusciante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048154" start="15599" end="15611" title="The Empyrean" label="The Empyrean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146764" start="15754" end="15763" title="the Cribs" label="the Cribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16220974" start="15787" end="15798" title="Gary Jarman" label="Gary Jarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="15822" end="15830" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5993040" start="15878" end="15897" title="Ignore the Ignorant" label="Ignore the Ignorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072252" start="16424" end="16437" title="Leeds Academy" label="Leeds Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128045" start="16628" end="16641" title="Crowded House" label="Crowded House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279009" start="16661" end="16674" title="Time on Earth" label="Time on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="16779" end="16794" title="science fiction film" label="science-fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="16795" end="16800" title="drama film" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q25188" start="16812" end="16821" title="Inception" label="Inception"/>
<link wikidata="Q25191" start="16863" end="16880" title="Christopher Nolan" label="Christopher Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="17018" end="17035" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q76364" start="17261" end="17272" title="Hans Zimmer" label="Hans Zimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745125" start="17386" end="17405" title="American Songwriter" label="American Songwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751145" start="17664" end="17677" title="The Messenger (Johnny Marr album)" label="The Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="17703" end="17715" title="Warner Bros. Records" label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q165711" start="17753" end="17757" title="Sire Records" label="Sire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4254026" start="17897" end="17921" title="The Amazing Spider-Man 2" label="The Amazing Spider-Man 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q76364" start="17933" end="17944" title="Hans Zimmer" label="Hans Zimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14313" start="17946" end="17963" title="Pharrell Williams" label="Pharrell Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q860068" start="17965" end="17981" title="Michael Einziger" label="Michael Einziger"/>
<link wikidata="Q325389" start="17986" end="18002" title="David A. Stewart" label="David A. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163187" start="18052" end="18060" title="Playland (Johnny Marr album)" label="Playland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20708875" start="18272" end="18282" title="Easy Money (Johnny Marr song)" label="Easy Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q76364" start="18345" end="18356" title="Hans Zimmer" label="Hans Zimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163187" start="18535" end="18543" title="Playland (album)" label="Playland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758135" start="18780" end="18802" title="Ballad of the Mighty I" label="Ballad of the Mighty I"/>
<link wikidata="Q194227" start="18833" end="18872" title="Noel Gallagher&amp;#x27;s High Flying Birds" label="Noel Gallagher&amp;#x27;s High Flying Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q18285107" start="18885" end="18902" title="Chasing Yesterday (album)" label="Chasing Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q202741" start="19051" end="19058" title="Blondie (band)" label="Blondie"/>
<link wikidata="Q29811979" start="19071" end="19081" title="Pollinator (album)" label="Pollinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q55389814" start="19173" end="19187" title="Call the Comet" label="Call the Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="19248" end="19268" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q220730" start="19298" end="19309" title="the Killers" label="the Killers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640904" start="19381" end="19398" title="This Charming Man" label="This Charming Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999714" start="19415" end="19429" title="Mr. Brightside" label="Mr. Brightside"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="19510" end="19520" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q21534241" start="19538" end="19552" title="No Time to Die" label="No Time to Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q84761142" start="19634" end="19644" title="No Time to Die (song)" label="theme song"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564107" start="19658" end="19671" title="Billie Eilish" label="Billie Eilish"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="19736" end="19747" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="19950" end="19952" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952339" start="19954" end="19983" title="Fever Dreams (Johnny Marr album)" label="&amp;quot;Fever Dreams Pt 1&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952339" start="20052" end="20072" title="Fever Dreams (Johnny Marr album)" label="Fever Dreams Pts 1-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q91044673" start="20229" end="20249" title="Imploding the Mirage" label="Imploding the Mirage"/>
<link wikidata="Q106648" start="20492" end="20505" title="Fleetwood Mac" label="Fleetwood Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q435306" start="20516" end="20534" title="Lindsey Buckingham" label="Lindsey Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q497759" start="20975" end="20987" title="Nile Rodgers" label="Nile Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q332953" start="20989" end="21000" title="Bert Jansch" label="Bert Jansch"/>
<link wikidata="Q600903" start="21006" end="21022" title="James Williamson (musician)" label="James Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q208767" start="21028" end="21039" title="the Stooges" label="the Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q708007" start="21099" end="21119" title="James Honeyman-Scott" label="James Honeyman-Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q667389" start="21123" end="21137" title="the Pretenders" label="the Pretenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818058" start="21275" end="21287" title="open tunings" label="open tunings"/>
<link wikidata="Q506986" start="21314" end="21322" title="arpeggio" label="arpeggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q213793" start="21907" end="21919" title="Phil Spector" label="Phil Spector"/>
<link wikidata="Q331922" start="22147" end="22161" title="Rory Gallagher" label="Rory Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q26933" start="22163" end="22177" title="Pete Townshend" label="Pete Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="22181" end="22188" title="the Who" label="the Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="22190" end="22202" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346255" start="22204" end="22216" title="John McGeoch" label="John McGeoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475584" start="22220" end="22228" title="Magazine (band)" label="Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="22233" end="22258" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q164757" start="22264" end="22279" title="John McLaughlin (musician)" label="John McLaughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="22383" end="22405" title="the Velvet Underground" label="the Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q189599" start="22438" end="22452" title="Keith Richards" label="Keith Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="22456" end="22474" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q287514" start="22476" end="22486" title="Marc Bolan" label="Marc Bolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211770" start="22490" end="22496" title="T. Rex (band)" label="T. Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q918613" start="22730" end="22739" title="Raw Power" label="Raw Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945581" start="22813" end="22834" title="My Goal&amp;#x27;s Beyond" label="My Goal&amp;#x27;s Beyond"/>
<link wikidata="Q922227" start="22907" end="22920" title="Richard Lloyd (guitarist)" label="Richard Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160206" start="22924" end="22934" title="Television (band)" label="Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746970" start="23153" end="23166" title="Peter Perrett" label="Peter Perrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641565" start="23168" end="23180" title="Colin Newman" label="Colin Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141280" start="23182" end="23194" title="Pete Shelley" label="Pete Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q243041" start="23196" end="23210" title="Siouxsie Sioux" label="Siouxsie Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q357455" start="23411" end="23421" title="Ray Davies" label="Ray Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q967901" start="23426" end="23439" title="Howard Devoto" label="Howard Devoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q775605" start="23671" end="23684" title="Fender Jaguar" label="Fender Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005326" start="23879" end="23899" title="Bare Knuckle Pickups" label="Bare Knuckle Pickups"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331901" start="23935" end="23951" title="Rickenbacker 330" label="Rickenbacker 330"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937830" start="24148" end="24153" title="Vivid (Electronic song)" label="Vivid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135543" start="24196" end="24199" title="Rickenbacker 360/12" label="360"/>
<link wikidata="Q26933" start="24239" end="24253" title="Pete Townshend" label="Pete Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q623103" start="24386" end="24403" title="Fender Telecaster" label="Fender Telecaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q208173" start="24407" end="24426" title="Fender Stratocaster" label="Fender Stratocaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q539672" start="24482" end="24518" title="There Is a Light That Never Goes Out" label="There Is a Light That Never Goes Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q193459" start="24864" end="24878" title="Noel Gallagher" label="Noel Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q623103" start="24882" end="24899" title="Fender Telecaster" label="Fender Telecaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331901" start="24937" end="24953" title="Rickenbacker 330" label="Rickenbacker 330"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640904" start="25117" end="25134" title="This Charming Man" label="This Charming Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q322625" start="25143" end="25158" title="Gibson Les Paul" label="Gibson Les Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q853308" start="25761" end="25778" title="The Queen is Dead" label="The Queen is Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q115885843" start="25820" end="25833" title="Gibson ES-355" label="Gibson ES-355"/>
<link wikidata="Q826255" start="25915" end="25920" title="Suede (band)" label="Suede"/>
<link wikidata="Q520062" start="25931" end="25945" title="Bernard Butler" label="Bernard Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467316" start="26176" end="26190" title="Forbidden City (Electronic song)" label="Forbidden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466945" start="26207" end="26214" title="For You (Electronic song)" label="For You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065130" start="26326" end="26351" title="Strangeways, Here We Come (album)" label="Strangeways, Here We Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q940380" start="26416" end="26425" title="Gibson SG" label="Gibson SG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162697" start="26539" end="26556" title="Fender Jazzmaster" label="Fender Jazzmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q431355" start="26614" end="26626" title="Modest Mouse" label="Modest Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447428" start="26838" end="26855" title="Fender Amplifiers" label="Fender Amplifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443281" start="26941" end="26952" title="Fender Twin" label="Twin Reverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443236" start="26956" end="26969" title="Fender Deluxe Reverb" label="Deluxe Reverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342675" start="26976" end="26983" title="Fender Bassman" label="Bassman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443232" start="27015" end="27027" title="Fender Champ" label="Fender Champ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443274" start="27087" end="27099" title="Fender Super Reverb" label="Super Reverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360293" start="27222" end="27235" title="Roland JC-120 Jazz Chorus Guitar Amplifier" label="Roland JC-120"/>
<link wikidata="Q430501" start="27237" end="27245" title="Vox AC30" label="Vox AC30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572433" start="27247" end="27258" title="Mesa Boogie" label="Mesa Boogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q671465" start="27263" end="27271" title="Marshall Amplification" label="Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q584991" start="27302" end="27306" title="Boss Corporation" label="Boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="27307" end="27319" title="effects unit" label="effects unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076641" start="27355" end="27368" title="chorus effect" label="chorus effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q264300" start="27385" end="27398" title="wah wah pedal" label="wah wah pedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="27413" end="27428" title="distortion (music)" label="overdrive pedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738622" start="27517" end="27538" title="University of Salford" label="University of Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738622" start="27775" end="27796" title="University of Salford" label="University of Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q251091" start="28341" end="28345" title="Athy" label="Athy"/>
<link wikidata="Q917865" start="28356" end="28363" title="Kildare" label="Kildare"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="28365" end="28372" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129867" start="28503" end="28507" title="NAMM Show" label="NAMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044723" start="28656" end="28667" title="Carole Pope" label="Carole Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370866" start="28690" end="28701" title="Rough Trade (band)" label="Rough Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637693" start="29050" end="29078" title="the Brian Jonestown Massacre" label="the Brian Jonestown Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243023" start="29281" end="29309" title="John Kettley Is a Weatherman" label="John Kettley Is a Weatherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660301" start="29332" end="29348" title="A Tribe of Toffs" label="A Tribe of Toffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25558458" start="29372" end="29387" title="Laurie Kynaston" label="Laurie Kynaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q30223253" start="29418" end="29433" title="England Is Mine" label="England Is Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q92309376" start="29582" end="29591" title="Nile Marr" label="Nile Marr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="29693" end="29709" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839953" start="30020" end="30032" title="bacon sarnie" label="bacon sarnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q785051" start="30073" end="30090" title="Naughty by Nature" label="Naughty by Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="30340" end="30360" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q974045" start="31027" end="31037" title="The Smiths (album)" label="The Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065599" start="31059" end="31073" title="Meat Is Murder" label="Meat Is Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q853308" start="31095" end="31112" title="The Queen Is Dead" label="The Queen Is Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065130" start="31134" end="31159" title="Strangeways, Here We Come (album)" label="Strangeways, Here We Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q6863446" start="31191" end="31200" title="Mind Bomb" label="Mind Bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316915" start="31222" end="31226" title="Dusk (The The album)" label="Dusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558284" start="31248" end="31256" title="Solitude (The The album)" label="Solitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941788" start="31291" end="31301" title="Electronic (album)" label="Electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417865" start="31323" end="31341" title="Raise the Pressure" label="Raise the Pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542572" start="31363" end="31381" title="Twisted Tenderness" label="Twisted Tenderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643898" start="31422" end="31438" title="7 Worlds Collide (album)" label="7 Worlds Collide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767329" start="31460" end="31476" title="The Sun Came Out" label="The Sun Came Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943538" start="31528" end="31537" title="Boomslang (album)" label="Boomslang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175298" start="31574" end="31612" title="We Were Dead Before the Ship Even Sank" label="We Were Dead Before the Ship Even Sank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342443" start="31634" end="31674" title="No One&amp;#x27;s First and You&amp;#x27;re Next" label="No One&amp;#x27;s First and You&amp;#x27;re Next"/>
<link wikidata="Q5993040" start="31708" end="31727" title="Ignore the Ignorant" label="Ignore the Ignorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q508412" start="31823" end="31834" title="Billy Bragg" label="Billy Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q216179" start="31892" end="31903" title="Bryan Ferry" label="Bryan Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="31908" end="31921" title="Talking Heads" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="31969" end="31982" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438472" start="32036" end="32045" title="Xenomania" label="Xenomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507848" start="32068" end="32071" title="Yes (Pet Shop Boys album)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882185" start="32142" end="32150" title="M People" label="M People"/>
<link wikidata="Q11901" start="32152" end="32156" title="Beck" label="Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q180850" start="32161" end="32170" title="Tom Jones (singer)" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q194227" start="32223" end="32262" title="Noel Gallagher&amp;#x27;s High Flying Birds" label="Noel Gallagher&amp;#x27;s High Flying Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="32264" end="32273" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q212873" start="32275" end="32286" title="Jane Birkin" label="Jane Birkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q270469" start="32288" end="32300" title="Lisa Germano" label="Lisa Germano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128045" start="32305" end="32318" title="Crowded House" label="Crowded House"/>
<link wikidata="Q205473" start="32344" end="32355" title="Girls Aloud" label="Girls Aloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070776" start="32382" end="32396" title="Out of Control (Girls Aloud album)" label="Out of Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q188980" start="32617" end="32632" title="John Frusciante" label="John Frusciante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048154" start="32652" end="32664" title="The Empyrean" label="The Empyrean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741713" start="33024" end="33072" title="The Increasingly Poor Decisions of Todd Margaret" label="The Increasingly Poor Decisions of Todd Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="33144" end="33156" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602678" start="33164" end="33174" title="I Feel You" label="I Feel You"/>
<link wikidata="Q64579449" start="33392" end="33427" title="eFootball Pro Evolution Soccer 2020" label="eFootball Pro Evolution Soccer 2020"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173712" wikidata="Q887932" url="?curid=173712" title="Bob Foster (boxer)">
<text>Robert Wayne Foster (April 27, 1942 – November 21, 2015) was an American professional boxer who fought as a light heavyweight and heavyweight. He won the world light heavyweight title from Dick Tiger in 1968 via fourth-round knockout, and went on to defend the title fourteen times against thirteen different fighters in total from 1968 to 1974. Foster challenged Joe Frazier and Muhammad Ali during his career, but was knocked out by both (the fight with Ali was not for a world heavyweight title, but for the regional NABF version). He was named to &quot;Ring&quot;″s list of 100 Greatest Punchers of all time. He was also named to &quot;Ring&quot;″s list of the 80 Best Fighters of the Last 80 Years, ranking at No. 55. He was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame in the inaugural class of 1990.

==Early life==
Foster was born at Borger, Texas on April 27, 1942. In his childhood years his family moved to Albuquerque in New Mexico, and he received his formal education at Albuquerque High School. Upon leaving school he enlisted with the United States Air Force, in which he served with the rank of Airman Second Class. He began boxing on the Golden Gloves amateur circuit, and also took part in competitive inter-service matches for the U.S. Air Force.

==Boxing career==
Foster started his professional career on the night of March 27, 1961, against Duke Williams, in Washington, D.C., winning by knockout in two rounds. The first 12 bouts of his career were spent campaigning in the United States&#x27; Eastern coast and in Canada. In his tenth bout, he made his first of multiple forays into the heavyweight division, and suffered his first loss, at the hands of Doug Jones, by a knockout in the eighth round.

After two more wins, he went in 1963 to Peru, where he lost to South American champion Mauro Mina by a decision in ten rounds at Lima. This was his first major Light Heavyweight bout, but it wouldn&#x27;t be his last.

Three more fights back in the States resulted in quick knockout wins for him, and then, in 1964, he made his second attempt at entering the heavyweight rankings, being knocked out in the seventh by future world Heavyweight champion Ernie Terrell. He finished the year by posting three more knockout wins at Light Heavyweight, two of them in the month of November. The night of November 11 was Foster&#x27;s first win of note as a light-heavyweight. One month after knocking out Don Quinn in the first round, he stepped up in the ring again and faced former world title challenger Henry Hank. He beat Hank by a knockout in the tenth.

In 1965, he had five fights, winning four and losing one. He beat Hank again, by decision in 12 rounds, and lost to Zora Folley, by a decision in ten rounds, in another attempt at joining the heavyweight top ten.

In 1966 he defeated Leroy Green in two rounds.

By 1967, Foster, although his attempts to become a top heavyweight were being frustrated, was a ranked light heavyweight. He decided to stick to the light-heavyweight division for the time being, and he won all seven of his fights, six by knockout. Among the fighters he beat were Eddie Cotton, Eddie Vick, and Sonny Moore. After defeating Moore, Foster became the world&#x27;s number one ranked light heavyweight challenger.

===World light-heavyweight champion===
In 1968, Foster got his first shot at a world title. At Madison Square Garden in New York, on the night of March 24, Foster became world champion by knocking out Dick Tiger in four rounds. Tiger had been a two-time world middleweight champion and was defending his world light heavyweight crown that night. Foster then decided to box at heavyweight once again, and beat Charlie Polite by a knockout in three. He ended that year defeating Vick again, and his future world title challenger Roger Rouse, both by a knockout.

In 1969, he began by rising off the canvas to knock out Frank DePaula in the same first round and retain his belt. It is believed that was the first time ever a boxer won a world title fight in the first round after being floored in that same round. It is also believed that that fight is one of only three times that&#x27;s happened... the second time being in 1984, when Juan Meza rose off a knockdown to dethrone world Jr. Featherweight champion Jaime Garza in the same first round too. It also happened in the 21st century, when Kendall Holt was dropped twice, only to knockout Ricardo Torres in round 1, for the WBO 140 lb title.

Foster&#x27;s next fight in 1969 was against Andy Kendall, whom he beat in four rounds by knockout, to once again retain the crown. He closed the 1960s with two more knockout wins.

===Frazier vs Foster===
In 1970, Foster made two more trips to the heavyweights. In the first, he beat fringe contender Lee Wallace in six rounds by knockout. This was followed by a return to the light-heavyweight division to defend his title against Rouse. Infuriated by some comments that Rouse&#x27;s manager had made before the bout concerning the fact that even though Foster knocked out Rouse in their first bout he was not able to drop him, Foster dropped Rouse five times en route to a fourth-round knockout victory. A knockout in 10 to retain the title against Mark Tessman followed, and then he was given the chance to challenge for the world heavyweight title. Facing world champion Joe Frazier on the night of November 18 in Detroit, he was knocked out in two rounds.

After defeating Hal Carroll by a knockout in four rounds to defend his crown, the WBA stripped him of the title, but he was still recognized by the WBC as a champion. Foster became enraged at the WBA, which proceeded to have Vicente Rondon of Venezuela and Jimmy Dupree fight for the world title. Rondon won, becoming the second Latin American world light-heavyweight champion (after José Torres), and Foster set his eyes on him. Foster went on defending his WBC title, and he defeated challengers Ray Anderson, Tommy Hicks, and Brian Kelly. Of those three, it was Anderson who was the only one to last the 15 round distance with Foster.

===Ali vs Foster===
Foster and Rondon met in Miami on April 7, 1972, in a unification bout. Foster became the undisputed world champion once again, by knocking Rondon out in the second round. In his next fight, he used what many critics have called one of the best punches in history to retain his title by a knockout in four against Mike Quarry. Foster then went up in weight and faced former and future world heavyweight champion Muhammad Ali, on November 21, 1972, in what was legendary referee Mills Lane&#x27;s first bout of note as a referee. Foster lost to Ali by a knockout in the eighth, after being knocked down 7 times.

In 1973, Foster retained his title twice against Pierre Fourie, both by decision. Their second fight had a distinct social impact because it was fought in apartheid-ruled South Africa, Foster being Black and Fourie being White. Foster became a hero to South African Blacks by beating Fourie the first time around, and in their rematch, the first boxing fight in South Africa during apartheid featuring a White versus a Black, he cemented that position by defeating Fourie on points again.

Piet Koornhoff was the South African Minister of Sport at that time and he had to be persuaded to allow the fight. He had to amend the regulations relating to the prohibition of &quot;mixed sport&quot; in order to do so. Foster was allowed into the country on condition that he refrain from making any political comments or speeches. In a post fight interview he diplomatically responded to a question that he liked the country and would be willing to come back again. This explains the sentiment of Mark Mathabane as noted in his autobiography &quot;Kaffir Boy&quot;, that South Africa&#x27;s black population felt betrayed by Foster since he did not address apartheid during his time in South Africa.

His last defense as world light-heavyweight champion came in 1974, when he was dropped by Argentinian Jorge Ahumada, but managed to keep the title with a draw. After that, he announced his retirement, leaving the world&#x27;s light-heavyweight championship vacant.

Foster returned to boxing in 1975, before retiring from the sport in 1978 at the age of 36.

==Post-boxing life==
In the mid-1970s Foster became a police officer with the Bernalillo County Sheriff&#x27;s Department, later becoming a detective and a well known policeman in Albuquerque, New Mexico.

==Personal life==
He married Pearl with whom he had four children. He divorced then married Sue. He had a child named Nelson. Foster married Patricia Saiz in 1982. Her death in 1984 was ruled a suicide. His fourth wife was Rosetta Benjamin.

Foster died at the age of 73 on November 21, 2015, in a hospital in Albuquerque, New Mexico.

==Professional boxing record==

==See also==

*List of WBC world champions

==References==
==External links==
*New Mexico Boxing, the Bob Foster story
*http://www.bobfosterboxing.net
*Bob Foster - CBZ Profile






|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q887932" start="0" end="19" title="Bob Foster (boxer)" label="Robert Wayne Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631720" start="73" end="91" title="professional boxer" label="professional boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004748" start="108" end="125" title="light heavyweight" label="light heavyweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q281678" start="130" end="141" title="heavyweight" label="heavyweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q326938" start="189" end="199" title="Dick Tiger" label="Dick Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q102301" start="364" end="375" title="Joe Frazier" label="Joe Frazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="380" end="392" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628588" start="520" end="524" title="North American Boxing Federation" label="NABF"/>
<link wikidata="Q572227" start="748" end="781" title="International Boxing Hall of Fame" label="International Boxing Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q893540" start="849" end="862" title="Borger, Texas" label="Borger, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="940" end="950" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="1058" end="1081" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889235" start="1111" end="1115" title="United States Air Force enlisted rank insignia" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507719" start="1163" end="1176" title="Golden Gloves" label="Golden Gloves"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1390" end="1406" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q668642" start="1419" end="1427" title="knockout" label="knockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251779" start="1687" end="1697" title="Doug Jones (boxer)" label="Doug Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="1775" end="1779" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917890" start="1822" end="1832" title="Mauro Mina" label="Mauro Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="1864" end="1868" title="Lima, Peru" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q780692" start="2186" end="2199" title="Ernie Terrell" label="Ernie Terrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q220464" start="2704" end="2715" title="Zora Folley" label="Zora Folley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335949" start="3131" end="3143" title="Eddie Cotton" label="Eddie Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="3372" end="3393" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3397" end="3405" title="New York, New York" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q326938" start="3478" end="3488" title="Dick Tiger" label="Dick Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q59180924" start="3804" end="3815" title="Roger Rouse" label="Roger Rouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490945" start="3894" end="3907" title="Frankie DePaula" label="Frank DePaula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6300517" start="4211" end="4220" title="Juan Meza" label="Juan Meza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678726" start="4287" end="4298" title="Jaime Garza (boxer)" label="Jaime Garza"/>
<link wikidata="Q102301" start="5350" end="5361" title="Joe Frazier" label="Joe Frazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="5393" end="5400" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q725676" start="5519" end="5522" title="World Boxing Association" label="WBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q724450" start="5585" end="5588" title="World Boxing Council" label="WBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324327" start="5662" end="5676" title="Vicente Rondon" label="Vicente Rondon"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="5680" end="5689" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q104632502" start="5694" end="5706" title="Jimmy Dupree" label="Jimmy Dupree"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="5766" end="5780" title="Latin American" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685019" start="5821" end="5832" title="José Torres (boxer)" label="José Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297136" start="5935" end="5947" title="Ray Anderson (Boxer)" label="Ray Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819523" start="5949" end="5960" title="Tommy Hicks" label="Tommy Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q21259238" start="5966" end="5977" title="Brian Kelly (boxer)" label="Brian Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="6121" end="6126" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933438" start="6410" end="6421" title="Mike Quarry" label="Mike Quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="6508" end="6520" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q324197" start="6574" end="6584" title="Mills Lane" label="Mills Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192214" start="6757" end="6770" title="Pierre Fourie" label="Pierre Fourie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="6863" end="6872" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="6879" end="6891" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900258" start="7698" end="7712" title="Mark Mathabane" label="Mark Mathabane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="7729" end="7742" title="autobiography" label="autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346096" start="7749" end="7759" title="Kaffir Boy" label="Kaffir Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="7992" end="8003" title="Argentina" label="Argentinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277605" start="8004" end="8017" title="Jorge Ahumada" label="Jorge Ahumada"/>
<link wikidata="Q822204" start="8339" end="8349" title="Bernalillo" label="Bernalillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="8441" end="8452" title="Albuquerque" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="8454" end="8464" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837719" start="8850" end="8877" title="List of WBC world champions" label="List of WBC world champions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173719" wikidata="Q338109" url="?curid=173719" title="Tracy Kidder">
<text>John Tracy Kidder (born November 12, 1945) is an American writer of nonfiction books. He received the Pulitzer Prize for his &quot;The Soul of a New Machine&quot; (1981), about the creation of a new computer at Data General Corporation. He has received praise and awards for other works, including his biography of Paul Farmer, a physician and anthropologist, titled &quot;Mountains Beyond Mountains&quot; (2003).

Kidder is considered a literary journalist because of the strong story line and personal voice in his writing. He has cited as his writing influences John McPhee, A. J. Liebling, and George Orwell. In a 1984 interview he said, &quot;McPhee has been my model. He&#x27;s the most elegant of all the journalists writing today, I think.&quot;

Kidder wrote in a 1994 essay, &quot;In fiction, believability may have nothing to do with reality or even plausibility. It has everything to do with those things in nonfiction. I think that the nonfiction writer&#x27;s fundamental job is to make what is true believable.&quot;

==Early life and education==
John Tracy Kidder was born November 12, 1945, in New York City.
He graduated from Phillips Academy in 1963.
He attended Harvard College, originally majoring in political science, but switching to English after taking a course in creative writing from Robert Fitzgerald. He received an AB degree from Harvard in 1967.

Kidder served in the United States Army as a first lieutenant, Military Intelligence, Vietnam, from 1967 to 1969. After returning from Vietnam, he wrote for some time and was admitted to the Iowa Writers&#x27; Workshop. He received an MFA degree from the University of Iowa in 1974.

==Career==
Kidder wrote his first book, &quot;The Road to Yuba City: a Journey into the Juan Corona Murders&quot;, while at the University of Iowa. &quot;The Atlantic Monthly&quot; commissioned the work, and he continued writing as a freelancer for the magazine during the 1970s. &quot;The Road to Yuba City&quot; was a critical failure, and Kidder said in a 1995 interview that

I can&#x27;t say anything intelligent about that book, except that I learned never to write about a murder case. The whole experience was disgusting, so disgusting, in fact, that in 1981 I went to Doubleday and bought back the rights to the book. I don&#x27;t want &quot;The Road to Yuba City&quot; to see the light of day again.

Kidder has said that, unlike many other writers, he was not much influenced by his Vietnam experience: &quot;Of course, whenever you&#x27;re in an experience like Vietnam, it is bound to influence your work; it&#x27;s inevitable, but I really don&#x27;t think it greatly shaped me as a writer.&quot; His works for &quot;The Atlantic Monthly&quot; include several essays and short stories about the Vietnam War, including &quot;The Death of Major Great&quot; (1974), &quot;Soldiers of Misfortune&quot; (1978), and &quot;In Quarantine&quot; (1980). Writing in 1997, David Bennett rated these three pieces &quot;among the finest reporting to come out of Vietnam.&quot;

Kidder&#x27;s second book, &quot;The Soul of a New Machine&quot; (1981), was much more successful than his first. His account of the complex community and environment of programming and computer development won the Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction in 1982. He has continued to write nonfiction books and articles, and these have been well received by the critics. Kidder&#x27;s 2009 book, &quot;Strength in What Remains&quot;, is a portrait of a man who survived the genocide in Burundi.

He has explored a wide range of topics through his books: &quot;House&quot; (1985), a &quot;biography&quot; of a couple having their first house built, and the people involved in the project; &quot;Among Schoolchildren&quot; (1989), set in an elementary-school classroom in Holyoke, Massachusetts, and reflecting on US education through the lives of these 20 children and their teacher (these two books were both bestsellers); and &quot;Old Friends&quot; (1993), which explored the daily lives and personal growth of a pair of elderly men in a nursing home. His books have made &quot;Notable&quot; annual lists of &quot;The New York Times&quot; and received positive praise from critics, in addition to awards.

In fall 2010 Kidder was selected as the first A. M. Rosenthal Writer-in-Residence at the Harvard Kennedy School&#x27;s Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy. At the center, he worked with his onetime editor at &quot;The Atlantic&quot;, Richard Todd, on a book about writing, titled &quot;Good Prose: The Art of Nonfiction&quot;. He lectured to students and did research to identify his next narrative subject.

==Selected awards==
* Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction, 1982, for &quot;The Soul of a New Machine&quot;
* National Book Award for Nonfiction, 1982, for &quot;The Soul of a New Machine&quot;
* Robert F. Kennedy Book Award, 1989–1990, for &quot;Among Schoolchildren&quot;
*L. L. Winship/PEN New England Award, 1990, for &quot;Among Schoolchildren&quot;
* Ambassador Book Award in American Studies, 1990, for &quot;Among Schoolchildren&quot;
* Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement, 2001 
* Lettre Ulysses Award (2nd prize), 2004, for &quot;Mountains Beyond Mountains&quot;

==Books==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==
* Kidder&#x27;s web site
* Lyceum Agency
* by Don Swaim
* 
** C-SPAN &quot;Q&amp;A&quot; interview with Kidder, October 11, 2009</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q338109" start="0" end="17" title="Tracy Kidder" label="John Tracy Kidder"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="102" end="116" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765374" start="131" end="156" title="The Soul of a New Machine" label="The Soul of a New Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172222" start="211" end="235" title="Data General" label="Data General Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263705" start="315" end="326" title="Paul Farmer" label="Paul Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925679" start="373" end="399" title="Mountains Beyond Mountains" label="Mountains Beyond Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669574" start="438" end="457" title="Creative nonfiction" label="literary journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701049" start="565" end="576" title="John McPhee" label="John McPhee"/>
<link wikidata="Q278806" start="578" end="592" title="A. J. Liebling" label="A. J. Liebling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="598" end="611" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432645" start="1144" end="1160" title="Phillips Academy" label="Phillips Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49123" start="1182" end="1197" title="Harvard College" label="Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="1222" end="1239" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344366" start="1313" end="1330" title="Robert Fitzgerald" label="Robert Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1401" end="1419" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715023" start="1425" end="1441" title="first lieutenant" label="first lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="1443" end="1464" title="Military intelligence" label="Military Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q662801" start="1571" end="1598" title="Iowa Writers&amp;#x27; Workshop" label="Iowa Writers&amp;#x27; Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175466" start="1615" end="1618" title="Master of Fine Arts" label="MFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q182973" start="1635" end="1653" title="University of Iowa" label="University of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q720063" start="1752" end="1763" title="Juan Corona" label="Juan Corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q182973" start="1792" end="1810" title="University of Iowa" label="University of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="1818" end="1838" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765374" start="3075" end="3100" title="The Soul of a New Machine" label="The Soul of a New Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q784589" start="3257" end="3294" title="Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction" label="Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="3526" end="3533" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="3810" end="3832" title="Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Holyoke, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3973" end="3984" title="Old Friends (book)" label="Old Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q49127" start="4337" end="4359" title="John F. Kennedy School of Government" label="Harvard Kennedy School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980880" start="4367" end="4422" title="Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy" label="Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q784589" start="4699" end="4736" title="Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction" label="Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765374" start="4754" end="4779" title="The Soul of a New Machine" label="The Soul of a New Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873147" start="4788" end="4822" title="National Book Award for Nonfiction" label="National Book Award for Nonfiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500688" start="4953" end="4988" title="Laurence L. &amp;amp; Thomas Winship/PEN New England Award" label="L. L. Winship/PEN New England Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741057" start="5035" end="5056" title="Ambassador Book Award" label="Ambassador Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="5149" end="5180" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821245" start="5190" end="5210" title="Lettre Ulysses Award" label="Lettre Ulysses Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925679" start="5240" end="5266" title="Mountains Beyond Mountains" label="Mountains Beyond Mountains"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173720" wikidata="Q661986" url="?curid=173720" title="Disc film">
<text>Disc film is a discontinued still-photography film format that was aimed at the consumer market. It was introduced by Kodak in 1982.

==Technical details==

The film is in the form of a flat disc, and is fully housed within a plastic cartridge. Each disc holds fifteen 10 × 8 mm exposures, arranged around the outside of the disc, with the disc being rotated 24° between successive images.

The system was a consumer-oriented product, and most cameras are self-contained units with no expansion capability. The disc film allows them to be compact and considerably thinner than other cameras. The cameras are very simple to load and unload, and are generally completely automated. The cassette has a built-in dark slide to prevent stray light reaching the film when the disc is removed.

As the film is rotated on a disc instead of over a spool, the cassette is very thin. The flat nature of the format also led to the potential advantage of greater sharpness over curved spool-based cassette formats (such as Minox film, 110 and 126 film). Disc film has a very thick acetate base, comparable thickness with 4×5&quot; sheet film, which holds the film much flatter than the other formats of the time.

==Performance and market reception==

Disc film did not prove hugely successful, mainly because the image on the negative is only 10 mm by 8 mm, leading to generally unacceptable grain and poor definition in the final prints from the analog imaging equipment used at the time. The film was intended to be printed with special six-element lenses from Kodak, but many labs simply printed discs with standard three-element lenses used for larger negative formats. The resulting prints often disappointed the consumer. Few labs made the investment required to get the best out of the small negative size. A problem with labs of the time was the manual nature of processing the color negative film. This was essentially a manual process, unlike spool-based films, whose chemical processing could be fully automated.

There were several different manufacturers of disc film. Kodak produced films throughout the complete lifespan of the format, but 3M, Konica and Fuji also produced disc film. While Kodak film was always eponymous, 3M and Konica made disc film for many third parties, branded with the retailer&#x27;s logo. As with most photographic film, for such white-label products the country of manufacture provides the best indication as to the actual manufacturer.

The film was officially discontinued by the last manufacturer, Kodak, on December 31, 1999, though the cameras had disappeared from the market long before then.

==Legacy==

The 1983 &quot;Minolta Disc-7&quot; camera introduced a predecessor of the selfie stick—a convex mirror on its front to allow the composition of self-portraits, and its packaging showed the camera mounted on a stick while used for such a purpose.

== Film history ==

* Kodak: Kodacolor HR (1981), Kodacolor VR (1982–1991), Kodacolor (or Kodak) Gold (1992–1999)
* Fuji: Fujicolor HR series (1982–1995) and third party film. Manufactured in Japan.
* 3M: HR film series (1982–1996) and third party film. Manufactured in Italy until the 1990s, then USA.
*Konica: Konicacolor SR (c. 1983–86), SR-V (c. 1980s), SR-G (c. 1990–93). Also third party film. Manufactured in Japan.

==References==
== External links ==

* The rise and fall of the Kodak Disc Camera</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q661986" start="0" end="9" title="Disc film" label="Disc film"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="34" end="45" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q759853" start="46" end="57" title="film format" label="film format"/>
<link wikidata="Q22855" start="80" end="88" title="consumer" label="consumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q330284" start="89" end="95" title="marketplace" label="market"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="118" end="123" title="Kodak" label="Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q15328" start="596" end="602" title="camera" label="camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223551" start="708" end="718" title="dark slide (photography)" label="dark slide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428588" start="730" end="741" title="stray light" label="stray light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520790" start="838" end="843" title="Bobbin" label="spool"/>
<link wikidata="Q688121" start="1009" end="1019" title="Minox film" label="Minox film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148317" start="1021" end="1024" title="110 film" label="110"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321314" start="1029" end="1037" title="126 film" label="126 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q124686" start="1067" end="1074" title="Cellulose acetate" label="acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364220" start="1117" end="1127" title="sheet film" label="sheet film"/>
<link wikidata="Q159433" start="2142" end="2144" title="3M" label="3M"/>
<link wikidata="Q354375" start="2146" end="2152" title="Konica" label="Konica"/>
<link wikidata="Q164740" start="2157" end="2161" title="Fujifilm" label="Fuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888882" start="2359" end="2378" title="white-label product" label="white-label product"/>
<link wikidata="Q354578" start="2657" end="2664" title="Minolta" label="Minolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387942" start="2717" end="2729" title="selfie stick" label="selfie stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998624" start="2919" end="2931" title="Kodacolor (still photography)" label="Kodacolor HR"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998624" start="2940" end="2952" title="Kodacolor (still photography)" label="Kodacolor VR"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998624" start="2966" end="2991" title="Kodacolor (still photography)" label="Kodacolor (or Kodak) Gold"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="173722" wikidata="Q51664" url="?curid=173722" title="Jesus in Islam">
<text>In Islam, [[Jesus]] () is believed to be the penultimate prophet and messenger of God and the Messiah sent to guide the Children of Israel () with a book called the (Evangel or Gospel).

In the Quran, Jesus is described as the Messiah (), born of a virgin, performing miracles, accompanied by his disciples, and rejected by the Jewish religious establishment; in contrast to the traditional Christian narrative, however, he is stated to have not been crucified, died on the cross, nor resurrected, rather, he is depicted as having been miraculously saved by God and ascending into heaven. The Quran places Jesus among the greatest prophets and mentions him with various titles. The prophethood of Jesus is preceded by that of Yahya (John) and succeeded by Muhammad, the latter of whom Jesus is reported in the Quran to have prophesied by using the name Ahmad.

Christians view Jesus Christ as God incarnate, the Son of God in human flesh, but the Quran denies the divinity of Jesus and his status as Son of God in several verses, and also insinuates that Jesus Christ did not claim to be personally God nor the Son of God. Islam teaches that Jesus&#x27; original message was altered () after his being raised alive. The monotheism () of Jesus is emphasized in the Quran. Like all prophets in Islam, Jesus is also called a Muslim (&quot;lit. submitter [to God]&quot;), as he preached that his followers should adopt the &#x27;straight path&#x27; (). Jesus is attributed with a vast number of miracles in Islamic tradition.

In their views of Islamic eschatology, most accounts state Jesus will return in the Second Coming to kill the (&#x27;The False Messiah&#x27;), after which with the ancient tribe Gog and Magog () would disperse. After God gets rid of them, Jesus would rule the world, establish peace and justice, die a natural death and then be buried alongside Muhammad at the fourth reserved tomb of the Green Dome in Medina.

The place where Jesus is believed to return, the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus, is highly esteemed by Muslims as the fourth holiest site of Islam. Jesus is widely venerated in Sufism, with numerous ascetic and mystic literature written and recited about the most important historical Jewish Christian-Islamic prophet-messenger to these Abrahamic faiths.

== Quran ==
Jesus is referred to in the Quran throughout 15 Surahs. The Quran emphasizes Jesus as a prophet, unique in creation, born out of a virgin, and messenger from God. He is usually referred to as &quot;ʿĪsā ibn Maryam&quot; (Jesus son of Mary) and &quot;al-Masīḥ&quot;. Jesus is described as God’s word (&quot;kalima&quot;), which appears to be the equivalent of the Greek &quot;logos&quot;, imparted to Mary and to be his spirit. Yet, the Quran rejects the identification of Jesus and God (Surah 5:73, 116) in order to protect God&#x27;s absolute unity (&quot;tawhid&quot;). Jesus is understood to have preached salvation through submission to God&#x27;s will and worshipping God alone. The Quran states that Jesus will ultimately deny claiming divinity in . Thus, he is considered to have been a &quot;Muslim&quot; by the religious definition of the term (i.e., one who submits to God&#x27;s will). The bodily crucifixion, perceived as an event of humiliation, is denied (4:157).

==Birth==
Islam&#x27;s account of Jesus begins with a prologue narrated several times in the Quran which first describes the birth of his mother, Mary, and her service in the Jerusalem temple while under the care of the prophet Zechariah, who would become the father of Yahya (John the Baptist). The Quran&#x27;s birth narrative of Jesus begins at and . This birth narrative has been recounted with certain variations and detailed additions by Islamic historians over the centuries. In the matter of the virgin birth of Jesus, while Islamic theology affirms Mary as a pure vessel, it does not follow the concept of Immaculate Conception as related to Mary&#x27;s birth in some Christian traditions.

===Annunciation===

Islamic exegesis affirms the virginal birth of Jesus – similarly to the Gospel account and occurring in Bethlehem. The narrative of the virgin birth opens with an announcement to Mary by the angel Gabriel while Mary is being raised in the Temple after having been pledged to God by her mother. Gabriel states she is honored over all women of all nations and has brought her glad tidings of a pure son.

Gabriel declares the son is to be named Jesus, the Messiah, proclaiming he will be called a great prophet. Mary, asking how she could conceive and have a child when no man had touched her, was answered by the angel that God can decree what he wills, and that it shall come to pass.

The narrative from the Quran continues with Mary, overcome by the pains of childbirth, being provided with a stream of water under her feet from which she could drink, and with a palm tree which she could shake so ripe dates would fall and be enjoyed. After giving birth, Mary carries the baby Jesus back to the temple and is asked by the temple elders about the child. Having been commanded by Gabriel to a vow of silence, she points to the infant Jesus and the infant proclaims:

Jesus speaking from the cradle is one of six miracles attributed to him in the Quran, an account which is also found in the Syriac Infancy Gospel, a sixth-century work. According to various hadiths, Jesus and Mary did not cry at birth.

===Birth narratives===

The Islamic faith echoed some strands within the Christian tradition that Mary (or Maryam) was a literal virgin when Jesus was conceived. The most detailed account of the annunciation and birth of Jesus is provided in Surah 3 (Al Imran) and 19 (Maryam) of the Quran, where the story is narrated that God (Allah) sent an angel to announce that Maryam could shortly expect to bear a son, despite being a virgin.

Some academics have noted that the account in Surah 19 is particularly close to that in the Christian Gospel of Luke. The Annunciation to Mary is mentioned twice in the Quran, and in both instances Mary/Maryam is told that she was chosen by God to deliver a son. In the first instance, the bearer of the news (who is believed by most Muslims to be the archangel Gabriel), delivered the news in () as he takes the form of a man (). The details of the conception according to and , Mary conceives Jesus by being blown into her womb through the spirit (i.e. archangel Gabriel), Mary asks how she can bear a son in view of her chastity, she is told that God creates what he wills and that these things are easy for God.

The 8th-century Muslim historian Ibn Ishaq (704–767), wrote the account entitled (&#x27;In the Beginning&#x27;), reporting that Zechariah is Mary&#x27;s guardian briefly, and after being incapable of maintaining her, he entrusts her to a carpenter named George. Secluded in a church, she is joined by a young man named Joseph, and they help one another fetching water and other tasks. The account of the birth of Jesus follows the Quran&#x27;s narrative, adding that the birth occurred in Bethlehem beside a palm tree with a manger.

The 10th-century Persian scholar al-Tabari (839–923) mentions envoys arriving from the king of Persia with gifts (similar to the Magi from the east) for the Messiah; the command to a man called Joseph (not specifically Mary&#x27;s husband) to take her and the child to Egypt and later return to Nazareth.

The Fatimid Ismaili jurist Qadi al-Nu&#x27;man also contributed to the narrative, explaining that the virgin birth of Jesus is meant to be interpreted symbolically. In his interpretation, Mary was the follower (), of the Imam Joachim (&#x27;Imran). However, when Joachim realized that she was not suited for the , he passed it to Zechariah, who then passed it to John the Baptist. Meanwhile, Mary received spiritual inspiration () from God, revealing that he would invite a man (to the faith) who would become an exalted Speaker () of a revealed religion (). According to al-Nu&#x27;man, the verses &quot;She said: Lord! How can I have a child when no man has touched me?&quot; () and &quot;neither have I been unchaste&quot; () are symbolic of Mary&#x27;s saying, &quot;How can I conduct the invitation () when the Imam of the Time has not given me permission to do so?&quot; and &quot;Nor shall I be unfaithful by acting against his command&quot;, respectively. To this, a celestial hierarch replies &quot;Such is God. He creates [i.e., causes to pass] what he wills&quot; ().

==Childhood==
The Quran does not include the tradition of the Flight into Egypt, though 23:50 could conceivably allude to it: &quot;And we made the son of Maryam and his mother a sign; and we made them abide in an elevated place, full of quiet and watered with springs.&quot; However, narratives similar to the narrative found in the Gospels and non-canonical sources circulated in later Islamic tradition, with some details and elaborations added over the centuries by Islamic writers and historians. Some narratives have Jesus and family staying in Egypt up to 12 years. Many moral stories and miraculous events of Jesus&#x27; youth are mentioned in (&#x27;Stories of the Prophets&#x27;), books composed over the centuries about pre-Islamic prophets and heroes.

Al-Masudi wrote that Jesus as a boy studied the Jewish religion reading from the Psalms and found &quot;traced in characters of light&quot;:

with Jesus then claiming:

===In Egypt===

Several narratives show some disparity and similarity in Islamic writings about Jesus&#x27; early childhood, specifically his time in Egypt with regard to duration and events. Most of the narratives are found in non-canonical Christian sources like, for example, the pre-Islamic Gospel of Thomas. One such disparity is from al-Athir in his &quot;The Perfection of History&quot; which contains a birth narrative stating Jesus was born in Egypt instead of Bethlehem.

Some other narratives of Jesus&#x27; childhood are popular Middle Eastern lore as highlighted by professor of interfaith studies Mahmoud M. Ayoub. Many miracles are attributed to a young Jesus while in Egypt (see the sections Miracles and Other miracles).

==Adulthood==
===Mission===

It is generally agreed that Jesus spoke Galilean Aramaic, a dialect of the common language of Judea in the first century and the region at-large.

The first and earliest view of Jesus formulated in Islamic thought is that of a prophet – a human being chosen by God to present both a judgment upon humanity and challenge to turn to the one true God. From this basis, reflected upon all previous prophets through the lens of Muslim identity, Jesus is considered no more than repeating a message of the ages. The miracles of Jesus and the Quranic titles attributed to him demonstrate the power of God rather than the divinity of Jesus – the same power behind the message of all prophets. Some Islamic traditions believe Jesus&#x27; mission was only to the children of Israel and his status as a prophet being confirmed by numerous miracles.

A second early high image of Jesus is an end-time figure. This concept arises mostly from the Hadith. Muslim tradition constructs a narrative similarly found in Christian theology, seeing Jesus arriving at the end of time and descending upon earth to fight the Antichrist. This narrative is understood to champion the cause of Islam, with some traditions narrating Jesus pointing to the primacy of Muhammad. Most traditions state Jesus will then die a natural death.

A third and distinctive image is of Jesus representing an ascetic figure – a prophet of the heart. Although the Quran refers to the &#x27;gospel&#x27; of Jesus, those specific teachings of his are not mentioned in the Quran or later religious texts. They are largely absent. The Sufi tradition is where Jesus became revered, acknowledged as a spiritual teacher with a distinctive voice from other prophets, including Muhammad. Sufism tends to explore the dimensions of union with God through many approaches, including asceticism, poetry, philosophy, speculative suggestion, and mystical methods. Although Sufism to the Western mind may seem to share similar origins or elements of Neoplatonism, Gnosticism, and Buddhism, the ideology is distinctly Islamic since they adhere to the words of the Quran and pursue imitation of Muhammad as the perfect man.

===Preaching===
The Islamic concepts of Jesus&#x27; preaching is believed to have originated in Kufa, Iraq, under the Rashidun Caliphate where the earliest writers of Muslim tradition and scholarship was formulated. The concepts of Jesus and his preaching ministry developed in Kufa was adopted from the early ascetic Christians of Egypt who opposed official church bishopric appointments from Rome.

The earliest stories, numbering about 85, are found in two major collections of ascetic literature entitled (&#x27;The Book of the Asceticism and Tender Mercies&#x27;) by Abd Allah ibn al-Mubarak ( 797), and (&#x27;The Book of Asceticism&#x27;) by Ibn Hanbal ( 855). These sayings fall into four basic groups:

# eschatological sayings;
# quasi-Gospel sayings;
# ascetic sayings and stories;
# sayings echoing intra-Muslim polemics.

The first group of sayings expands Jesus&#x27; archetype as portrayed in the Quran. The second group of stories, although containing a Gospel core, are expanded with a &quot;distinctly Islamic stamp&quot;. The third group, being the largest of the four, portrays Jesus as a patron saint of Muslim asceticism. The last group builds upon the Islamic archetype and Muslim-centric definition of Jesus and his attributes, furthering esoteric ideas regarding terms such as &quot;Spirit of God&quot; and &quot;Word of God&quot; describing Jesus Christ, attributes given to the Islamic view of Jesus Christ as a holy angelic messenger divinely sent from heaven by God to his fleshly incarnation, like an Angel of the Lord in some other Messianic Christian traditions.

==Miracles==
The Quran attributes at least six miracles to Jesus, with many more being added over the centuries by writers and historians. Miracles were attributed to Jesus as signs of his prophethood and his authority, according to educator and professor Musa Al-Husayni ( 1990), an author most known for (&#x27;Memoirs of a Hen&#x27;) (Cairo: Dar al-Maarif, 1943; 2nd ed. 1967). In &quot;Christ in the Quran and Modern Arabic Literature&quot; (1960), Al-Husayni said it is noteworthy Muhammad attributes no miracles to himself.

These six miracles in the Quran are without detail unlike the Gospel and their non-canonical Gnostic sources, which include details and mention other attributed miracles. Over the centuries, these six miracle narratives have been elaborated through Hadith and poetry, with religious writings including some of the other miracles mentioned in the Gospel, non-canonical sources, and from lore.

===Speaking from the cradle===
Speaking from the cradle is mentioned in three places in the Quran: , and . Part of the narrative has the infant Jesus defending his mother Mary from the accusation of having given birth without a known husband. Early Islam was unclear about Joseph and his role. Jesus speaks as the angel Gabriel had mentioned at the annunciation: Jesus proclaims he is a servant of God, has been given a book, is a prophet, is blessed wherever he will go, blesses the day he was born, the day he will die, and the day he is raised alive.

Although this particular narrative is not found in the Bible, the theme of speaking from the cradle is found in the non-canonical pre-Islamic Syriac Infancy Gospel. The Syriac Infancy Gospel has Jesus declaring himself the Son of God, the Word, and affirming what the angel Gabriel had previously announced to Mary as detailed in the Gospel.

===Creating birds from clay===
The miracle story of creating birds from clay and breathing life into them when a child is mentioned in , . Although this miracle is also not mentioned in the canonical Gospels, the same narrative is found in at least two pre-Islamic sources: the Infancy Gospel of Thomas and the Jewish Toledot Yeshu, with few variant details between the Quran and these two sources.

===Healing the blind and the lepers===

Similar to the New Testament, the Quran mentions Jesus healing the blind and the lepers in . Muslim scholar and judge al-Baydawi ( 1286) wrote how it was recorded that many thousands of people came to Jesus to be healed and that Jesus healed these diseases through prayer only. Medieval scholar al-Tha&#x27;labi wrote about how these two particular diseases were beyond medical help, and Jesus&#x27; miracles were meant to be witnessed by others as clear signs of his message.

===Raising the dead===
Jesus is believed to have raised people from the dead, as mentioned in al-Imran . Although no detail is given as to who was raised or the circumstance, at least three people are mentioned in detail in the Christian Gospel (a daughter of Jairus, a widow&#x27;s son at Nain, and Lazarus).

===Prescience===
Jesus was able to predict, or had foreknowledge, of what was hidden or unknown to others. One example is Jesus would answer correctly any and every question anyone asked him. Another example is Jesus knew what people had just eaten, as well as what they had stored in their homes.

===Table of food from heaven===
In the fifth chapter of the Quran, , a narration mentions the disciples of Jesus requesting a table laden with food, and for it to be a special day of commemoration for them in the future. This may be a possible reference to the Eucharist according to professor of Islamic and Arabic studies W. Montgomery Watt ( 2006). According to professor of comparative religions Geoffrey Parrinder ( 2005), it is unclear if this story parallels the Gospel&#x27;s Last Supper or the feeding the multitude, but may be tied to the Arabic word (Muslim festival):

In a record by the Sunni exegete Tabari, before the last supper, the threat of death made him anxious. Therefore, Jesus invited his disciples for the last supper. After the meal, he washed their hands and performed their ablutions to wipe their hands on his clothing. Afterwards Jesus replied to them: &quot;As for that I have done to you tonight, in that I served you the meal and washed your hands in person, let it be an example for you. Since you indeed consider me to be better than you, do not be haughty in relation to each other but rather expand yourselves for each other as I have expanded myself for you.&quot; After instructing the disciples in his teachings, Jesus foretells that one of them would deny him and another betray him. However, in accordance with Islamic views on Jesus&#x27; death, just a corpse in semblance of Jesus was crucified and Jesus himself was raised to God.

===Other miracles===
Many stories and narratives have been developed over the years about Jesus, containing certain inherent lessons or providing meaning due to the lack of detail in the Quran regarding Jesus. Some of these narratives are similar in nature to the New Testament, while some portray Jesus in a very human manner.

Besides some detailed summaries of miracles of Jesus mentioned by Muslim writers over the centuries, from adulthood (like walking on water – also found in the Gospel – and causing loaves of bread to come from the ground), some other miracles from childhood include: explaining the Muslim creed fundamentals to a schoolmaster, revealing who the thieves were to a wealthy chief, filling empty jars of something to drink, providing food and wine for a tyrannical king while also proving to this king his power in raising a man from the dead, raising a child accidentally killed, and causing the garments from a single-colored vat to come out with various colors.

====Healing a royal official&#x27;s son====

Al-Tabari ( 923) reports a story of an adult Jesus&#x27; encounter with a certain king in the region and the healing of his son. The identity of the king is not mentioned while legend suggests Philip the Tetrarch. The corresponding Bible reference is &quot;the royal official&#x27;s son&quot;.

====Greed and truth-telling====
A legendary story of a miracle by a young Jesus, used as a hard-learned lesson popularly found in Middle Eastern lore according to professor Ayoub, has to do with a Jewish man and loaves of bread. Although carrying a polemic tone, the lesson centers on greed with truth-telling woven into the narration. It is a story found often in children&#x27;s books.

====Inherent wisdom====

Another legendary miracle story is one regarding Jesus&#x27; childhood wisdom. This legend, reported through al-Tabari from ibn Ishaq, talks about Mary sending Jesus to a religious school and the teacher being astonished to find Jesus already knowing the information being taught / discussed.

====Food in children&#x27;s homes====
Another story from al-Tabari tells of a young Jesus playing with the youths of his village and telling them what food their parents were preparing for them at home.

According to the details of the narrative, some parents became annoyed and forbade their children to play with Jesus, suspecting he was a magician. As a result, the parents kept their children away from Jesus and gathered their children into a single house. One day, feeling lonely, Jesus went out looking for his friends, and coming upon this house he asked the parents where their children were. The parents lied, responding that the children were not there. After Jesus asks who, then, is in the house, the parents replied that there were swine inside. Jesus then says &quot;Let them be swine!&quot;, with the parents then discovering that all the children had turned into swine.

Over the centuries, Muslim writers have also referenced other miracles like casting out demons, having borrowed from some heretical pre-Islamic sources, and from canonical sources as legends about Jesus were expanded.

==Revelation==
Muslims believe that God revealed a new scripture to Jesus, called the (the Gospel), while also declaring the truth of the previous revelations: (the Torah) and (the Psalms). The Quran speaks favorably of , which it describes as a scripture that fills the hearts of its followers with meekness and piety. Traditional Islamic exegesis claims the biblical message to have been distorted (), is termed (&quot;resolution of ambiguity&quot;). This polemic effort has its origins in the medieval period with Abd al-Jabbar ibn Ahmad&#x27;s writings. Regarding the Law of Moses, the Quran indicates that Jesus never abolished Jewish laws but rather confirmed them, while making partial abrogations only.

Muslims have long believed that Paul purposefully corrupted the original teachings of Jesus. The 9th-century historian Sayf ibn Umar asserted that certain rabbis persuaded Paul to deliberately misguide early Christians by introducing what Ibn Hazm viewed as objectionable doctrines into Christianity.

According to Yusuf al-Qaradawi in his book &quot;The Lawful and the Prohibited in Islam&quot;, the legal restrictions Jesus abrogated for Jews were those initially legislated by God as a punishment. Classical commentaries such as specify they pertained to the consumption of fish and bird meat without spikes, or in general.

==Disciples==

The Quran states that Jesus was aided by a group of disciples () who believed in his message. While not naming the disciples, the Quran does give a few instances of Jesus preaching the message to them. Muslims view the disciples of Jesus as identical to the companions () of Muhammad. According to Christianity, the names of the twelve disciples were Peter, Andrew, James, John, Philip, Bartholomew, Thomas, Matthew, James, Jude, Simon, and Judas.

The Quran mentions in chapter 3, verses 52–53, that the disciples submitted to the faith of Islam:
The longest narrative involving Jesus&#x27; disciples is when Jesus performs the miracle of bringing a table of food from heaven at their request, for further proof that his preaching is the true message.

==Ascension==
 is the primary verse of the Quran to refer to the event of Jesus&#x27; crucifixion. It says that Jesus was not killed and neither crucified, but &quot;it was made to appear to them&quot;:

Most Islamic traditions categorically deny that Jesus physically died on the cross or otherwise. According to the Quran, he was not crucified, but was rather saved by God. (Although the earliest Islamic traditions and exegesis quote somewhat conflicting reports regarding a death and its length, Muslims believe that Jesus did not die on the cross, but believe that he was saved by being raised alive to heaven.) A minority, especially among the &quot;falāsifa&quot;, and some &quot;Ismāʿīlī&quot; interpreted &quot;walākin s̲h̲ubbiha lahum&quot; as meaning that the Jews intended to annihilate Jesus completely; but in fact, they crucified only his &quot;nāsūt&quot; (form), yet his &quot;lāhūt&quot; remained alive. The view is also recalled by some Sufis. 

===Substitution===
It is unclear exactly where the substitution interpretation originated, but some scholars consider the theory originating among certain Gnostic groups of the second century. Leirvik finds the Quran and Hadith to have been clearly influenced by the non-canonical (&#x27;heretical&#x27;) Christianity that prevailed in the Arab peninsula and further in Abyssinia.

Some disagreement and discord can be seen beginning with Ibn Ishaq&#x27;s ( 761) report of a brief accounting of events leading up to the crucifixion, firstly stating that Jesus was replaced by someone named Sergius, while secondly reporting an account of Jesus&#x27; tomb being located at Medina, and thirdly citing the places in the Quran (, ) that God took Jesus up to himself.

Michael Cook notes that denial that Jesus died follows the Christian heresy of docetism, who were &quot;disturbed by that God should have died&quot;, but that this concern conflicts with another Islamic doctrine, that Jesus was a man, not God. According to Todd Lawson, Quranic commentators seem to have concluded the denial of the crucifixion of Jesus by following material interpreted in Tafsir that relied upon extra-biblical Judeo-Christian sources, with the earliest textual evidence having originated from a non-Muslim source – a misreading of the Christian writings of John of Damascus regarding the literal understandings of docetism (exegetical doctrine describing spiritual and physical realities of Jesus as understood by men in logical terms) as opposed to their figurative explanations. John of Damascus highlighted the Quran&#x27;s assertion that the Jews did not crucify Jesus being very different from saying that Jesus was not crucified, explaining that it is the varied Quranic exegetes in Tafsir, and not the Quran itself, that denies the crucifixion, further stating that the message in the verse simply affirms the historicity of the event.

=== Symbolic interpretations ===
Ja&#x27;far ibn Mansur al-Yaman ( 958), Abu Hatim Ahmad ibn Hamdan al-Razi ( 935), Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani ( 971), Mu&#x27;ayyad fi&#x27;l-Din al-Shirazi ( 1078) and the group Ikhwan al-Safa also affirm the historicity of the Crucifixion, reporting Jesus was crucified and not substituted by another man as maintained by many other popular Quranic commentators and Tafsir. More recently, Mahmoud M. Ayoub, a professor and scholar, provided a more symbolic interpretation for Surah 4 Verse 157:
Ayoub, instead of interpreting the passage as a denial of the death of Jesus, instead believes the passage is about God denying men the power to vanquish and destroy God&#x27;s message. The words &quot;but they killed him not, nor crucified him&quot; are meant to show that any power humans believe that they have against God is illusory.

Some Sunni Islamic exegesists, such as the anti-Christian polemicist Muhammad Rashid Rida, held an ambiguous stance on the matter, namely that the crucifixion and ascension of Jesus were allegorical, but with extreme precaution, in order to rebut Christian doctrines on crucifixion and salvation. Comprehensively denouncing Christian doctrines on salvation, atonement and crucifixion as irrational and (disbelief) in his , Rida also denounced the Jews for their killings of the Prophets of God, writing:

An early interpretation of verse 3:55 (specifically &quot;I will cause you to die and raise you to myself&quot;), Al-Tabari ( 923), records an interpretation attributed to Ibn &#x27;Abbas, who used the literal &quot;I will cause you to die&quot; () in place of the metaphorical (&#x27;Jesus died&#x27;), while Wahb ibn Munabbih, an early Jewish convert, is reported to have said &quot;God caused Jesus, son of Mary, to die for three hours during the day, then took him up to himself.&quot; Tabari further transmits from Ibn Ishaq: &quot;God caused Jesus to die for seven hours&quot;, while at another place reported that a person called Sergius was crucified in place of Jesus. Ibn-al-Athir forwarded the report that it was Judas, the betrayer, while also mentioning the possibility it was a man named Natlianus.

In reference to the Quranic quote &quot;We have surely killed Jesus the Christ, son of Mary, the apostle of God&quot;, Muslim scholar Mahmoud Ayoub asserts this boast not as the repeating of a historical lie or the perpetuating of a false report, but an example of human arrogance and folly with an attitude of contempt towards God and his messenger(s). Ayoub furthers what modern scholars of Islam interpret regarding the historical death of Jesus, the man, as man&#x27;s inability to kill off God&#x27;s Word and the Spirit of God, which the Quran testifies were embodied in Jesus Christ. Ayoub continues highlighting the denial of the killing of Jesus as God denying men such power to vanquish and destroy the divine Word. The words, &quot;they did not kill him, nor did they crucify him&quot; speaks to the profound events of ephemeral human history, exposing mankind&#x27;s heart and conscience towards God&#x27;s will. The claim of humanity to have this power against God is illusory. &quot;They did not slay him... but it seemed so to them&quot; speaks to the imaginations of mankind, not the denial of the actual event of Jesus dying physically on the cross.

Another report from Ibn Kathir quotes Ishaq Ibn Bishr, on authority of Idris, on authority of Wahb ibn Munabbih, that &quot;God caused him to die for three days, then resurrected him, then raised him.&quot;

Al-Masudi ( 956) reported the death of Christ under Tiberius.

Ibn Kathir ( 1373) follows traditions which suggest that a crucifixion did occur, but not with Jesus. After the event, Ibn Kathir reports the people were divided into three groups following three different narratives; The Jacobites believing &quot;God remained with us as long as He willed and then He ascended to Heaven&quot;; the Nestorians believing &quot;The son of God was with us as long as he willed until God raised him to heaven&quot;; and the Muslims believing &quot;The servant and messenger of God, Jesus, remained with us as long as God willed until God raised him to Himself.&quot;

Islamic reformer Muhammad Rashid Rida agrees with contemporary commentators interpreting the physical killing of Christ&#x27;s apostleship as a metaphorical interpretation.

Modern Islamic scholars like Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba&#x27;i interpret the ascension of Jesus as spiritual, not physical. This interpretation is in accord with Muʿtazila and Shia metaphorical explanations regarding anthropomorphic references to God in the Quran. Although not popular with traditional Sunni interpretations of the depiction of crucifixion, there has been much speculation and discussion in the effort of logically reconciling this topic.

In ascetic Shia writings, Jesus is depicted having &quot;ascended to heaven wearing a woolen shirt, spun and sewed by Mary, his mother. As he reached the heavenly regions, he was addressed, &#x27;O Jesus, cast away from you the adornment of the world. After his ascension, his word is believed to have been altered.

== Apocalyptic literature ==

According to Islamic apocalyptics, having ascended to heaven and dwelled there for 2000+ years, Jesus will descend to earth shortly before Judgement Day, in the midst of wars fought against al-Masih ad-Dajjal (&#x27;The False Messiah&quot;) and his followers, to come to the aid of the Mahdi and his Muslim followers. Dressed in saffron robes with his head anointed, Jesus will descend at the point of a white minaret, in eastern Damascus, which is believed to be the Minaret of Isa in the Umayyad Mosque. He will then greet the Mahdi and (being a Muslim) pray beside him. Eventually, Jesus will slay the Dajjal at Lod.

Afterwards, he will &quot;break the cross, kill the pigs, and abolish the Jizya tax&quot;, according to a well-known Sahih al-Bukhari hadith. &quot;The usual interpretation&quot; of this prophecy is that, being a Muslim, Jesus will put a stop to Christian worship of himself and in belief in his divinity, &quot;symbolized by the cross&quot;. He will re-establish the Kosher/Halal dietary laws abandoned by Christianity; and because Jews and Christians will now all reject their former faith and accept Islam, there will be no more need for the tax on unbelievers. (According to one hadith, Jesus will &quot;destroy the churches and temples and kill the Christians unless they believe in him.&quot;)

Islamic texts also allude to the reappearance of the ancient menace Gog and Magog (), which will break out of its underground confinement and cause havoc around the world. God, in response to Jesus&#x27; prayers, will kill them by sending a type of worm in the napes of their necks, and send large birds to carry and clear their corpses from the land. After the death of the Mahdi, Jesus will assume world leadership and peace and justice will be universal.

Also according to tradition, Jesus will then marry, have children, and rule the world for forty years (traditions give many different time periods) after which he will die. Some Muslims believe that the Muslims will then perform the funeral prayer for him and then bury him at the Green Dome in the city of Medina in a grave left vacant beside Muhammad, Abu Bakr, and Umar respectively. According to Ibn Khaldun&#x27;s legend, the two caliphs will rise from the dead between the two prophets.

===Sources===
While the Quran does not describe any of the above narrative of Jesus&#x27; return, many Muslims believe that two Quranic verses refer to his second coming during the end times. (1) The verse mentioned above stating he is never died on earth: 
*&quot;And [for] their saying, &#x27;Indeed, we have killed Christ, Jesus, the son of Mary, the messenger of God.&#x27; And they did not kill him, nor did they crucify him; but [another] was made to resemble him to them. And indeed, those who differ over it are in doubt about it. They have no knowledge of it except the following of assumption. And they did not kill him, for certain.&quot; (Q.4:157:) 
A second verse interpreted to indicate a connection between Jesus and &quot;the Hour&quot; (end times): 
*&quot;And lo! verily there is knowledge of the Hour. So doubt ye not concerning it, but follow Me. This is the right path.&quot; (Q.43:61 trans Pickthall).

Hadiths on Jesus&#x27;s return are traced back to Abu Hurairah, one of the , but might actually have been introduced later during civil wars in the early Abbasid Caliphate, when a savior was expected. While for Shias, the Mahdi will be the savior, some Sunnis tended to expect Jesus&#x27; return. During the early Abbasid Caliphate, wearing crucifixes in processions and holding pigs in public, was forbidden. Otherwise, the breaking of the cross, might reflect general disapproval of this symbol by Muslims, and slaying pigs a reference to Jesus exorcism of Legion.

== Islamic theology ==
Jesus is described in various ways in the Quran. The most common reference to Jesus occurs in the form of (&#x27;son of Mary&#x27;), sometimes preceded with another title. Jesus is also recognized as a (&#x27;prophet&#x27;) and (&#x27;messenger&#x27;) of God. The terms (&#x27;servant of God&#x27;), (&#x27;worthy of esteem in this world and the next&#x27;) and (&#x27;blessed&#x27;, or &#x27;a source of benefit for others&#x27;) are all used in reference to him. According to Islam, Jesus never claimed to be divine.

Jesus&#x27; role in Muslim theology falls roughly under four types:
* a perception based on fragments of the New Testament
* anti-Jewish, exposing thieves, criminals, and liars (usually identified with Jews)
* an ascetic, based on monastic tradition; prevalent particularly in Sufi literature
* an Islamic messenger, exercising polemics against Christians and predicting the coming of Muhammad (as Surah 61:6)

Islam sees Jesus as human, sent as the last prophet of Israel to Jews with the Gospel scripture, affirming but modifying the Mosaic Law. Islamic accounts have rejected any divine notions of Jesus being God, or the begotten Son of God, or of the Trinity. Islamic theology teaches such beliefs constitute (the &quot;association&quot; of partners with God) and thereby a rejection of his divine oneness () as the sole unpardonable sin. According to Islamic theology, Jesus received an original message, containing references to Muhammad, but which became distorted later under Jewish and Roman influence. Rather than being divine or a savior, Jesus confirms to the Islamic concept of prophetic mission.
The strict monotheism of Islam rejects any Christological debate which conflates Jesus in any way with Allah or with God the Father, precluding any divinity in Jesus and avoiding the subtleties of Trinitarianism.
A frequent title of Jesus mentioned is , which translates to &#x27;the Messiah&#x27;, as well as &#x27;Christ&#x27;. Although the Quran is silent on its significance, Muslim scholars disagree with the Christian concepts of the term &quot;Messiah&quot;, and lean towards a Jewish understanding. Muslim exegetes explain the use of the word in the Quran as referring to Jesus&#x27; status as the one anointed by means of blessings and honors; or as the one who helped cure the sick, by anointing the eyes of the blind, for example.

Jesus is also associated both with a word from God and with a spirit. The interpretations are collected by the Quran exegete Mahmud al-Alusi: Jesus is the embodiment of God&#x27;s word uttered at the moment of his conception (9:169, 14:30, 3:42), announced in the &quot;word of God&quot;, prophesied preached by preceding prophets; Jesus is the word of God because he speaks on behalf of God; or that Jesus is a word of God because Jesus is, in his own person, “good news”.

Muhammad described himself as the &quot;nearest of all people to Jesus&quot;.

===Similitude with Adam===
The Quran emphasizes Allah&#x27;s creation of Jesus: &quot;The case of Jesus in the eyes of God is like that of Adam. He created him from earth and then said to him, &#x27;Be!&#x27; And he is.&quot; (Q:3:59), through his similitude with Adam in regards to the absence of human origin. Muhammad often used to compare the births of Adam and Jesus.

Islamic exegesis extrapolates a logical inconsistency behind the Christian argument of divine intervention, as such implications would have ascribed divinity to Adam who is understood only as creation.

=== Precursor to Muhammad ===
In Islam, Jesus is believed to have been the precursor to the Islamic prophet Muhammad. According to the Quran, the coming of Muhammad was predicted by Jesus in . Through this verse, early Arab Muslims claimed legitimacy for their new faith in the existing religious traditions and the alleged predictions of Jesus. Muslims believe that Jesus was a precursor to Muhammad, and that he prophesied the latter&#x27;s coming. This perspective is based on a verse of the Quran wherein Jesus speaks of a messenger to appear after him named &quot;Ahmad&quot;. Islam associates Ahmad with Muhammad, both words deriving from the &quot;h-m-d&quot; triconsonantal root which refers to praiseworthiness. Muslims assert that evidence of Jesus&#x27; pronouncement is present in the New Testament, citing the mention of the Paraclete whose coming is foretold in the Gospel of John.

Muslim commentators claim that the original Greek word used was , meaning &#x27;famed&#x27;, &#x27;illustrious&#x27;, or &#x27;praiseworthy&#x27;—rendered in Arabic as ; and that this was replaced by Christians with . This idea is debated, asking if the traditional understanding is supported by the text of the Quran.

Islamic theology claims Jesus had foretold another prophet succeeding him according to Sura 61:6, with the mention of the name &#x27;Ahmad&#x27;. (Ahmad is an Arabic name from the same triconsonantal root Ḥ-M-D = [ح – م – د].) In responding to Ibn Ishaq&#x27;s biography of Muhammad, the Sirat Rasul Allah, Islamic scholar Alfred Guillaume wrote:

===Messianism===
An alternative, more esoteric, interpretation is expounded by Messianic Muslims in the Sufi and Isma&#x27;ili traditions so as to unite Islam, Christianity and Judaism into a single religious continuum. Other Messianic Muslims hold a similar theological view regarding Jesus, without attempting to unite the religions. Making use of the New Testament&#x27;s distinguishing between Jesus, Son of Man (being the physical human Jesus), and Christ, Son of God (being the Holy Spirit of God residing in the body of Jesus), the Holy Spirit, being immortal and immaterial, is not subject to crucifixion – for it can never die, nor can it be touched by the earthly nails of the crucifixion, for it is a being of pure spirit. Thus, while the spirit of Christ avoided crucifixion by ascending unto God, the body that was Jesus was sacrificed on the cross, thereby bringing the Old Testament to final fulfillment. Thus Quranic passages on the death of Jesus affirm that while the Pharisees intended to destroy Jesus completely, they, in fact, succeeded only in killing the Son of Man, being his (&#x27;material being&#x27;). Meanwhile, the Son of God, being his (&#x27;spiritual being&#x27;) remained alive and undying – because it is the Holy Spirit.

== Islamic literature ==

The Quran does not convey the specific teachings of Jesus. What has developed over the years was authored by later followers of Islam. What is found in the Quran about Jesus is that his teaching conformed to the prophetic model: a human sent by God to present both a judgment upon humanity for worshipping idols and a challenge to turn to the one true God. In the case of Jesus, Muslims believe that his mission was to the people of Israel and that his status as a prophet was confirmed by numerous miracles. The Quran&#x27;s description of specific events at the end of Jesus&#x27; life have continued to be controversial between Christians and Muslims, while the classical commentaries have been interpreted differently to accommodate new information. Jesus is written about by some Muslim scholars as the perfect man.

===Hadith===

The Hadiths are reported sayings of Muhammad that developed a canonical status in the third Muslim century as a source of authority for the Muslim community. The Muslim perception of Jesus emerging from the Hadiths is of a miraculous, sinless, and eschatological figure, pointing people, again according to the Muslim&#x27;s perspective of prophethood, to the Muslim faith (&quot;Muslim&quot;; one who submits to the will of God).

Jesus is featured as a major figure in two categories of hadiths which can be described as apocalyptic and biblical. The eschatological role of Jesus in the hadiths may have been influenced by ideas of the Second coming held by the Eastern Churches, as well as the Quranic Jesus mentioned in . Many of the hadiths which feature Jesus&#x27;s sayings were not included in the canonical hadith collections, which became more focused on the sayings of Muhammad, but were instead included in a separate genre known as (&#x27;Stories of the Prophets&#x27;).

===Sunni Islam===

In , al-Shahrastani ( 1153), an influential Persian historian, historiographer, scholar, philosopher and theologian, records a portrayal of Jesus very close to the orthodox tenets while continuing the Islamic narrative:

===Shia Islam===
In the Nahj al-Balagha, the fourth caliph Ali () is reported to have talked about the simplicity of Jesus. Ali says that &quot;Jesus used a stone for his pillow, put on coarse clothes and ate rough food. His condiment was hunger. His lamp at night was the moon. He had no wife to allure him, nor any son to give grief, neither wealth to deviate. His two feet were his conveyance and his two hands were his servant&quot;. According to Ja&#x27;far al-Sadiq, a great-great-grandson of Ali, the time between David and Jesus was four hundred years. Ja&#x27;far further says that the religion of Jesus was monotheism () and purity (). The (Gospel) was sent down to him and the pledge that other prophets took was also taken from Jesus: to establish prayer with religion, enjoin the good and forbid the evil, allowing what is allowed and forbidding what has been forbidden. Admonitions and parables were sent down to him in the , but there was no law of retribution in it nor precepts of retribution (), and no obligations for inheritance. He was sent what was an alleviation of what was sent down to Moses in the Torah. Jesus commanded of his followers that they believe in the law of the Torah and the .

According to Qadi al-Nu&#x27;man, a famous Muslim jurist of the Fatimid period, Jesus is referred to as the Messiah () in the Quran because he was sent to the people who responded to him in order to remove () their impurities, the ailments of their faith; whether apparent () or hidden (). Qadi al- Nu&#x27;man, in his work &quot;Foundation of Symbolic Interpretation&quot; (), talks about the spiritual birth () of Jesus, as an interpretation of his story of physical birth () mentioned in the Quran. He says that Mary, the mother of Jesus, is a metaphor for someone who nurtured and instructed Jesus (), rather than physically giving birth to him. Qadi al-Nu&#x27;man explains that Jesus was from the pure progeny of Abraham, just as Ali and his sons were from the pure progeny of Muhammad, through Fatima.

===Sufism===
Early Sufis adopted the sayings of Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount and an ascetic dimension. The submission and sacrifice Jesus exemplified shows the Muslim is to be set apart from worldly compromises. In poetry and mysticism, Jesus was celebrated as a prophet close to the heart of God achieving an uncommon degree of self-denial.

Although the writings developed over the centuries embellished Jesus&#x27; miracles, the lessons of Jesus can be seen as metaphors of the inner life. These rich and diverse presentations of Jesus in Sufi traditions are the largest body of Jesus-texts in any non-Christian tradition.

The miraculous birth and life of Jesus becomes a metaphor for Rumi of the spiritual rebirth that is possible within each human soul. This rebirth is not achieved without effort; one needs to practice silence, poverty, and fasting—themes that were prominent in Jesus&#x27; life according to Islamic traditions.

Ibn Arabi stated Jesus was Al-Insān al-Kāmil, the spirit and simultaneously a servant of God. Jesus is held to be &quot;one with God&quot; in whole coincidence of will, not as a being. Due to the spirit of God dwelling in Jesus, God spoke and acted through him. Yet Jesus is not considered to be God, but a person within God&#x27;s word and spirit and a manifestation of God&#x27;s attributes, like a mirror, a view resembling Nestorian traditions.

The conception of Jesus as described by Ibn Arabi ( 1240), an Andalusian scholar, Sufi mystic, poet and philosopher, in the &quot;Bezels of Wisdom&quot;:

==== Ascetic literature ====
Jesus is widely venerated in Muslim ascetic and mystic literature, such as in Muslim mystic Al-Ghazali&#x27;s (&#x27;The revival of the religious sciences&#x27;). These works lay stress upon Jesus&#x27; poverty, his preoccupation with worship, his detachment from worldly life and his miracles. Such depictions also include advice and sermons which are attributed to him. Later Sufic commentaries adapted material from Christian gospels which were consistent with their ascetic portrayal. Sufi philosopher Ibn Arabi described Jesus as &quot;the seal of universal holiness&quot; due to the quality of his faith and &quot;because he holds in his hands the keys of living breath and because he is at present in a state of deprivation and journeying&quot;.

== Ahmadiyya literature ==

The Ahmadiyya movement considers Jesus was a prophet and a mortal man, who was crucified and remained on the cross for six hours, until darkness fell. Jesus was taken down from the cross alive and unconscious. He was treated for three days and nights by saint physician Necdemus in a cave like tomb (especially built for Joseph of Arimathea). Thereafter, Jesus recuperated from his wounds, met his trusted disciples on the Mount of Olives, and left Judea towards the sea of Galilee on his way to Damascus. After his dramatic escape from crucifixion, Jesus traveled to the eastern lands in search of the ten lost tribes of Israel. Finally, he died a natural death in Kashmir, India, as opposed to having been raised up alive to Heaven.

== Appearance ==
Based upon several Hadith narrations of Muhammad, Jesus can be physically described thus (with any differences in Jesus&#x27; physical description being due to Muhammad describing him when seeing him at different occasions, such as during his ascension to Heaven, or when describing Jesus during Jesus&#x27; second coming):
*A well-built man of medium/moderate/average height and stature with a broad chest.
*Straight, lank, long, red and white hair that fell between his shoulders. It seems as though water is dribbling from his head, though it is not wet.
*A Moderate complexion

==See also==
==References==
=== Notes ===

===Citations===
===Sources===
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Google books site
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
*
*
* 
*


==Further reading==
*
* 
*Zuckermann, Ghil&#x27;ad (2006). &quot;&#x27;Etymythological Othering&#x27; and the Power of &#x27;Lexical Engineering&#x27; in Judaism, Islam and Christianity. A Socio-Philo(sopho)logical Perspective&quot;, &quot;Explorations in the Sociology of Language and Religion&quot;, edited by Tope Omoniyi and Joshua A. Fishman, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 237–258. 
== External links ==


* Jesus: A Summary of the Points About Which Islam and Christianity Agree and Disagree Dr. Alan Godlas, University of Georgia.
* What Do Muslims Think About Jesus – Royal Embassy of Saudi Arabia
* Jesus Through Muslim Eyes – BBC
* The Story of Jesus Through Iranian Eyes – ABC News
* 7 Muslim Beliefs about Jesus Dr. Warren Larson
* Alim.org Surah 3. Al-i&#x27;Imran, Ayah 4</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="3" end="8" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q51664" start="10" end="19" title="Jesus in Islam" label="[[Jesus]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q168827" start="57" end="78" title="Prophets and messengers in Islam" label="prophet and messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095353" start="82" end="85" title="God in Islam" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="94" end="101" title="Messiah in Islam" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="120" end="138" title="Israelites" label="Children of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q235131" start="149" end="153" title="Islamic holy books" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="194" end="199" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="239" end="255" title="Parthenogenesis" label="born of a virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="391" end="400" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="485" end="496" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="resurrected"/>
<link wikidata="Q107404809" start="662" end="676" title="Names and titles of Jesus in the Quran" label="various titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422313" start="726" end="731" title="John the Baptist in Islam" label="Yahya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932888" start="756" end="764" title="Muhammad in Islam" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q406294" start="853" end="858" title="Ahmad" label="Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q616175" start="893" end="906" title="Incarnation (Christianity)" label="God incarnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q472768" start="912" end="922" title="Son of God" label="Son of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810992" start="1175" end="1182" title="Tahrif" label="altered"/>
<link wikidata="Q174495" start="1220" end="1230" title="Tawhid" label="monotheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q168827" start="1280" end="1297" title="Prophets of Islam" label="prophets in Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="1322" end="1328" title="Muslims" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576009" start="1355" end="1358" title="God in Abrahamic religions" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529988" start="1425" end="1438" title="Sirat al-Mustaqim" label="straight path"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1541" end="1560" title="Islamic eschatology#Isa (Jesus)" label="Islamic eschatology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1607" end="1620" title="Second Coming#Islam" label="Second Coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q629060" start="1701" end="1714" title="Gog and Magog" label="Gog and Magog"/>
<link wikidata="Q727042" start="1912" end="1922" title="Green Dome" label="Green Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="1926" end="1932" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q183562" start="1984" end="1998" title="Umayyad Mosque" label="Umayyad Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="2002" end="2010" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885943" start="2049" end="2077" title="Holiest sites in Islam" label="fourth holiest site of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="2108" end="2114" title="Sufism" label="Sufism"/>
<link wikidata="Q234262" start="2347" end="2352" title="Surah" label="Surah"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="2359" end="2364" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="3371" end="3376" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="3453" end="3469" title="Second Temple" label="Jerusalem temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420409" start="3506" end="3515" title="Zechariah in Islam" label="Zechariah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422313" start="3548" end="3553" title="John the Baptist in Islam" label="Yahya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3555" end="3571" title="John the Baptist#Islam" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q859115" start="3782" end="3803" title="virgin birth of Jesus" label="virgin birth of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185606" start="3893" end="3914" title="Immaculate Conception" label="Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="4102" end="4111" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q81989" start="4195" end="4202" title="Gabriel" label="Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="4237" end="4243" title="Second Temple" label="Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q624348" start="5290" end="5311" title="Syriac Infancy Gospel" label="Syriac Infancy Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="5356" end="5362" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q234262" start="5645" end="5650" title="Surah" label="Surah"/>
<link wikidata="Q219682" start="5654" end="5662" title="Al Imran" label="Al Imran"/>
<link wikidata="Q220716" start="5672" end="5678" title="Maryam (surah)" label="Maryam"/>
<link wikidata="Q234262" start="5884" end="5889" title="Surah" label="Surah"/>
<link wikidata="Q39939" start="5940" end="5954" title="Gospel of Luke" label="Gospel of Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q334847" start="6588" end="6597" title="Ibn Ishaq" label="Ibn Ishaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="7044" end="7053" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q192124" start="7122" end="7131" title="al-Tabari" label="al-Tabari"/>
<link wikidata="Q51671" start="7218" end="7236" title="Biblical Magi" label="Magi from the east"/>
<link wikidata="Q430776" start="7384" end="7392" title="Nazareth" label="Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="7399" end="7406" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="7407" end="7414" title="Isma&amp;#x27;ilism" label="Ismaili"/>
<link wikidata="Q482353" start="7422" end="7441" title="Al-Qadi al-Nu&amp;#x27;man" label="Qadi al-Nu&amp;#x27;man"/>
<link wikidata="Q837143" start="8537" end="8554" title="Flight into Egypt" label="Flight into Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q837143" start="9023" end="9031" title="Flight into Egypt" label="in Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47855" start="9206" end="9217" title="Pre-Islamic Arabia" label="pre-Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369122" start="9321" end="9327" title="Zabur" label="Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q24248277" start="10020" end="10036" title="Mahmoud M. Ayoub" label="Mahmoud M. Ayoub"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10117" end="10125" title="#Miracles" label="Miracles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10130" end="10144" title="#Other miracles" label="Other miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518598" start="10217" end="10233" title="Galilean dialect" label="Galilean Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="10252" end="10267" title="lingua franca" label="common language"/>
<link wikidata="Q186234" start="12435" end="12439" title="Kufa" label="Kufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490507" start="12457" end="12475" title="Rashidun Caliphate" label="Rashidun Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="12657" end="12676" title="Arianism" label="Christians of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="12820" end="12827" title="Asceticism" label="ascetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666111" start="12911" end="12935" title="Abd Allah ibn al-Mubarak" label="Abd Allah ibn al-Mubarak"/>
<link wikidata="Q194442" start="12988" end="12998" title="Ahmad ibn Hanbal" label="Ibn Hanbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131714" start="13221" end="13230" title="archetype" label="archetype"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619342" start="13870" end="13887" title="Angel of the Lord" label="Angel of the Lord"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13902" end="13921" title="Messianic Christian" label="Messianic Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="14124" end="14135" title="prophethood in Islam" label="prophethood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="15469" end="15474" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q624348" start="15556" end="15577" title="Syriac Infancy Gospel" label="Syriac Infancy Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180832" start="15653" end="15657" title="Logos" label="Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q81989" start="15688" end="15695" title="Gabriel" label="Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q210709" start="16035" end="16059" title="Infancy Gospel of Thomas" label="Infancy Gospel of Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q279556" start="16075" end="16088" title="Toledot Yeshu" label="Toledot Yeshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="16212" end="16225" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="16278" end="16284" title="Leprosy" label="lepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q287573" start="16315" end="16325" title="al-Baydawi" label="al-Baydawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015226" start="16492" end="16508" title="al-Tha&amp;#x27;labi" label="al-Tha&amp;#x27;labi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571108" start="16923" end="16941" title="Raising of Jairus&amp;#x27; daughter" label="daughter of Jairus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458101" start="16945" end="16961" title="Raising of the son of the widow of Nain" label="widow&amp;#x27;s son"/>
<link wikidata="Q539890" start="16975" end="16982" title="Raising of Lazarus" label="Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q520667" start="17021" end="17028" title="Precognition" label="predict"/>
<link wikidata="Q214267" start="17037" end="17050" title="Prophecy" label="foreknowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="17546" end="17555" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q471167" start="17609" end="17627" title="W. Montgomery Watt" label="W. Montgomery Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534820" start="17685" end="17703" title="Geoffrey Parrinder" label="Geoffrey Parrinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q51633" start="17769" end="17780" title="Last Supper" label="Last Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q625231" start="17788" end="17809" title="feeding the multitude" label="feeding the multitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="17885" end="17890" title="Sunnism" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q192124" start="17899" end="17905" title="Tabari" label="Tabari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082810" start="18638" end="18672" title="Islamic views on Jesus&amp;#x27; death" label="Islamic views on Jesus&amp;#x27; death"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="19026" end="19039" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q345647" start="19990" end="20009" title="Philip the Tetrarch" label="Philip the Tetrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="21546" end="21551" title="Pig" label="swine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="21810" end="21819" title="Heresy" label="heretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615240" start="21850" end="21859" title="gospel canon" label="canonical"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="22072" end="22077" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="22088" end="22094" title="Psalms" label="Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773706" start="22424" end="22447" title="Abd al-Jabbar ibn Ahmad" label="Abd al-Jabbar ibn Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q837443" start="22479" end="22491" title="Law of Moses" label="Law of Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="22540" end="22551" title="Halakha" label="Jewish laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="22651" end="22655" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122255" start="22738" end="22751" title="Sayf ibn Umar" label="Sayf ibn Umar"/>
<link wikidata="Q317787" start="22858" end="22866" title="Ibn Hazm" label="Ibn Hazm"/>
<link wikidata="Q64129" start="22934" end="22951" title="Yusuf al-Qaradawi" label="Yusuf al-Qaradawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223915" start="22970" end="23008" title="The Lawful and the Prohibited in Islam" label="The Lawful and the Prohibited in Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="23059" end="23063" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23196" end="23200" title="List of halal and kosher fish#Kosher" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23205" end="23209" title="Kosher animals#Birds" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281472" start="23314" end="23323" title="Disciples of Jesus in Islam" label="disciples"/>
<link wikidata="Q188711" start="23520" end="23530" title="Companions of the Prophet" label="companions"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="23613" end="23618" title="Saint Peter" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q43399" start="23620" end="23626" title="Saint Andrew" label="Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q43999" start="23628" end="23633" title="James, son of Zebedee" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q44015" start="23635" end="23639" title="John the Apostle" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q43675" start="23641" end="23647" title="Philip the Apostle" label="Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q43982" start="23649" end="23660" title="Bartholomew" label="Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q43669" start="23662" end="23668" title="Thomas the Apostle" label="Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43600" start="23670" end="23677" title="Saint Matthew" label="Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q44047" start="23679" end="23684" title="James, son of Alphaeus" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q43945" start="23686" end="23690" title="Jude the Apostle" label="Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q12871" start="23692" end="23697" title="Simon the Zealot" label="Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81018" start="23703" end="23708" title="Judas Iscariot" label="Judas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082810" start="24352" end="24361" title="Islamic view of Jesus&amp;#x27; death" label="crucified"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686605" start="24608" end="24630" title="ascension of Jesus" label="raised alive to heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="24972" end="24977" title="Sufism" label="Sufis"/>
<link wikidata="Q328675" start="25745" end="25757" title="Michael Cook (historian)" label="Michael Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q207674" start="25824" end="25832" title="docetism" label="docetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29653414" start="26002" end="26013" title="Todd Lawson" label="Todd Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092752" start="26159" end="26197" title="Apocrypha" label="extra-biblical Judeo-Christian sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q51884" start="26321" end="26337" title="John of Damascus" label="John of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052702" start="26941" end="26972" title="The Book of the Sage and Disciple" label="Ja&amp;#x27;far ibn Mansur al-Yaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670206" start="26981" end="27015" title="Abu Hatim Ahmad ibn Hamdan al-Razi" label="Abu Hatim Ahmad ibn Hamdan al-Razi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188700" start="27024" end="27046" title="Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani" label="Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930533" start="27055" end="27093" title="Mu&amp;#x27;ayyad fi&amp;#x27;l-Din al-Shirazi" label="Mu&amp;#x27;ayyad fi&amp;#x27;l-Din al-Shirazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995603" start="27116" end="27130" title="Ikhwan al-Safa" label="Ikhwan al-Safa"/>
<link wikidata="Q24248277" start="27328" end="27344" title="Mahmoud M. Ayoub" label="Mahmoud M. Ayoub"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="27779" end="27790" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q335414" start="27793" end="27803" title="Mufassir" label="exegesists"/>
<link wikidata="Q471046" start="27843" end="27863" title="Rashid Rida" label="Muhammad Rashid Rida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235597" start="27921" end="27932" title="crucifixion" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235597" start="28044" end="28055" title="crucifixion" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="28060" end="28069" title="Salvation in Christianity" label="salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="28132" end="28141" title="Atonement (Christian)" label="atonement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="28221" end="28225" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q168827" start="28252" end="28267" title="Prophets and messengers in Islam" label="Prophets of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q192124" start="28393" end="28402" title="Al-Tabari" label="Al-Tabari"/>
<link wikidata="Q423600" start="28451" end="28466" title="Abd Allah ibn Abbas" label="Ibn &amp;#x27;Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q439374" start="28589" end="28606" title="Wahb ibn Munabbih" label="Wahb ibn Munabbih"/>
<link wikidata="Q81018" start="29003" end="29008" title="Judas" label="Judas"/>
<link wikidata="Q168705" start="30469" end="30478" title="Al-Masudi" label="Al-Masudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="30521" end="30529" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q369690" start="30532" end="30542" title="Ibn Kathir" label="Ibn Kathir"/>
<link wikidata="Q559495" start="30754" end="30763" title="Jacob Baradaeus" label="Jacobites"/>
<link wikidata="Q168414" start="30864" end="30874" title="Nestorianism" label="Nestorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q471046" start="31155" end="31166" title="Rashid Rida" label="Rashid Rida"/>
<link wikidata="Q737448" start="31339" end="31370" title="Muhammad Husayn Tabataba&amp;#x27;i" label="Muhammad Husayn Tabataba&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q668460" start="31470" end="31479" title="Muʿtazila" label="Muʿtazila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124554" start="32302" end="32320" title="al-Masih ad-Dajjal" label="al-Masih ad-Dajjal"/>
<link wikidata="Q784387" start="32398" end="32403" title="Mahdi" label="Mahdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="32542" end="32550" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183562" start="32602" end="32616" title="Umayyad Mosque" label="Umayyad Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124554" start="32717" end="32723" title="Dajjal" label="Dajjal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207540" start="32727" end="32730" title="Lod" label="Lod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023470" start="32850" end="32866" title="Sahih al-Bukhari" label="Sahih al-Bukhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="33101" end="33107" title="Kosher" label="Kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329066" start="33108" end="33113" title="Islamic dietary laws" label="Halal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33502" end="33515" title="Gog and Magog#Islamic texts" label="Gog and Magog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540543" start="34126" end="34140" title="Salat al-Janazah" label="funeral prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q727042" start="34174" end="34184" title="Green Dome" label="Green Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="34200" end="34206" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34230" end="34245" title="Green Dome#Tomb of Muhammad and early caliphs" label="beside Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q334923" start="34247" end="34255" title="Abu Bakr" label="Abu Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="34261" end="34265" title="Umar" label="Umar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="34293" end="34304" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q69326" start="35362" end="35374" title="Abu Hurairah" label="Abu Hurairah"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="35466" end="35483" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="35626" end="35643" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348528" start="35871" end="35877" title="Legion (demons)" label="Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="36700" end="36715" title="Sufism" label="Sufi literature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36873" end="36877" title="Prophets and messengers in Islam#Prophets and messengers" label="last"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="36899" end="36903" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762323" start="36913" end="36919" title="Gospel in Islam" label="Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q837443" start="36959" end="36969" title="Mosaic Law" label="Mosaic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="37079" end="37086" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="37577" end="37591" title="Christological" label="Christological"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="37731" end="37745" title="Trinitarianism" label="Trinitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q642420" start="37850" end="37856" title="Christ (title)" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37948" end="37966" title="Messiah#Christianity" label="Christian concepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421977" start="38019" end="38025" title="Messiah in Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q641922" start="38140" end="38152" title="Anointing" label="one anointed"/>
<link wikidata="Q335414" start="38388" end="38401" title="Tafsir" label="Quran exegete"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115112" start="38402" end="38417" title="Mahmud al-Alusi" label="Mahmud al-Alusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q70899" start="39095" end="39099" title="Adam" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932888" start="39516" end="39524" title="Muhammad in Islam" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932888" start="39564" end="39572" title="Muhammad in Islam" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="39590" end="39595" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40007" end="40012" title="Ahmad#Interpretations and meaning of Ahmad" label="Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138823" start="40063" end="40068" title="Ḥ-M-D" label="h-m-d"/>
<link wikidata="Q266273" start="40075" end="40094" title="Semitic root" label="triconsonantal root"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="40205" end="40218" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q864658" start="40246" end="40255" title="Paraclete" label="Paraclete"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="40288" end="40302" title="Gospel of John" label="Gospel of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q235662" start="40712" end="40719" title="Sura 61" label="Sura 61"/>
<link wikidata="Q406294" start="40772" end="40777" title="Ahmad" label="Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q266273" start="40810" end="40824" title="triconsonantal" label="triconsonantal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138823" start="40830" end="40835" title="Ḥ-M-D" label="Ḥ-M-D"/>
<link wikidata="Q334847" start="40869" end="40878" title="Ibn Ishaq" label="Ibn Ishaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436115" start="40913" end="40930" title="Prophetic biography" label="Sirat Rasul Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q346730" start="40948" end="40964" title="Alfred Guillaume" label="Alfred Guillaume"/>
<link wikidata="Q630281" start="41052" end="41061" title="Messianism" label="Messianic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="41062" end="41069" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="41077" end="41081" title="Sufism" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="41086" end="41099" title="Ismailism" label="Isma&amp;#x27;ili"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="41126" end="41131" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="41133" end="41145" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="41150" end="41157" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251388" start="41182" end="41191" title="Continuum (theory)" label="continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="41327" end="41340" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="41371" end="41376" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q616342" start="41378" end="41388" title="Son of Man" label="Son of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="41427" end="41433" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q472768" start="41435" end="41445" title="Son of God" label="Son of God"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41453" end="41468" title="Holy Spirit#Islam" label="the Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q37302" start="41508" end="41523" title="the Holy Spirit" label="the Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="41857" end="41870" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q26403" start="41959" end="41968" title="Pharisees" label="Pharisees"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="41989" end="41994" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q616342" start="42048" end="42062" title="Son of Man" label="the Son of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q472768" start="42115" end="42129" title="the Son of God" label="the Son of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q37302" start="42214" end="42229" title="the Holy Spirit" label="the Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="43098" end="43104" title="Hadith" label="Hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="43732" end="43745" title="Second coming" label="Second coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="43758" end="43774" title="Eastern Churches" label="Eastern Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3602186" start="43910" end="43928" title="hadith collections" label="hadith collections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050887" start="44103" end="44117" title="al-Shahrastani" label="al-Shahrastani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119296" start="44343" end="44358" title="Nahj al-Balagha" label="Nahj al-Balagha"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="44378" end="44381" title="Ali" label="Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q170046" start="44770" end="44790" title="Ja&amp;#x27;far al-Sadiq" label="Ja&amp;#x27;far al-Sadiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q482353" start="45549" end="45568" title="Al-Qadi al-Nu&amp;#x27;man" label="Qadi al-Nu&amp;#x27;man"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="45600" end="45614" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid period"/>
<link wikidata="Q482353" start="45826" end="45846" title="Al-Qadi al-Nu&amp;#x27;man" label="Qadi al- Nu&amp;#x27;man"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="46051" end="46055" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q482353" start="46186" end="46205" title="Al-Qadi al-Nu&amp;#x27;man" label="Qadi al-Nu&amp;#x27;man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768161" start="46255" end="46262" title="Abraham in Islam" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="46272" end="46275" title="Ali" label="Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="46319" end="46327" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q180123" start="46337" end="46343" title="Fatimah" label="Fatima"/>
<link wikidata="Q43347" start="47039" end="47043" title="Rumi" label="Rumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q46420" start="47288" end="47297" title="Ibn Arabi" label="Ibn Arabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201335" start="47315" end="47332" title="Al-Insān al-Kāmil" label="Al-Insān al-Kāmil"/>
<link wikidata="Q46420" start="47778" end="47787" title="Ibn Arabi" label="Ibn Arabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="47800" end="47810" title="al-Andalus" label="Andalusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="47825" end="47831" title="mysticism" label="mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="47958" end="47965" title="Asceticism" label="ascetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="47970" end="47976" title="mysticism" label="mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9546" start="48014" end="48024" title="Al-Ghazali" label="Al-Ghazali"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="48300" end="48305" title="Sufism" label="Sufic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46420" start="48428" end="48437" title="Ibn Arabi" label="Ibn Arabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q271474" start="49025" end="49044" title="Joseph of Arimathea" label="Joseph of Arimathea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125226" start="49307" end="49332" title="Ten Lost Tribes" label="ten lost tribes of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="49370" end="49377" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="49476" end="49482" title="Hadith" label="Hadith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49753" end="49778" title="#Second Coming" label="Jesus&amp;#x27; second coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q469925" start="50200" end="50224" title="Ghil&amp;#x27;ad Zuckermann" label="Zuckermann, Ghil&amp;#x27;ad"/>
<link wikidata="Q109964" start="50245" end="50260" title="folk etymology" label="Etymythological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433373" start="50261" end="50269" title="Othering" label="Othering"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="50328" end="50335" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="50337" end="50342" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="50347" end="50359" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="50447" end="50455" title="Language" label="Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="50460" end="50468" title="Religion" label="Religion"/>
</links>
</doc>
