<doc id="610845" wikidata="Q822620" url="?curid=610845" title="Urban forestry">
<text>Urban forestry is the care and management of single trees and tree populations in urban settings for the purpose of improving the urban environment. Urban forestry involves both planning and management, including the programming of care and maintenance operations of the urban forest. Urban forestry advocates the role of trees as a critical part of the urban infrastructure. Urban foresters plant and maintain trees, support appropriate tree and forest preservation, conduct research and promote the many benefits trees provide. Urban forestry is practiced by municipal and commercial arborists, municipal and utility foresters, environmental policymakers, city planners, consultants, educators, researchers and community activists.

== Benefits ==
=== Environmental and health impacts ===

Heat waves cause 1,300 deaths each year in the United States alone, which is more than any other weather-related event. As temperatures continue to rise due to global warming, we can expect to see this number increasing in coming years. The risk is exacerbated for low-income households who do not have access to air conditioning, as well as heat-sensitive populations such as the elderly, infants, and those who have chronic health problems. Urban forests mitigate the effects of urban heat island through evapotranspiration and the shading of streets and buildings. Reforesting a 10-meter radius corresponds to 0.7 degree Celsius decrease in daytime air temperature, compared to a 1.3 degree decrease in a 30-meter radius, and over 1.5 degrees in a 60 or 90 meter radius. This reduces the risk of heat stroke, decreases cooling costs, and improves general well-being. Trees have saved 1,200 lives annually in the U.S, by preventing heat related deaths. Urban forests improve air quality by absorbing pollutants such as ozone, nitrogen dioxide, ammonia, and particulate matter as well as performing carbon sequestration. Communities with better air quality measures demonstrate lower levels of childhood asthma. Urban forestry can be an important tool for stormwater management as trees intercept rainwater in the canopy, and can slow down, filter and pump water back into the atmosphere via their roots. Other benefits include noise control, traffic control, and glare and reflection control.

=== Mental health impacts ===
Forests that have been included in urban environments have shown beneficial effects for the residents who live there. Urban forestry has been shown to promote psychological healing, stress recovery, and to improve concentration and productivity.

A 2018 study asked low income residents of Philadelphia &quot;how often they felt nervous, hopeless, restless, depressed and worthless.&quot; As an experimental mental health intervention, trash was removed from vacant lots. Some of the vacant lots were &quot;greened&quot;, with plantings of trees, grass, and small fences. Residents near the &quot;greened&quot; lots who had incomes below the poverty line reported a decrease in feelings of depression of 68%, while residents with incomes above the poverty line reported a decrease of 41%. Removing trash from vacant lots without installing landscaping did not have an observable mental health impact.

Urban forests and green spaces have been associated with milder ADHD symptoms. Children with ADHD struggle with directed attention - a type of attention that is a part of the theory of attention restoration. Directed attention entails &quot;periods of deliberate focus&quot; and requires breaks to continue productivity.

A case study conducted in Belgrade, Serbia evaluated the mental health benefits of The Faculty Urban Forest for a younger population. Time spent in an arboretum is shown to benefit mental health by lowering depression, anxiety, and stress. An ideal forest environment for psychological improvement should have an extensive assortment of coniferous and broadleaved species displaying vibrant colors. These conditions provide a multitude of sensory experiences, which can be experienced with infrastructure such as benches, picnic tables, and pavilions. It is important to provide handicap-accessible options and locate urban forests close to public transportation so that they can support daily visits and restorative experiences for all.

=== Tree canopy inequity ===
Urban tree canopy inequity is defined by American Forests as the uneven distribution of urban trees in neighborhoods that are socioeconomically disadvantaged.  These neighborhoods that lack sufficient canopy cover compared to areas that have access to suitable canopy cover, experience inaccessibility to the benefits that trees provide, and other social inequalities. Many of the neighborhoods that are most impacted by this inequity are where minorities and impoverished populations reside.  This inequity of the urban tree canopy is caused by many social factors, such as environmental racism, which is environmental injustice that largely impacts racial groups by policies or practices, such as redlining policies. This resulted in the trend that poorer and predominantly minority neighborhoods experience less canopy cover.

This inequitable distribution of canopy cover in lower socioeconomic neighborhoods has resulted in many social impacts that raise environmental justice concerns.  Urban tree canopy inequity limits the access to the beneficial ecosystem services that trees provide.  Populations that do not live in neighborhoods with suitable canopy cover do not experience the protection from the impacts of climate change and the urban heat island effect, air and water pollution, trapping of rainfall surface runoff, and energy savings on air conditioning from tree shade. These populations also do not benefit from the psychological benefits that trees provide, such as having areas that increase social cohesion and congregation, recreation, and nature aesthetics. An example of other social benefits associated with urban tree canopy includes a research study reviewed by The Children &amp; Nature Network, an organization active in the movement of connecting children and their families to nature. Researchers conclude that there is a positive relationship between academic performance and tree cover and species composition, indicating that tree cover and species composition have a positive effect on the academic performance of primary school-aged children, especially those enrolled in socio-economically challenged schools.

There are many environmental impacts that are associated with the inequity of the urban tree canopy.  A lack of trees in neighborhoods and a heavy presence of impervious surfaces such as houses, sidewalks, and parking lots, contribute to the heat island effect and there is a lack of temperature moderation. In these areas, temperatures are more extreme.  Without the presence of trees, there would be poor air quality and an increase in air pollution as trees remove carbon and pollutants from the air through sequestration, and storing it in their structures. A lack of trees would also result in the risk of chemicals and other harmful pollutants entering water sources and collecting on sidewalks and roads, as they would not be present to increase infiltration and to help reduce and manage rainwater runoff. Biodiversity and habitat for animals decline in these areas as trees are not available for animals and plants to utilize.

As urban tree canopy inequity remains present in lower-socioeconomically disadvantaged neighborhoods, impacting the livelihoods and environmental state of these areas and populations, efforts are being made by urban foresters, city officials, and organizations to address this problem and present solutions.  Examples of these efforts include the United States Forest Service outreach and education programs.  Organizations such as Casey Tree&#x27;s Community Tree Planting projects, the Greening of Detroit program, and American Forests help to implement programs and initiatives within cities and neighborhoods to engage volunteers, preserve and care for the urban forest and promote educational and career opportunities for the public. Case studies, such as one based in Washington D.C., analyze and contribute to the knowledge of urban tree canopy inequity by utilizing various methods including interviews, collaboration with private and public organizations, and community outreach that are successful and help present solutions for urban tree canopy inequity. The use of online applications such as i-Tree and its associated tree and forest assessment tools, and Tree Equity Score, along with many others, assist urban foresters, professionals, and students in conducting research on urban areas and presenting planning solutions to urban tree canopy inequity.

==== Inequities in environmental and health impacts ====

In the 1930s as part of the New Deal, the federal government started implementing unfair redlining policies, which classified certain neighborhoods as &quot;risky&quot; areas for banks and mortgage lenders to approve in funding home investments. Demographics of these communities typically included higher percentages of Black, African American, and Latino community members. These redlining policies led to overall lack in investment in these areas, including lack of equitable investment in environmental resources. There remain lower percentages of tree canopy coverage in nearly every U.S. city that had formerly redlined neighborhoods, including the three most populous U.S. cities, New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles. People living in urban communities with significantly lower percentages of urban trees do not benefit from the same environmental and health impacts as those in communities with greater tree populations.

In New York, specifically, the South Bronx has far fewer trees than New York City neighborhoods with higher income levels. Tree canopy coverage in the Bronx, in general, is the lowest of all five New York City boroughs. There is only 19.86% canopy coverage provided by street trees, which is much lower than the citywide average of 23.98%. The New York City Department of Health&#x27;s Heat Vulnerability Index (HVI) measures how the risk of heat related illness and death differs across city neighborhoods, and it shows that New York City neighborhoods that are more heat-vulnerable, such as those in the South Bronx, tend to have lower tree canopy coverage. Populations living in these communities are at greater risk for heat related illness, such as heat stroke, or death due to heat waves. Health outcomes associated with air pollution, such as asthma, are also worse off in neighborhoods with lower tree canopy coverage. In the Bronx, childhood asthma rates are disproportionately high. Children in the Bronx visit the emergency room for asthma 2x the rate of children in other boroughs. There are approximately 17% of children (age 13 and younger) suffering from asthma in the Bronx, compared to the citywide average of 11%.

=== Impacts on wildlife ===
Urban forests in the built environment affect urban wildlife in several ways. An urban habitat can impact wildlife behavior significantly and can alter the ecology of urban wildlife, influencing these organisms&#x27; behavior. The interactions between humans and wildlife and the impacts of urbanization on these wildlife populations influence cities across the world.

==== Disturbances ====
Disturbances in urban forests are known for occurring more frequently and with higher intensities than in nature. Changes in the urban landscape can lead to greater competition for resources among species on fragmented areas of land, leading to more stress for urban wildlife. Urban wildlife is also exposed to warmer temperatures as well as higher levels of pollution as cities alter the natural environment significantly.

The construction of urban infrastructure requires deforestation, leveling, and other activities that lead to habitat fragmentation, reduced genetic diversity, and changes in behavior. Urban wildlife is also exposed to higher amounts of toxic substances, including heavy metals, road treatments, or pesticides from lawns that can lead to abnormal reproduction or development. Consumption of prey species by domesticated pets, such as dogs and cats, also leads to an increased mortality rate in urban habitats. Urban forests are essential to creating habitats for wildlife within cities, and many species have adapted to living in the disturbed conditions of the built environment by utilizing urban green-spaces. Research has shown diverse green-spaces to be better suited for wildlife. For example, in Krakow, Poland, the species richness of owls was higher in parts of the city with varied land uses than more homogeneous areas. Additional support for land-use diversity in urban areas is provided in a study showing the importance of leaving dead and decaying trees on the landscape for wildlife habitat.

Urban forests can alter natural diets by providing dietary supplements to wildlife in the form of fruit or nut-producing ornamental plants, trash, or even domestic pets like cats. By examining coyote scat and using stable isotope analysis, it was estimated that about 22% of the scat or 38% of the urban coyote diet was from human-created sources. Wildlife is also attracted to urban forests for their increased surface waters due to reduced runoff in these areas. Having wildlife interacting around humans in urban areas can create conflicts between humans and animals. A case study in Aspen, Colorado observed the foraging habits of bears, tracking their movements using GPS collars, and found that bears visited forested areas in the city with fruit-bearing trees for food. Alternatively, in a study on the behavioral ecology of urban deer populations, the authors discussed the difficulty of managing this species due to its positive public perception as an aesthetically pleasing animal. Proper species selection, placement of trees, and other urban forest management strategies can be utilized to mitigate human-wildlife conflicts in cities.

===Ecosystem Services===
==== Cultural Services ====
Cultural services are non-material benefits (such as aesthetics and spiritual enrichment) that can be obtained from an ecosystem. Certain tree species have cultural value to different groups of people, and different tree species provide a range of different aesthetic values. The tree species that urban foresters plant affect many cultural benefits provided by urban forestry, such as an increase in physical health, psychological health, social health, property values, community economic development, and tourism. Understanding the values and interests of the different stakeholders in the community can help improve the cultural services provided through urban forestry.

==== Regulating Services ====
Trees are important in regulating ecosystem processes; they contribute to filtering air pollution, microclimate regulation, carbon dioxide sequestration, and reducing climate change. Trees can reduce the urban heat island effect through shading paved areas, aiding in airflow, and evapotranspiration. When planted and managed properly, these cooling benefits extend past the city itself. If not planted in locations ideal for their survival, trees will be vulnerable to disease. Diseased trees provide decreased ecosystem services, making it important for urban forestry to be a part of the planning and management of the urban canopy. Trees in urban environments can also aid in stormwater management and reduce the risk of flash floods by intercepting rainfall in the tree canopy. Tree canopy interception can also minimize the amount of sediment and nutrient contamination that occurs downstream. This is now a focus in cities around the world through using water sensitive urban design (WSUD) in urban forestry. Urban forests protect watershed health by utilizing riparian and street buffering with urban forestry practices.

==== Provisioning Services ====
There are many different tree species that provide provisioning services in the urban forest. These services have a variety of names, including urban agriculture and edible green infrastructure. Wild food products produced from trees pose a variety of benefits to the residents in that area. They can supply food to local residents and wildlife and increase biodiversity in the community. These trees can be harvested by local residents with minimal education on urban foraging. Some examples of urban agriculture are fruit trees and rooftop gardens. While fruit trees can provide produce and many other benefits, they can also create a mess if the produce is not harvested and fruit is left on the ground. Proper pruning can help reduce the mess created but not eliminate it. An urban forest that can provide produce significantly cuts down on food transportation from distant farms and therefore lowers carbon emissions annually. Urban wood utilization is an often overlooked provisioning service. Almost 70% of urban wood is wasted while only 25% is recycled and/or reused. Urban wood that is reused can be turned into useful products, such as furniture or bioenergy.

==== Supporting Services ====
The supporting ecosystem services are necessary for the production of all other ecosystem services. Some of these services include biomass production, nutrient cycling, soil formation, and biodiversity. Additionally, proper management of urban forests can provide habits for native wildlife, including endangered species. Urban forests that include a large range of native and exotic trees provide a large range of habitats for wildlife. It has been shown in Sweden that certain endangered bird species mainly inhabit urban forests where certain trees are planted. One Swedish city contains two thirds of the red-list endangered species of the area by including endangered plants and habitats for endangered wildlife.

== Wildlife Habitat Management ==
The urban forest provides habitat for many wildlife species, including song birds, squirrels and other small mammals, and insects. The urban forest provides the basics that animals need for survival; food, water, shelter, and space or habitat. Fruit or mast producing trees provide food sources, trees and other vegetation provide shelter and habitats, and artificial water sources in cities and their parks provide water. The urban forest can be planned and managed in the context of the wildlife populations in the area, increasing the population of desired species or decreasing the population of undesirable or invasive ones based on the biological and/or cultural carrying capacity of the municipality.

=== Biodiversity and Threatened/Endangered Species ===
Biodiversity has been declining across the world due to climate change, deforestation, and the destruction of critical habitats. Preserving and bolstering biodiversity ensures that ecosystems of all kinds are functioning properly, and we can thus reap the benefits of ecosystem services. Urbanization holds potential solutions to achieve high levels of biodiversity when managed correctly. In the United States, the Endangered Species Act&#x27;s language acts as a means to protect not only listed species but also the conservation of their habitats to sustain them, many of which are found in urban areas. Multiple transcontinental research projects on urban wildlife have found that there is a consistent positive correlation between human population density and species richness across all vertebrate taxonomic groups. Urban areas provide and maintain a mosaic of diverse wildlife habitat to support existing and introduced fauna. Urban Forestry Management Plans in conjunction with Wildlife Management Plans can support and improve urban biodiversity by including following attributes: routine tree inventories to identify a biodiversity baseline for goal setting, intentional tree planting of hardy species to promote biodiversity, and lastly to focus on the preservation and improvement of urban parks and woodlots as vital wooded and edge habitats. Challenges to managing for biodiversity and endangered species include the difficulties in creating and managing artificial, fragmented, yet diverse habitat types simultaneously in the context of social problems such as poverty and crime.

=== Undesirable and Invasive Species ===
Invasive species are nonnative plants, animals, microbial pathogens, and fungi that cause damage environmentally and/or economically. These species are having a number of negative effects on our forests, both wild and urban, from being a nuisance to compromising and killing native trees. Oftentimes, invasive species are introduced via urban areas that serve as transportation hubs, meaning that the urban forest is typically the first to be affected by them, and can also serve as the first line of defense to keep them from invading native forests. Without one of the basics of survival, undesirable wildlife cannot inhabit the area. Trees and vegetation can be altered to decrease habitat space and fewer fruit producing trees could be planted or fruit could be cleaned up to limit food sources. In response to the growing prevalence, many municipalities have begun planting disease and pest resistant cultivars, such as modified American Elms and Ash trees to prevent the spread of the fungal Dutch Elm Disease and Emerald Ash Borer infestations, respectively. There are also rising regulations against the planting of invasive tree species that are harmful to the naturally occurring ecosystems because they can out compete native species for resources or attract undesirable wildlife. In April 2019, the state of Indiana enacted the Terrestrial Plants Rule, banning 44 invasive nursery species that cause harm to the urban forest and attract undesirable wildlife, including tree-of-heaven, honeysuckle and autumn olive. The Bradford Pear, a common landscape tree, has been banned from the state of Ohio, and the cities of Charlotte, North Carolina and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, as they are known to spread quickly, crowding out native vegetation types from grasses to hardwood trees, further fragmenting and damaging the habitat of native animals as well.

=== Social impact ===
Urban forest related events such as planting festivals can significantly reduce social isolation problems, enhance people&#x27;s experience and raise environmental awareness. Urban forests also encourage more active lifestyles by providing space for exercise and are associated with reduced stress and overall emotional well-being. Urban forests may also provide products such as timber or food, and deliver economic benefits such as increased property values and the attraction of tourism, businesses and investment. Street trees, if managed and cared for, are beneficial in creating sustainable and healthy communities.

==== Case study ====
The City of Denver Department of Parks and Recreation website hosts interactive online tools that allow residents to view the financial impact to their neighborhoods directly related to healthy tree planting. In the Washington-Virginia Vale neighborhood the city website cites 2,002 individual trees as having been planted and maintained by the City Forester. These trees are believed to bring in an annual ecosystem benefit of $159,521. This is mostly wrapped up in property benefits, which cite a contribution to this total of $143,331. The majorities of these trees are between 0 and 12 feet tall and are a mix of mostly Elm, Maple, Pine, and Locust species.

=== Economic impacts ===

==== Lifespan value ====
Trees serve an economical function within the urban forest, providing various monetary benefits. It is estimated that there are around 3.8 billion trees in urban areas around the United States, equating to $2.4 trillion in overall structural value. In addition, environmental and social benefits such as air quality, climate change, water flow, real estate, and even community well-being can be quantified to determine their economical impact. Examples of the economic values created by the urban forest includes an annual $4.7 billion of air pollution removal, $3.8 billion in carbon sequestration. Additionally, recreational experiences have the potential to surpass $2 billion in annual value. Furthermore, while these are national estimates for the United States, all of these estimates may vary by location.

The value of an urban forest is estimated by quantifying social and ecosystem services, then assigning those services monetary worth, which are often based on market value. Modeling tools, such as i-Tree, are used by urban foresters to accurately assess the effects of an urban forest&#x27;s structure; this information is used to quantify ecosystem services and ultimately the economic value of the forest across a variety of locations. By creating these models, urban foresters are able to quantify and communicate the value of the urban forest to stakeholders and the general public. These evaluations can be used to influence the amount of money allocated to tree management by the government and general populace. Trees may live a long and healthy life if they continue to receive proper management in the form of maintenance and pruning, which sustains the value of the urban forest. Moreover, after death, trees have the potential to remain profitable to the community— if utilized correctly.

==== Post life value ====
Typically, wood products such as lumber and wood pellets are associated with rural forestry and logging. Annually, urban forestry creates 14.8 metric tons of wood waste in the United States through pruning and removal. Within urban forestry there are initiatives to use this waste as wood products such as fuel, lumber, art, and more. These initiatives seek to extend the value of urban trees after their lives. One such initiative is the Virginia Urban Wood Group, a nonprofit with the mission to, &quot;enhance the quality of life through the Stewardship of our Commonwealth&#x27;s urban and community trees.&quot; The Virginia Urban Wood Group promotes the production and sale of wood products sourced from urban wood waste. The group connects governmental and commercial professionals such as arborists, municipal foresters, mills, carpenters, and more. Another group contributing to the urban wood waste industry is Wisconsin Urban Wood. This group collects suitable removed trees from local businesses and arborists and sells the wood to local mills. While urban lumber may not be as high of a grade quality as forest grown lumber, these products are suitable for smaller projects such as woodworking and artisan furniture. Some localities use their urban lumber to reduce costs on amenity construction— they use their wood to build their picnic tables and benches. Additionally, some urban wood initiatives seek the use of reclaimed wood to decrease the use of freshly cut lumber.

== Practice ==
Urban forestry is a practical discipline, which includes Tree planting, care, and protection, and the overall management of trees as a collective resource. The urban environment can present many arboricultural challenges such as limited root and canopy space, poor soil quality, deficiency or excess of water and light, heat, pollution, mechanical and chemical damage to trees, and mitigation of tree-related hazards. Among those hazards are mostly non-immediate risks like the probability that individual trees will not withstand strong winds (as during a thunderstorm) and damage parking cars or injure passing pedestrians.

Although quite striking in an urban environment, large trees in particular present a continuing dilemma for the field of urban forestry due to the stresses that urban trees undergo from automobile exhaust, constraining hardscape and building foundations, and physical damage (Pickett et al. 2008). Urban forestry also challenges the arborists that tend the trees. The lack of space requires greater use of rigging skills and traffic and pedestrian control. The many constraints that the typical urban environment places on trees limits the average lifespan of a city tree to only 32 years – 13 years if planted in a downtown area – which is far short of the 150-year average life span of trees in rural settings (Herwitz 2001).

Management challenges for urban forestry include maintaining a tree and planting site inventory, quantifying and maximizing the benefits of trees, minimizing costs, obtaining and maintaining public support and funding, and establishing laws and policies for trees on public and on private land. Urban forestry presents many social issues that require addressing to allow urban forestry to be seen by the many as an advantage rather than a curse on their environment. Social issues include under funding which leads to inadequate maintenance of urban trees. In the UK the National Urban Forestry Unit produced a series of case studies around best practice in urban forestry which is archived here .
=== Training and Credentials ===
Within the profession and practice of urban forestry, training and credentials are often a prerequisite to proper and efficient management. Skills within urban forestry may consist of community-based tree stewardship, restoration of neglected spaces, urban canopy monitoring and maintenance, and building social cohesion in urban neighborhoods. Higher education, field experience, and credentials are used to effectively develop and verify these goals. Achievement of the above training can provide prospects for commercial or governmental career opportunities such as a Certified Arborist, Certified Forester, Urban Forester, Professional Consulting Forester, Forestry Technician, and many more.

Higher education in urban forestry is a method of training for aspiring urban foresters. Careers in urban forestry often require higher education that concentrates in urban forestry, arboriculture, forestry, horticulture, natural resource management, urban planning, and environmental science. These interdisciplinary educational disciplines provide crucial knowledge for urban foresters including collecting attribute data of the urban forest and the implementation of best management practices. Precise data on the urban forest is often scarce and not up-to-date due to the difficulty of traditional sampling approaches. Higher education provides insight to modernized technologies that analyze the urban forest, such as remote sensing, and generates accurate data with more precise details on urban tree canopy, individual tree metrics, species, and age structures. The aforementioned educational training creates a path to becoming a credible urban forester.

While in-classroom education is one method of training, experiential learning is highly recommended in order to hone the more technical aspects of the field, such as tree inventory, planting, and pest management. This field work also extends to training social skills. Community and client-based relationships often require a certain social expertise to resolve conflict. Through field training and client interaction, skills in conflict management are acquired. This may include, but not limited to effective listening, participatory planning, and leadership. Social engagement is increasingly necessary when working with marginalized communities, formatting budget plans, managing aesthetics, and other urban forestry responsibilities. Through internships, job experience, and field training opportunities, many skills are developed that are crucial for professions in urban forestry.

Earning credentials and certifications through professional organizations, such as the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) and the Tree Care Industry Association (TCIA), are often specific qualifications for becoming an urban forester. The ISA, for example, is a global organization that offers an array of certifications and qualifications, including ISA Certified Arborist. According to a 2020 survey, urban forestry employers desired most employees who possessed the ISA Certified Arborist credential, followed by a commercial pesticide applicator license, and a commercial driver&#x27;s license. It should be recognized that such credentials require a minimum time period of on-the-job training followed by a written and/or practical exam. To accomplish certifications such as these, online course material and tangible study guides can be purchased, such as through the ISA&#x27;s website. After thorough review, computer-based and paper exams can be taken to officially earn a certain credential. As urban forestry focuses on the extensive management of trees, it is important to note that these organizations are geared to credentialing arborists, or those who manage trees intensively. The TCIA is another professional organization that sets standards for tree firms and provides education and information through publications, conferences, and workshops. While the TCIA is designed to provide tree care firms with training and certification, certain programs, such as the Electrical Hazards Awareness Program (EHAP), may benefit those in urban forestry. An urban forester who directly manages street trees, for example, may find the EHAP useful, for their management decisions because street trees are often affected by overhead and/or underground utilities.

Higher education, field work, and credentials are all methods of training that provide experiences for someone pursuing a career in urban forestry. This training is crucial to establishing trust among urban forest stakeholders and withholding professionalism in the urban forest industry.

=== Street trees ===
A street tree is any tree that is growing in a city thoroughfare, whether between the sidewalk and the curb or in an unimproved right-of-way. Street trees provide valuable ecosystem services including stormwater mitigation, air pollutant removal, and shade to mitigate the urban heat island effect. Since street trees are often planted in areas with a high percentage of impervious surfaces, they are an important fraction of an area&#x27;s overall urban tree cover. When planting street trees, there are many factors to consider and difficulties to overcome. Depending on climate, soil moisture, nutrient dynamic, and location much planning goes into planting street trees. If done incorrectly these trees can cost a municipality time and money to maintain and remove. Urban site conditions, Species selection, and tree management are three key aspects of cultivating street trees.

Urban sites present many challenges to street trees because of their adverse conditions. Limited soil volume, high soil compaction, and intense microclimates are common where street trees are planted. Because of these adverse conditions, street trees typically have lower growth rates and lower survival rates than trees planted in nurseries or more natural settings. There are also conflicts between tree parts and urban infrastructure because of dense urban environments. Tree roots are known to inflict costly damage by fracturing pavement, which is a common cause for tree removal. In order to receive the full benefit of ecosystem services of street trees, urban foresters aim to minimize these conflicts and provide young trees with the highest opportunity to reach maturity.

A guiding principle of urban forestry is to plant the right tree in the right place. Certain species are more tolerant of adverse urban conditions than others, and urban foresters strive to select species that will maximize benefits and minimize costs for a specific site. For example, yellow-poplar (&quot;Liriodendron tulipifera&quot;) is known to be intolerant of poor urban soils, and therefore is rarely used as a street tree. There is no tree species perfectly suited for every site so characteristics of each species are scrutinized to determine their suitability for planting as a street tree. Some important characteristics of street tree species include tolerance of alkaline soils, compacted soils, low soil volume, de-icing salts, drought, and having good structure. Blackgum (&quot;Nyssa sylvatica&quot;) and swamp white oak (&quot;Quercus bicolor&quot;) are species renowned for their adaptability to urban environments, but even they have drawbacks such as Blackgum being difficult to transplant. The London plane (&quot;Platanus × hispanica&quot;) has been planted in cities all over the world, due to being highly tolerant of urban environments.

Planning is an important step in the establishment of street trees. Policies and guidelines are beneficial in the street tree planning process by lowering costs and improving the health and safety of a municipality. Studies have shown that municipalities that do not abide by policies and guidelines are shown to have higher costs in economic and environmental aspects. Models and formulas may also be used to warrant adequate species diversity for more resiliency to disturbances and stressors. An example of a formula that municipalities abide by in planning is Santamour&#x27;s 10-20-30 rule. This formula allows for no more than 10% of the same tree species, no more than 20% of the same genus, and no more than 30% of the same family. The Species Selection Model focuses on procedures that create a suitable street tree by surveying common species used in urban areas. The Analytic Hierarchy Process is a three layer structure that includes an objective, criteria, and factors. Some factors that may be included in street tree establishment are tree height, DBH, canopy density, and drought resistance. Planning for the physical tree planting should consider bare root and balled-and burlapped (B&amp;B) trees. When deciding upon bare root or B&amp;B, species, age, street traffic intensity, site type, wound presence, and dimensions of sidewalk pit cuts should be examined. Taking into account bare root and B&amp;B trees along with the above criteria are beneficial in the physical aspects of establishing street trees.

=== Case study: Nashville tree density increase bill ===

In late March 2019, the Nashville Metro Council announced its plan to cut down 21 cherry trees from Riverfront Park so that a temporary outdoor stage could be constructed for the NFL draft. Immediate public outcry from residents, including a Change.org petition that garnered over 80,000 signatures, pressured the city and the NFL to revise the plan so that only 10 trees would be uprooted and relocated, leaving the remaining ones untouched.

Following these events Vice Mayor Jim Shulman contacted the Nashville Tree Conservation Corps, a non-profit that &quot;works to promote, preserve, protect, and plant the tree canopy in Davidson County&quot; in order to prevent future incidents such as this one. Thanks to the efforts of the lead sponsor of the bill, council member Jeff Syracuse, and the Nashville Tree Conservation Corps, more than two years later on August 19, 2021, the new public tree bill BL2021-829 was signed into law.

BL2021-829 &quot;seeks to promote transparency and oversight within Metro departments regarding tree removal and replacement.&quot; The passage of the bill signaled the Nashville Metro Council&#x27;s commitment to maintaining urban green space as the city underwent a development boom. Starting in 2015, Nashville experienced a surge of construction projects that consisted of high rise residential towers to a $220 million office building. This development has shown no signs of slowing down, and if left unchecked runs the risk of actively contributing to the environmental degradation of the city.

The law specifically addresses the removal of public trees by requiring that the public be notified of their removal at least two weeks beforehand and that replacements are planted. Key features of the law include the formation of a Tree Working Group, which reviews tree-related policies, and a Tree Review Panel made up of representatives from Water, Parks, Codes, Transportation, General Services, Planning, and the Mayor&#x27;s Office who oversee public trees. It also mandates that a countywide tree canopy study be conducted every five years in order to keep accurate data on the public trees.

This kind of regulation of the city&#x27;s trees promises both environmental and social benefits. Maintaining a healthy population of public trees in cities helps to reduce the effect of environmental issues that are common in urban landscapes, such as air pollution and waste heat. Prioritizing tree growth also supports biophilic urban design, which has shown to have health benefits and facilitate stronger social and emotional connections among people.

== Planning ==

There are many benefits, costs, and challenges to planning an urban forest. Urban forests provide both ecosystem services and disservices that are considered prior to planning. Urban forests provide services such as improved air quality, noise reduction, temperature mitigation, and stormwater mitigation when they are placed in the right spot. Urban forest planning is used to maximize the benefits that trees provide by thoughtfully placing them in the best locations. Challenges that are faced during planning include managing the disservices from trees and valuating their services, the loss/replacement cost of green infrastructure, and the cost of remediating gray infrastructure interference. A major loss of green infrastructure could alter the sense of place, community identity, and social cohesion of a municipality.

When planning an urban forest there are several practices that can be used. Many municipalities put plans for an urban forest into an official document such as a master plan. While not every city can implement an urban forest plan, it is possible to implement plans for specific areas, such as parks, that would help increase the canopy cover of a municipality.

During the creation of the urban forest management plan, criteria and goals are usually outlined in the plan early in the planning process. Determining criteria is done by assessing the current state of the urban forest and then incorporating criteria for performance goals into the management plan. Assessment is the first step in planning and provides necessary information on the forest extent, age distribution, tree health, and species diversity. Once the assessment is completed, the next step becomes deciding what criteria—or indicators—to incorporate into the plan so that there are set performance goals. Incorporating indicators into the management plan makes it easier to track the progress of the urban forest and whether goals are being met. Criteria/indicators typically focus on a category of urban forest management and usually include subjects such as:

* The urban forest vegetation and its characteristics such as canopy cover, age distributions, and species diversity.
* Having a community focus that involves industry cooperation, and community and stakeholder involvement.
* The planning of the urban forest and whether it is successful in the management and funding of the urban forest.

The incorporation of indicators into management plans are a strong aid in the implementation and revision of management plans and help reach the goals within the plan.

A key part of a master plan is to map spaces where trees will be planted. In the paper &quot;A methodology to select the best locations for new urban forests using multicriteria analysis&quot;, three different steps are outlined for determining tree planting areas. The first stage is an excluding stage, which uses a set of criteria to exclude poor locations and indicate potential locations for planting. Second is a suitability stage, which evaluates the potential locations to determine a more selective group of suitable spots. Finally, the feasibility stage is a final test to determine if the suitable locations are the most feasible planting areas with minimal site use conflicts.

The management of urban forest planning falls into many hands. During the writing process of a plan, the input from professionals and citizens are taken into consideration. When designing the plan and determining planting locations, landscape architects, arborists, and urban foresters provide valuable input and knowledge as to what trees to plant and where, in order to ensure an urban forest that is long lived and healthy. The public works department and planning commissioners also play a role in the process to make sure that no trees are planted where they may interfere with emergency practices, underground or above ground utilities, or safety of the public in any way. Planning for an urban forest involves input from a variety of people and the consideration of how trees affect the community they grow in.

=== Assessment ===

Urban forest assessment is a strategy that is used within broader management and planning operations that allows urban foresters to better understand and care for the forest resource at hand. It allows aspects of the forest, such as ecosystem services and benefits, species composition, canopy distribution, and health, to be monitored and predicted for current and future management needs. Data from urban forest assessments can prove to be useful in not only providing information for foresters but in quantifying benefits that can show members of the public the importance of preserving and protecting trees in urban forest settings. Urban forest assessments are becoming integral to trees in urban communities as they plan and care for their trees, an example being found within cities like Tallahassee, Florida that have incorporated assessment into their urban forest master plan. Within the United States, the USDA Forest Service has provided resources to inform foresters and community members about the importance of these assessments and the benefits to conducting them.

Urban forestry planning and management methods are key to creating and maintaining an urban forest that produces sustainable benefits for the surrounding community. Stakeholders, such as individual citizens, local volunteer groups, and political figures, can oftentimes be involved in the urban forest planning and management processes within municipalities. Urban forest assessments have the potential to increase urban forest economic, social, and cultural benefits to the community. Diverse stakeholder groups allow a comprehensive plan to develop with unique elements brought to attention by each group. Things included in an urban forest plan include land use, transportation, infrastructure, and green space because they all affect the urban forest structure. It will be determined per municipality why each of these is of certain importance and vice versa, as well as the proper actions to be taken to protect the urban forest function and role in the area.

An assessment must first be completed before any benefits are gained. There are generally two basic ways that urban forests are assessed. The bottom-up approach is a field inventory completed by crews on the ground. This process is detailed and can provide useful forest information needed for management decisions. The top-down approach utilizes aerial and satellite imagery to discern canopy cover, plantable space, and impervious surfaces at a low cost. There are different tools available to complete these assessments. i-Tree is a set of tools cooperatively created and maintained by the USDA Forest Service and other organizations. i-Tree Eco is commonly used for bottom-up approach assessment, and uses the field data collected by the user to quantify value and benefits of the trees. The i-Tree software also has tools helpful to top-down approaches. i-Tree Landscape uses National Land Cover Database (NLCD) along with other layers to provide information about canopy cover, plantable space, ecological benefits, and more. i-Tree Canopy allows the user to interpret aerial and satellite imagery to determine land cover on a smaller scale than landscape.

=== Impact of Climate Change ===

Cities and urban areas are more vulnerable to the growing impacts of climate change due to high amounts of paved surfaces, increased pollution, denser human population, and concentration of built structures. This leads to the urban heat island phenomena, in which urban areas with large amounts of impermeable, heat absorbing surfaces are measurably warmer than the surrounding areas, particularly those with more natural cover. As climate change impacts Earth, it will continue to disproportionately affect urban areas, and the warming will continue. This poses challenges for urban foresters as tree species will be pushed out of their species distribution as conditions change and become unfavorable. Trees and the urban canopy are vital in mitigating these heat effects and other challenges. They serve as an asset to the communities which is why planning and implementation of strategies to adapt are coming to the forefront.

Since cities are heavily impacted by climate change, urban forestry professionals need to adopt strategies that will lessen the effect of climate change on cities. Many cities have created management plans to address this issue. The city of Chicago, Illinois created a forest vulnerability assessment and synthesis in 2017 that looks at their current forest assessment and what the future could look like. They found that the species distribution will change for the native tree species and that stressors like drought, heat, and flooding will make the trees more vulnerable to pests and disease. A report published by the United States Department of Agriculture addresses the different ways that an urban forestry program can work to mitigate the impacts of climate change. Some strategies include maintaining natural order (restore riparian buffers and use prescribed fires), promote an integrated pest management program, sustain native animal habitat, and reduce landscape fragmentation among others. Another recent study points out that public action is also a large part of combating climate change. Those researchers note that an urban forestry program is only as strong as its community support, and if the public does not see the urgency of climate change and understand the science behind the program&#x27;s actions, then progress will be slow.

Strategically planting trees is a proven method of climate change adaptation and mitigation. The city of Houston has developed a simple yet effective framework for tree planting to fight the increasingly noticeable effects of climate change. Native &quot;super&quot;  tree species have been identified by a ranking system examining the highest combination of absorption of carbon dioxide, absorption other air pollutants, flood mitigation, and their ability to thrive under projected future climate conditions. Regions of the municipality experiencing disproportionately poor air quality, flooding, elevated heat, and high rates of health concerns are then mapped to plan for large-scale planting of ideal tree species. This framework can be altered and applied to any municipality to improve negative conditions worsened by climate change. The US Forest Service has also identified potential strategies for creating more resilient urban forests to be prepared for more unpredictable conditions. Important to this is the enhancement of taxonomic, structural, and functional diversity of trees in the urban forest. One way to accomplish diversity is through implementation of the 30-20-10 rule, which states that no more than 30% of the trees should belong to a single taxonomic family, no more than 20% of a single taxonomic genera, and no more than 10% a single taxonomic species.

== By country ==

=== Brazil ===

The Amazon rainforest is world famous for its ability to sequester carbon from our atmosphere. Since the 1960&#x27;s, cities were integrally linked with their surrounding forest in the Brazilian Amazonia. Modern urbanization has degraded forests, depleting ecosystem services that are vital to city functioning. Invasive species seem to be a large issue in Brazilian urban forest conservation. Exotic and invasive species are more common than native in 29 amazonian urban forests. 34.7% of all identified species are invasive, while 65.3% were native. Urban forest development and management in Brazil is supported by legislation. The 2012 Brazilian Forest code states that city halls can require green areas in residential allotments, commercial property, and in public infrastructure.

==== Curitiba&#x27;s RPPNM ====

Curitiba is internationally known as a pioneer city in conservationist efforts. Since 2006 Curitiba has instituted the Municipal Private Natural Heritage Reserves (RPPNM) project, allowing owners of relevant native areas within the city to turn them into privately owned natural reserves in exchange of being able to transfer that area&#x27;s constructive potential somewhere else. This means instead of building on an area of Atlantic Forest, the owner of such can add what could have been built there somewhere else, allowing the building to which the building potential was transferred to surpass the usual urbanistic height and density limit, thus preserving the forest and zeroing the urban impact. The project won 2006&#x27;s UNEP-Bayer Young Environmental Envoy programme.

=== Canada ===

With over 75% of Canadians in urban areas, urban forests play an important role in the daily lives of Canadian citizens. Urban forests provide numerous environmental and health benefits to the people of Canada. Over time, the use of urban forestry in Canada has changed. In the 1960s, Erik Jorgensen of the University of Toronto, coined the oxymoronic term &quot;urban forestry&quot; while assisting a master&#x27;s student with his curriculum. However, after this milestone in the urban forestry community, urban forestry faded to the background with few accounts of urban forestry being practiced. As urban forestry started gaining recognition globally and the importance of urban forestry was realized, Canada began creating Urban Forest Management Plans (UFMPs). These plans focus on maintenance, improving canopy cover, enhancing tree species diversity, and educational programs, without focus on economic or environmental services urban forests provide. Today, Canada is conducting studies to address the gaps within their urban forestry programs. Because urban forestry is practiced under different departments, labels, and disciplines, the true extent of urban forestry in Canada is unknown.

==== University of Toronto ====

The University of Toronto during the 1960s was home to some of the most significant forest pathology developments of the decade. Two professors at the university (Jorgensen, and media professor Marshall McLuhan), were given the catalyst to pioneer the discipline of &quot;urban forestry&quot; when the crisis of Dutch Elm Disease threatened 90% elm mono-culture at the university. What made this new discipline different from prior urban tree management strategies was the sense of scale. Prior to the 1960s urban trees were managed on a tree-by-tree basis. The Dutch Elm Disease finally convinced forest pathologists at the school to consider the urban forest on a systems level, where small changes can create forest-wide effects if not properly managed. In 1962 this thinking gave Jorgensen a convincing enough argument to secure funding for the world&#x27;s first &quot;Shade Tree Research Laboratory&quot; in an old dairy plant that the university owned. By 1965 the University of Toronto had its first official urban forestry course, called &quot;the Study of Urban Forestry&quot;, taught by Jorgensen. Only one year later department head, Dean Sisam, applied the term to the previously known courses of &quot;arboriculture and parks management&quot;, three years following that the university began creating diplomas for urban forestry; producing seven graduates by 1982. The University of Toronto&#x27;s program has continued and has grown significantly into current times, inspiring many other institutions to offer a similar diploma as the discipline diffused across the globe.

==== Erik Jorgensen ====

Erik Jorgensen began as a forest pathologist for the federal government in Denmark, he then moved to Toronto in 1959 to begin studies on Dutch Elm Disease (DED). Which at the time was spreading through North America at extreme rates and killing thousands of Elm trees in its path. He was a professor of Forest Pathology at the University of Toronto throughout the 1960s. While being interviewed for a newspaper article in 1969 he defined Urban Forestry as &quot;a specialized branch that has as its objective the cultivation and management of city trees&quot;. He continued his career at the University of Toronto and his laboratory became increasingly devoted to shade tree research in Canada. Jorgensen continued to define and justify the importance of Urban Forestry through his conference papers published in the Shade Tree Research Laboratory throughout the 70&#x27;s and 80&#x27;s. He ended up leaving the university in 1973 to lead a National Urban Forestry program in Ottawa, Canada.

=== China ===

==== Urban Green Space Development ====

With a rapidly growing population, China has started developing strategies to improve urban life. The concept &quot;making forests enter cities and making cities embrace forests&quot; has been promoted. The creation of the &quot;National Forest City&quot; title in 2004 has incentivized urban forest development. This program has led to significant positive changes in the quality and quantity of many Chinese cities. Currently, 58 cities have been awarded this title. While changes have been made, inequity of recreational green spaces may still be a challenge. In a case study of Wuhan, China, equal distribution of greenspaces was found, but there was unequal distribution of public parks. These findings suggest that some social groups and populations cannot equally enjoy the recreational and health benefits of these public greenspaces.

==== Nanjing ====

Nanjing Vertical Forest Project, designed by Stefano Boeri of Stefano Boeri Architetti, consists of two towers: one 200 meter tower that will hold office spaces, a museum, a rooftop club, and a green architecture school while the other 108-meter tower that will include a Hyatt hotel and swimming pool. With construction now complete, native trees, shrubs, and perennials are being installed. 600 tall trees, 200 medium-sized trees and 2,500 cascading plants and shrubs will be planted on the building facades. It is expected to absorb 18 tonnes of while providing 16,5 tonnes of oxygen annually.

==== Shanghai ====

A 99 km long and 100 m wide forest belt surrounding the city of Shanghai was completed in 2003. The heat island issue has been significantly reduced.

Another pilot project by Shanghai Municipal Agricultural Commission aims to convert 35% of the total area of Shanghai to urban forest. A forest network of two rings, eight lines, five zones, multi-corridors, multi-grids, and one chain was introduced in the project, which means planting two ring-shaped forests, an inner ring 500 m wide by 97 km in length surrounding the central district, and an outer ring 180 km long in suburban land, eight longitudinal forest belts 1000 m wide along expressways and major rivers, five large forest parks about 30 km2 each in area scattered in the suburbs, multiple green corridors 25 to 500 m, grids of forests along the seashore and in industrial areas, and one chain linking various habitats.

=== Japan ===

In recent years, there has been significant national effort to deploy urban reforestation research initiatives in Japanese metropolitan areas. The current research evaluates tree count, species richness, and carbon sequestration capacity. The Tokyo area has planted 420,563 trees bordering 2,712 kilometers of streets. In 4,177 ha of urban parks in Tokyo, there are over 1.5 million trees planted. The urban forest in Tokyo is managed by the Japan Greenery Research and Development Center Foundation since 1973.

History:

The first planting of camphor trees alongside rural roads is estimated to have happened around the 3rd Century (AD). The first record of government policy ordering roadside tree planting was in 759 AD. Cherry, willow, and Japanese pagoda trees were planted adjacent Kyoto streets by the 9th century. In the Ginza area, cherry and pine trees were planted along sidewalks 5 meters apart in 1873. The growth of these trees, however, was unhealthy, so they were replaced with Shidareyanagi willow trees in 1880. Japanese maple was also one of the most popularly planted species. In 1907, the city of Tokyo did a massive urban planting of the most healthy and dependable street trees that had survived. Historically, the ginkgo was first a widely successful and popular street tree in Tokyo, which is why the tree is now planted along streets and in parks around the world.
In the late 60&#x27;s, street trees were used to solve urban environmental issues, such as air and noise pollution. The Tokyo Olympic Games also gave the government a valid reason to plant more trees in the city. There were 12,000 street trees planted in Tokyo by 1965. The species composition of street trees changed dramatically from 1980 to 1996. Dogwood, cherry, and Japanese zelkova trees skyrocketed in popularity and were extensively planted. There were 420,564 street trees planted in Tokyo by 1997.

=== India ===
The majority of Indian cities excluding Chandigarh and Canhinagar, have very low urban forest availability per capita compared to U.S., Australian, and European cities. There are, however, strong urban forestation initiatives in New Delhi, the capital of India. Currently, 20% of landcover in Delhi is green space. The parks and garden society is newly in charge of urban forestry initiatives. Two biodiversity parks and nine city forests have been constructed in Delhi, and there are still nine more city forests in the planning process. Roads in Dehli are identified by trees species planted beside them (e.g. Vigyan path with &quot;Toona ciliata).&quot;

Tree planting is promoted in the Gujarat state through association with religious practices in numerous belief systems. In the Puranas (religious Hindu text), each planet, constellation, and zodiac has its own preferred tree. Planting these trees is said to benefit human life and luck. In Gandhinagar city, six ha of land is planted with trees acknowledging these religious beliefs. It is a dedicated space for giving life and love to the trees for health and prosperity of the forest.

==== The Kerwa Forest Area ====

A case study performed on the Kerwa Forest Area, 10 km from the city of Bhopal, India, evaluated the effects of human impact and capacity of ecosystems services. Bhopal&#x27;s swift urbanization has negatively impacted ecosystems in the Kerfa Forest Area. Due to human impacts, there were very few ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration and biodiversity conservation, that were evident enough to be measured in the study. The forest is still able to filter stormwater and provide stable drinking water supplies for Bhopal city residents. 40% of Bhopal citizens rely on the Upper Lake, a reservoir that sits in a region of the Kerfa Forest, for drinking water. Forest degradation has increased runoff from the Kerwa Forest Area, which alters water quality in the lake. Direct overland flow transports excess nutrients from adjacent agricultural fields to the lake, which causes eutrophication and reduces lake biodiversity. The Kerfa Forest Area is under critical environmental stress and supplies ecosystem services necessary to the health and wellbeing of Bhopal residents.

==== Carbon Sequestration Potential ====

Native tree species in India have a large potential for carbon sequestration in urban areas with high greenhouse gas concentrations. A highly productive species of Teak trees (&quot;T. grandis)&quot; can sequester more carbon in less time than other native trees. Planting &quot;T. grandis&quot; in areas undergoing rapid urbanization can act as carbon sinks for excess carbon dioxide emissions. A mix of native species, however, is often ecologically more valuable and will provide more ecosystem services.

=== Scandinavia ===

==== History ====

Following urbanization in Europe, rapid city expansion resulted in forests being kept to the edge of cities, making the only urban greenspaces privately owned by monarchs, religious establishments, and other positions of power. Over time, as democracies began to emerge, the public was able to express interest in public recreational areas. Urban forest development was initially dictated by the wealthy and upper class society, yet in the second half of the 19th century, direct government intervention increased. At the same time, more urban greenspaces began opening to the public. The development of urban greenspaces led to a need for management of these areas, leading to the urban forester professions becoming commonplace. Forestry experts then became more involved in forest and green services management as localities and national forest services became responsible for these areas.

==== Practices ====

According to a study published in the Scandinavian Journal of Forest Research, an average of 53% of forest lands within any Danish municipality are owned by the municipality itself. While this number varies respectively as the size of a municipality increases and decreases, this average serves as a general statistic. When compared to the other Scandinavian countries, Denmark&#x27;s municipalities are unique in that they regularly buy and sell land to the private sector. This exchange of land results in various owners of the green spaces that reside within Denmark&#x27;s urbanized areas. Only around a quarter of municipalities in Denmark have woodland policies in place for managing their urban forests. The others either have a stand-alone policy (around 20%), or no policy at all (roughly 30%). In fairly recent years, the budget for parks and tree maintenance in most places seem to be steadily dwindling. Sweden as well has transitioned into more of a conservation and active management mindset. In Sweden, the urban forests and green spaces are classified into five zones based on size and use. After classification, recommendations for future improvements and management strategies are formed. In addition to urban zone classification, the use of i-tree inventory is also used for the assessment and management planning of their urban green spaces. Swedish municipalities are constantly innovating and adapting their managing strategies for the old growth forests in central urban areas and the younger forests on the outskirts.

==== Composition ====

Most of the species in Scandinavian urban forests are native, with a majority of people stating their preference for native species. Common species include Norway Spruce (Picea abies), Scots Pine (Pinus syl vestris), Silver Birch (Betula pendula), and Moor Birch (Betula pubescens). Urban forests also tend to be fairly irregular in age and tree placement, however general favor tends to be shown towards older trees. Visibility is rated as a priority in the design of these places, and is a common issue faced by managing officials. Between surveys conducted across Finland, Denmark, and Sweden, approximately 53% of Urban Canopy cover is managed directly by municipal governments, while the rest is under private ownership.

=== South Africa ===

==== History ====

Cape Town&#x27;s indigenous flora, fynbos, is characterized by low-lying shrubbery with few trees. In response to the Cape&#x27;s natural timber deficiency, alien tree species were introduced during the Dutch occupation, beginning in 1652, to support a growing population and economy. Foreign settlers planted trees in cities, alongside new roads and around private dwellings. Compelled by the need to support a growing population and economy, Cape foresters developed new methods for growing exotic trees in the new climate. These methods, which began in the Cape, later spread to other South African colonies. Many South African towns remain characterized by road-side rows of exotic trees, which were planted from as early as the 17th century.

=== United Kingdom ===

In the UK urban forestry was pioneered around the turn of the 19th century by the Midland reafforesting association, whose focus was in the Black Country. England&#x27;s Community Forests. programme was established in 1990 by the then Countryside Commission as a pilot project to demonstrate the potential contribution of environmental improvement to economic and social regeneration. Each Community Forest was established as a partnership between local authorities and local, regional and national partners including the Forestry Commission and Natural England. Collectively, this work has formed the largest environmental regeneration initiative in England. In the mid-1990s the National Urban Forestry Unit (NUFU) grew out of a Black Country Urban Forestry Unit and promoted urban forestry across the UK, notably including the establishment of the Black Country Urban Forest. As urban forestry become more mainstream in the 21st century, NUFU was wound up, and its advocacy role is now carried on by organisations such as The Wildlife Trusts and the Woodland Trust.

=== United States ===

==== History ====
Tree warden laws in the New England states are important examples of some of the earliest and most far-sighted state urban forestry and forest conservation legislation. In 1896, the Massachusetts legislature passed the first tree warden law, and the other five New England states soon followed suit: Connecticut, Rhode Island, and New Hampshire in 1901, Vermont in 1904, and Maine in 1919. (Kinney 1972, Favretti 1982, Campanella 2003).

As villages and towns grew in population and wealth, ornamentation of public, or common, spaces with shade trees also increased. However, the ornamentation of public areas did not evolve into a social movement until the late 18th century, when private individuals seriously promoted and sponsored public beautification with shade and ornamental trees (Favretti 1982, Lawrence 1995). Almost a century later, around 1850, institutions and organization were founded to promote ornamentation through private means (Egleston 1878, Favretti 1982). In the 1890s, New England&#x27;s &quot;Nail&quot; laws enabled towns to take definitive steps to distinguish which shade trees were public. Chapter 196 of the 1890 Massachusetts Acts and Resolves stated that a public shade tree was to be designated by driving a nail or spike, with the letter M plainly impressed on its head, into the relevant trunk. Connecticut passed a similar law in 1893, except its certified nails and spikes bore the letter C. (Northrup 1887).

The rapid urbanization of American cities in the late 19th century was a concern to many as encouraging intellectual separation of humanity and nature (Rees 1997). By the end of the 19th century, social reformers were just beginning to understand the relationship between developing parks in urban areas and &quot;[engendering] a better society&quot; (Young 1995:536). At this time, parks and trees were not necessarily seen as a way to allow urban dwellers to experience nature, but more of a means of providing mechanisms of acculturation and control for newly arrived immigrants and their children (e.g., areas to encourage &quot;structured play&quot; and thus serve as a deterrent for youth crime) (Pincetl and Gearin 2005). Other prominent public intellectuals were interested in exploring the synergy between ecological and social systems, including American landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted, designer of 17 major U.S. urban parks and a visionary in seeing the value of including green space and trees as a fundamental part of metropolitan infrastructure (Young 2009). To Olmsted, unity between nature and urban dwellers was not only physical, but also spiritual: &quot;Gradually and silently the charm comes over us; the beauty has entered our souls; we know not exactly when or how, but going away we remember it with a tender, subdued, filial-like joy&quot; (Beveridge and Schuyler 1983 cited in Young 2009:320). The conscious inclusion of trees in urban designs for American cities such as Chicago, San Francisco, and Minneapolis was also inspired by Paris&#x27;s urban forest and its broad, tree-lined boulevards as well as by the English romantic landscape movement (Zube 1973). The belief in green cover by early park proponents as a promoter of social cohesion has been corroborated by more recent research that links trees to the presence of stronger ties among neighbors, more adult supervision of children in outdoor areas, more use of the neighborhood common areas, and fewer property and violent crime (Kuo et al. 1998, Kuo and Sullivan 2001, Kuo 2003).

Many municipalities throughout the United States employ community-level tree ordinances to empower planning officials to regulate the planting, maintenance, and preservation of trees. The development of tree ordinances emerged largely as a response to the Dutch Elm Disease that plagued cities from the 1930s to 1960s, and grew in response to urban development, loss of urban tree canopy, and rising public concern for the environment (Wolf 2003). The 1980s saw the beginning of the second generation of ordinances with higher standards and specific foci, as communities sought to create more environmentally pleasing harmony between new development and existing infrastructure. These new ordinances, legislated by local governments, may include specific provisions such as the diameter of tree and percentage of trees to be protected during construction activities (Xiao 1995). The implementation of these tree ordinances is greatly aided by a significant effort by community tree advocates to conduct public outreach and education aimed at increasing environmental concern for urban trees, such as through National Arbor Day celebrations and the USDA Urban and Community Forestry Program (Dwyer et al. 2000, Hunter and Rinner 2004, Norton and Hannon 1997, Wall et al. 2006). Much of the work on the ground is performed by non-profits funded by private donations and government grants.

Policy on urban forestry is less contentious and partisan than many other forestry issues, such as resource extraction in national forests. However, the uneven distribution of healthy urban forests across the landscape has become a growing concern in the past 20 years. This is because the urban forest has become an increasingly important component of bioregional ecological health with the expanding ecological footprint of urban areas. Based on American Forests&#x27; Urban Ecosystem Analyses conducted over the past six years in ten cities, an estimated 634,407,719 trees have been lost from metropolitan areas across the U.S. as the result of urban and suburban development (American Forests 2011). This is often due to the failure of municipalities to integrate trees and other elements of the green infrastructure into their day-to-day planning and decision-making processes (American Forests 2002). The inconsistent quality of urban forestry programs on the local level ultimately impacts the regional context in which contiguous urban forests reside, and is greatly exacerbated by suburban sprawl as well as other social and ecological effects (Webb et al. 2008). The recognition of this hierarchical linkage among healthy urban forests and the effectiveness of broader ecosystem protection goals (e.g., maintaining biodiversity and wildlife corridors), highlights the need for scientists and policymakers to gain a better understanding of the socio-spatial dynamics that are associated with tree canopy health at different scales (Wu 2008).

==== Wardens ====

The New England region created urban forestry policies that laid the foundation for urban areas everywhere. Initially, surface level policies, such as Nail laws and the introduction of tree wardens, were created to protect street trees. Nail laws consisted of placing a nail in street trees to mark them as part of the city&#x27;s responsibility. The nails also served as a protection method from citizens that wanted to either cut these trees down or cause them any harm. Tree wardens were required in Massachusetts starting in 1896 to protect these urban trees. Other New England states quickly followed suit. Each municipality was required to have their own tree warden, someone who was knowledgeable enough about trees to decide how to properly care for them. Some larger municipalities paid these wardens, but many of the smaller municipalities had to recruit volunteers for this position. The wardens&#x27; job is to protect the trees and at once protect the public from the trees. Even though shade trees can be perceived as harmless they can also cause risks to the safety of the public. It is the job of the warden to make sure they preserve as many trees as possible, while keeping the public safe.

The responsibilities of tree wardens have grown and shifted over the years. While each municipality has a tree warden in charge of overseeing the urban forest, they have less time to manage each individual tree. That being said, tree wardens are required to approve the pruning and trimming of any public tree. However, they need not be as involved. Rather than needing the tree warden to be present when the tree is maintained, now there are certified arborists and educational programs, so the tree warden can feel at ease about other people and companies maintaining the trees that he or she approves. The scope of their jobs has increased in modern times. While wardens used to primarily ensure that street trees were cared for and did not cause problems, now they have to worry about the entire urban forest. This includes a great deal of planning and following countless regulations.

As society has progressed and the technology has improved, the roles of tree wardens have adapted. For instance, power lines have become a large issue for public trees and the development of utility forestry has been immense. Wardens now create relationships with utility foresters to ensure they follow the requirements for proper spacing between the lines and public trees. Also, tree wardens and urban forest ordinances are no longer restricted to New England. They now span across the entire United States. While they generally follow similar guidelines, their policies can vary quite a bit. In order to keep policies fairly uniform, the introduction of the Tree City USA program was created by the Arbor Day Foundation in 1976.

=== Australia ===
Australian urban forestry involves the care and management of single trees and tree populations throughout urban Australia, ameliorating the livability of cities in the country. The establishment and progression of urban forestry in Australia have helped alleviate the impacts of the country&#x27;s harsh climatic conditions in urban areas. The present focus is on improving tree species adaptability, resiliency, and diversity to continue providing similar benefits in a future of increasingly harsh climatic conditions.

==== History ====

The first calls for conserving woodland areas in and around cities arose in the 1970s in response to increasing urbanisation and the consequent demand for recreational green space and awareness of protecting native wildlife. BOBITS – bits of bush in the suburbs – was a popular term at the time to describe these early &quot;simplified versions of Australia&#x27;s native forests&quot; that flourished in Australian cities by the ecologist policies of the then prime minister Bob Hawke, summarised in its 1988 Greenhouse 21C: A Plan of Action for a Sustainable Future strategy to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. This and many other efforts to implement urban forestry in Australia were stimulated by CSIRO forester John French, drawing inspiration from ongoing efforts in North America. Australia&#x27;s understanding of urban forestry evolved during the second period to include all spaces used by the urban population. Known as a &quot;city forest&quot; this vision of urban forestry incorporated the economic value of urban trees and a focus on ecosystem services. The third and present period in Australia&#x27;s urban forestry history is known as &quot;city in a forest&quot;, and considers the ongoing efforts to include urban forestry as a solution to environmental and health problems.

==== Climate challenges ====

Complications of global climate change are exacerbated within certain regions of Australia based on location and exposure to climate factors. Australia is susceptible to variable climatic intensities due to the Southern Annular Mode (SAM), a dynamic circulation pattern promoting warm and dry conditions via cold front redirection. Such conditions intensify standalone climate change challenges, particularly throughout the southern half of Australia. Since nearly 90% of Australians inhabit urban areas, adaptable, efficient and cost-effective methods of climate change mitigation may limit negative human consequences. Establishing, maintaining and retaining trees and shrubs in the urban environment is a nature-based solution with potential to mitigate some impacts that climate change has on Australia&#x27;s urban population. Municipalities in Australia are exploring the benefits of urban forestry for their regional needs.

===== Canberra =====
A 2020 study of Australia&#x27;s capital, Canberra, explored opportunities for living infrastructure to mitigate conditions like increasing temperature and drought. The authors identified urban forests as one of four kinds of living infrastructure with the potential to provide ecosystem services like cooling, carbon sequestration, and improved livability. While hopeful that a high-quality urban forest can provide these benefits, the authors emphasized the importance of planning and collaboration across diverse stakeholders for successful implementation.

===== Adelaide =====

Adelaide, located in South Australia&#x27;s driest state, examined the potential of green roofs to combat the urban heat island effect. The study found that providing 30% green roof coverage significantly reduced temperature, electricity usage, and cost. Researchers concluded that green roofs and similar green infrastructure have the potential to mitigate urban heat island effects in this region.

However, climate change impacts also bring challenges to the existing urban forest. A 2019 study of 22 southeastern Australian suburbs showed that over half (53%) of the existing tree species were vulnerable to heat and/or moisture stress. A study of 2017 tree health decline in Melbourne found significant negative relationships between tree health and climate conditions for every species studied. Researchers concluded that drought was the primary factor inducing decline, increasing tree vulnerability to secondary stressors like pests. Researchers emphasized a need for planting trees that are better suited to the region, given predictions of hotter and drier conditions in the coming years.

==== Ongoing efforts ====

Australian cities have outlined urban forestry initiatives and visions to guide future regulation of climate change challenges, as seen in the 2014 Urban Forestry Strategy Guide. Cities have set goals to double tree canopy coverage and encourage tree species biodiversity by monitoring taxonomic composition of urban forests.

=== Constraints ===

Resolving limitations will require coordinated efforts among cities, regions, and countries (Meza, 1992; Nilsson, 2000; Valencia, 2000).

* Loss of green space is continuous as cities expand and densification occurs; available growing space is limited in city centres. This problem is compounded by pressure to convert green space, parks, etc. into building sites (Glickman, 1999).
* Inadequate space is allowed for the root system. Research indicates that healthy large maturing trees require approximately 1,000 cubic feet of soil.
* Poor soil is used when planting specimens.
* Incorrect and neglected staking or usage of tree shelters leads to bark damage.
* Larger, more mature trees are often used to provide scale and a sense of establishment to a scheme. These trees grow more slowly and do not thrive in alien soils whilst smaller specimens can adapt more readily to existing conditions.
* Lack of information on the tolerances of urban tree cultivars to environmental constraints.
* Poor tree selection which leads to problems in the future
* Poor nursery stock and failure of post-care
* Limited genetic diversity of the tree stock planted (especially the planting of clonal material)
* Too few communities have working tree inventories and very few have urban forest management plans.
* Lack of public awareness about the benefits of healthy urban forests.
* Poor tree care practices by citizens and untrained arborists.

== Organizations ==
* American Forests
* Casey Trees
* Friends of the Urban Forest
* Greening of Detroit
* Hantz Woodlands
* International Society of Arboriculture
* National Urban Forestry Unit
* Society of American Foresters
* Trees Atlanta

American Society of Consulting Arborists

== See also ==
*Arboriculture
*European Arboricultural Council
*Forestry
*Garden city movement
*Horticulture
*i-Tree
*Landscape architecture
*Million Tree Initiative
*Natural resource management
*Planting strategy
*Silviculture
*Tree care
*Urban forest inequity
*Urban reforestation
== References ==

=== Notes ===
=== Further reading ===
* American Forests. 2002. &quot;Urban Ecosystem Analysis, Knox County, Tennessee.&quot; American Forests. Available online as a pdf (archived page).
* American Forests. 2011. Urban Ecosystem Analysis. Available online (archived page)
* Barro, S. C., Gobster, P. H., Schroeder, H. W. &amp; Bartram, S. M. 1997. &quot;What Makes a Big Tree Special? Insights from the Chicagoland Treemendous Trees Program.&quot; &quot;Journal of Arboriculture&quot;, 23(6), 239–49.
* Campanella, T.J. 2003. Republic of shade: New England and the American elm. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
* Coder, K. 1996. Cultural aspects of trees: traditions and myth. Athens, GA: Cooperative Extension Service, Forest Resources Unit, University of Georgia.
* Dwyer, J. F., McPherson, E. G., Schroeder, H. W., &amp; Rowntree, R. A. 1992. Assessing the Benefits and Costs of the Urban Forest. &quot;Journal of Arboriculture&quot;, 18(5), 227–234.
* Dwyer, J. F., Nowak, D. J., Noble, M. H. &amp; Sisinni, S. M. 2000. &quot;Connecting People with Ecosystems in the 21st Century: an assessment of our nation&#x27;s urban forests.&quot; General technical report PNW ; GTR-490 Portland: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station.
* Dwyer, J. F., Schroeder, H. W. &amp; Gobster, P. H. 1991. &quot;The Significance of Urban Trees and Forests: Toward a Deeper Understanding of Values.&quot; &quot;Journal of Arboriculture&quot;, 17(10), 276–84.
* Egleston, N.H. 1878. Villages and village life with hints for their improvement. Harper and A Brothers, Publishers, New York.
* European Union, Commission, Brussels.2016.Urban and Periurban Forests. Management,Monitoring and Ecosystem Services. EMONFUR LIFE+Project Experiences.
* Fernow, B.E. 1910. The care of trees in lawn, street and park. Henry Holt and Company, New York.
* Glickman, D. 1999. &quot;Building Cities of Green&quot;. 1999 National Urban Forest of Conference. American Forests, Washington, DC. pp. 4–7.
* Hansen-Moller, J. &amp; Oustrup, L. 2004. &quot;Emotional, physical/functional and symbolic aspects of an urban forest in Denmark to nearby residents.&quot; &quot;Scandinavian Journal of Forest Research&quot;, 19, 56–64.
* Hanson, Michael L. (1990). Urban &amp; Community Forestry, a Guide for the Interior Western United States, USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Ogden, Utah.
* Hastie, C. 2003. The Benefits of Urban Trees. Warwick District Council, UK.
* Herwitz, E. 2001. Trees at Risk: Reclaiming an Urban Forest. Worcester, MA: Chandler House Press.
* Jones, O. &amp; Cloke, P. 2002. Tree Cultures: The Place of Trees and Trees in Their Place. Oxford and New York: Berg.
* Kaplan, R. &amp; Kaplan, S. 1989. The Experience of Nature: A Psychological Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Kaplan, R. 1992. Urban Forestry and the Workplace (No. NC-163). Chicago, IL: USDA Forest Service, North Central Forest Experiment Station.
* Kellert, S. R. &amp; Wilson, E. O. 1993. The Biophilia Hypothesis. Washington, D.C.: Island Press/ Shearwater Books.
* Kinney, J. P. 1972. The development of forest law in America including legislation in America prior to March 4, 1789. Arno Press, New York.
* Konijnendijk, C. C, Nilsson, K, Randrup, T. B, Schipperijn J (Eds.) 2005. Urban Forests and Trees- A Reference Book. (Print) 978-3-540-27684-5 (Online) Springer
* Kuo, F. E. 2003. &quot;The Role of Arboriculture in a Healthy Social Ecology.&quot; &quot;Journal of Arboriculture&quot;, 29(3).
* 
* Lohr, V. I., Caroline H. Pearson-Mims, John Tarnai, and Don A. Dillman. 2004. How Urban Residents Rate and Rank the Benefits and Problems Associated with Trees in Cities. Journal of Arboriculture, 30(1), 28–35.
* McPherson, E. G. &amp; Simpson, J. R. (2000). Reducing Air Pollution Through Urban Forestry. &quot;Proceedings of the 48th meeting of California Pest Council&quot; (available online, pdf file).
* McPherson, E. G. 1994. Using Urban Forests for Energy Efficiency and Carbon Storage. &quot;Journal of Forestry&quot;, 92(10), 36–41.
* McPherson, E. G., &amp; Rowntree, R. A. 1993. Energy Conservation Potential of Urban Tree Planting. Journal of Arboriculture, 19(6), 321–331.
* McPherson, E. G., Simpson, J. R. &amp; Scott, K. (2002). Actualizing Microclimate and Air Quality Benefits with Parking Lot Shade Ordinances. &quot;Wetter und Leben&quot; 4: 98 (available online, pdf file).
* McPherson, E. G. 1998. Structure and sustainability of Sacramento&#x27;s urban forest. Journal of Arboriculture 24(4):174–90.
* Meza, H.M.B. 1992. &quot;Current Situation of the Urban Forest in Mexico City&quot;. J. Arbor., 18: 33-36
* Morales, D. J., Micha, F. R., &amp; Weber, R. L. 1983. Two Methods of Valuating Trees on Residential Sites. Journal of Arboriculture, 9(1), 21–24.
* Mudrack, L. 1980. &quot;Urban Vegetation: A Reference for New York Communities&quot;. New York Department of Environmental Conservation.
* Nillsson, K., Randrup, T.B., and Wandell, B.I.M. 2000. &quot;Trees in the Environment&quot;. Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
* Northrup, B. G. 1887. Arbor Day: Its history and aims, and how to secure them. Rep. Sec. Connecticut Board of Agric. 13 p.
* Norton, B. G., &amp; Hannon, B. 1997. &quot;Environmental values: A place-based theory.&quot; &quot;Environmental Ethics&quot;, 19(3), 227–45.
* Nowak, D., &amp; Wheeler, J. Program Assistant, ICLEI. February 2006.
* Nowak, D. (1993). Plant Chemical Emissions. &quot;Miniature Roseworld&quot; 10 (1) (available online, pdf file).
* Nowak, D. (1995). Trees Pollute? A &quot;Tree Explains It All&quot;. &quot;Proceedings of the 7th National Urban Forest Conference&quot; (available online, pdf file).
* Nowak, D. (2000). Tree Species Selection, Design, and Management to Improve Air Quality Construction Technology. &quot;Annual meeting proceedings of the American Society of Landscape Architects&quot; (available online, pdf file).
* Nowak, D. &quot;The Effects of Urban Trees on Air Quality&quot; USDA Forest Service (available online, pdf file).
* Orland, B., Vining, J., &amp; Ebreo, A. 1992. The Effect of Street Trees on Perceived Values of Residential Property. &quot;Environment and Behavior&quot;, 24(3), 298–325.
* Pickett, S. T. A., Cadenasso, M. L., Grove, J. M., Nilon, C. H., Pouyat, R. V., Zipperer, W. C. &amp; Costanza, R. 2008. &quot;Urban Ecological Systems: Linking Terrestrial Ecological, Physical, and Socioeconomic Components of Metropolitan Areas.&quot; &quot;Urban Ecology&quot;, 99–122.
* Pincetl, S. &amp; Gearin, E. 2005. &quot;The reinvention of public green space.&quot; &quot;Urban Geography&quot;, 26(5), 365–84.
* Rees, W. E. 1997. &quot;Urban ecosystems: the human dimension.&quot; &quot;Urban Ecosystems&quot;, 1:1, 63–75.
* Simpson, J. R., &amp; McPherson, E. G. 1996. Potential of Tree Shade for Reducing Residential Energy Use in California. &quot;Journal of Arboriculture&quot;, 22(1), 10–18.
* Solotaroff, W. 1911. Shade-trees in towns and cities. John Wiley &amp; Sons, New York.
* USDA Forest Service. 2003. Benefits of Urban Trees: Urban and Community Forestry: Improving Our Quality of Life. In Southern Region (Ed.), Urban Forestry Manual. Athens, GA: USDA Forest Service.
* USDA Forest Service. 2004. Urban Forestry Manual – Benefits and Costs of the Urban Forest. Athens, GA: USDA Forest Service.
* Valencia, R.L. 2000. Management of Green Area in Mexico City. Presentation to the 20th Session of the North American Forestry Commission, June 6–10, St. Andrews, Canada.
* Wall, B. W. T. J. S., and Stephen E. Miller 2006. &quot;An Econometric Study of the Factors Influencing Participation in Urban and Community Forestry Programs in the United States.&quot; &quot;Arboriculture &amp; Urban Forestry&quot;, 32(5), 221–28.
* Webb, T. J., Bengston, D. N. &amp; Fan, D. P. 2008. &quot;Forest value orientations in Australia: An application of computer content analysis.&quot; &quot;Environmental Management&quot;, 41:1, 52–63.
* Wolf, K. L. 1998. Enterprising landscapes: Business districts and the urban forest. In C. Kollin (Ed.), Cities by Nature&#x27;s Design: Proceedings of the 8th National Urban Forest Conference. Washington, D.C.: American Forests.
* Wolf, K. L. 1999. Grow for the Gold: Trees in Business Districts. Olympia, WA: Washington State Department of Natural Resources.
* Wolf, K. L. 2003. &quot;Introduction to Urban and Community Forestry Programs in the United States.&quot; &quot;Landscape Planning and Horticulture&quot; (Japan), 4(3), 19–28.
* Wolf, K. L. 2004. Economics and Public Value of Urban Forests. &quot;Urban Agriculture Magazine&quot;, 13 (Special Issue on Urban and Periurban Forestry), 31–33.
* Wolf, K. L. 2007. City Trees and Property Values. &quot;Arborist News&quot;, 34–36.
* Wu, Jianguo. 2008. &quot;Toward a Landscape Ecology of Cities: Beyond Buildings, Trees, and Urban Forests.&quot; in Ecology, Planning, and Management of Urban Forests: International Perspectives, edited by M. M. Carreiro. New York: Springer.
* Xiao, H. 1995. &quot;Local ordinances to protect private trees: A field investigation &amp; analysis.&quot; Ypsilanti, Michigan: Eastern Michigan University.
* Young, Robert. 2009. &quot;Interdisciplinary Foundations of Urban Ecology.&quot; &quot;Urban Ecosystems&quot; 12:311-331.
* Young, T. 1995. &quot;Modern urban parks.&quot; &quot;Geographical Review&quot;, 85(4), 535.
* Zube, E. H. 1973. &quot;The Natural History of Urban Trees.&quot; &quot;Natural History&quot;, 82, 48–51.
*Dean, J. (2009). Seeing Trees, Thinking Forests: Urban Forestry at the University of Toronto in the 1960s. In Method and Meaning in Canadian Environmental History (pp. 236–253). Nelson Education Ltd. 
*Jorgensen, E. (1977). Vegetation Needs and Concerns in Urban Areas. The Forestry Chronicle, 267–270
*Kenney, W. A. (2003). A strategy for Canada&#x27;s urban forests. The Forestry Chronicle, 79(4), 785–789
*Ordóñez, C., &amp; Duinker, P. N. (2013). An analysis of urban forest management plans in Canada: Implications for urban forest management. Landscape and Urban Planning, 116, 36–47
*Prebble, M. (1970). Organizational Developments and Program Adjustments in the Canadian Forestry Service. The Forestry Chronicle, 154–156
*Rosen, M. R., &amp; Kenney, W. A. (n.d.). Urban forestry Trends in Canada</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q822620" start="0" end="14" title="Urban forestry" label="Urban forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="52" end="56" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="67" end="77" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="82" end="87" title="Urban area" label="urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="130" end="147" title="urban environment" label="urban environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="354" end="374" title="urban infrastructure" label="urban infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="447" end="453" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q776268" start="586" end="595" title="arborists" label="arborists"/>
<link wikidata="Q131062" start="658" end="670" title="city planner" label="city planner"/>
<link wikidata="Q215712" start="1273" end="1290" title="urban heat island" label="urban heat island"/>
<link wikidata="Q828158" start="1299" end="1317" title="evapotranspiration" label="evapotranspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q337554" start="1591" end="1602" title="heat stroke" label="heat stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="1769" end="1780" title="air quality" label="air quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305550" start="1892" end="1912" title="carbon sequestration" label="carbon sequestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421263" start="2049" end="2070" title="stormwater management" label="stormwater management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2608" end="2620" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536096" start="2845" end="2863" title="Tree planting" label="plantings of trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="3284" end="3288" title="Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="ADHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743833" start="4351" end="4367" title="American Forests" label="American Forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491965" start="4885" end="4905" title="environmental racism" label="environmental racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453838" start="5009" end="5018" title="redlining" label="redlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515895" start="5195" end="5208" title="Socioeconomic status" label="socioeconomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479527" start="5270" end="5291" title="environmental justice" label="environmental justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="5532" end="5546" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q215712" start="5555" end="5579" title="Urban heat island" label="urban heat island effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098284" start="6001" end="6034" title="Children &amp;amp; Nature Network" label="The Children &amp;amp; Nature Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146659" start="6235" end="6254" title="Species richness" label="species composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434713" start="6619" end="6637" title="impervious surface" label="impervious surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="6898" end="6911" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305550" start="6971" end="6984" title="Carbon sequestration" label="sequestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127330" start="7213" end="7225" title="Infiltration (hydrology)" label="infiltration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444790" start="7256" end="7272" title="Surface runoff" label="rainwater runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="7274" end="7286" title="Biodiversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="7291" end="7298" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="7744" end="7772" title="United States Forest Service" label="United States Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048593" start="7829" end="7846" title="Casey Trees" label="Casey Tree&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7857" end="7870" title="Tree Planting" label="Tree Planting"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098429" start="7885" end="7904" title="The Greening of Detroit" label="Greening of Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743833" start="7918" end="7934" title="American Forests" label="American Forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q155207" start="8136" end="8148" title="Case study" label="Case studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="8171" end="8185" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington D.C"/>
<link wikidata="Q11640" start="8366" end="8384" title="Outreach" label="community outreach"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207950" start="8503" end="8509" title="i-Tree" label="i-Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="8852" end="8860" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453838" start="8913" end="8922" title="redlining" label="redlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453838" start="9206" end="9215" title="redlining" label="redlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134228" start="9376" end="9387" title="Canopy (biology)" label="tree canopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="9512" end="9520" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="9522" end="9529" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="9535" end="9546" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404798" start="9784" end="9795" title="South Bronx" label="South Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="9904" end="9909" title="The Bronx" label="Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995038" start="10097" end="10138" title="New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene" label="New York City Department of Health&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q337554" start="10507" end="10518" title="heat stroke" label="heat stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q215864" start="10536" end="10545" title="heat wave" label="heat wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="10580" end="10593" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="10603" end="10609" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740283" start="11060" end="11074" title="urban wildlife" label="urban wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154948" start="14614" end="14644" title="community economic development" label="community economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q828158" start="15129" end="15147" title="evapotranspiration" label="evapotranspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194826" start="16154" end="16171" title="urban agriculture" label="urban agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q18556" start="17170" end="17179" title="bioenergy" label="bioenergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070482" start="17363" end="17379" title="nutrient cycling" label="nutrient cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q282070" start="17381" end="17395" title="Pedogenesis" label="soil formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="18209" end="18214" title="Fruit" label="Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907811" start="18218" end="18222" title="Mast (botany)" label="mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q866283" start="18634" end="18651" title="carrying capacity" label="carrying capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="18729" end="18741" title="Biodiversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="18785" end="18799" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="18801" end="18814" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186723" start="18839" end="18855" title="critical habitat" label="critical habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q295865" start="18997" end="19016" title="Ecosystem service" label="ecosystem services."/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="19017" end="19029" title="Urbanization" label="Urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743374" start="19145" end="19174" title="Endangered Species Act of 1973" label="Endangered Species Act&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="19471" end="19489" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146659" start="19494" end="19510" title="species richness" label="species richness"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="19533" end="19549" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536096" start="19910" end="19923" title="tree planting" label="tree planting"/>
<link wikidata="Q22746" start="20025" end="20035" title="urban park" label="urban park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033070" start="20041" end="20048" title="woodlot" label="woodlot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156520" start="20070" end="20083" title="Edge effects" label="edge habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="20366" end="20382" title="Invasive species" label="Invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298537" start="20729" end="20748" title="Transport hub" label="transportation hubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="21272" end="21280" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q469382" start="21300" end="21313" title="Ulmus americana" label="American Elms"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="21318" end="21327" title="Fraxinus" label="Ash trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q845598" start="21364" end="21381" title="Dutch elm disease" label="Dutch Elm Disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960177" start="21386" end="21403" title="Emerald ash borer" label="Emerald Ash Borer"/>
<link wikidata="Q159570" start="21847" end="21861" title="Ailanthus altissima" label="tree-of-heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q156047" start="21863" end="21874" title="honeysuckle" label="honeysuckle"/>
<link wikidata="Q367242" start="21879" end="21891" title="Elaeagnus umbellata" label="autumn olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079266" start="21897" end="21910" title="Pyrus calleryana" label="Bradford Pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="21971" end="21975" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="21995" end="22020" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="22025" end="22049" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331830" start="22088" end="22100" title="Competitive exclusion principle" label="crowding out"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="22130" end="22137" title="grasses" label="grasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="22141" end="22155" title="Hardwood" label="hardwood trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536096" start="22288" end="22296" title="Tree planting" label="planting"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="22900" end="22914" title="Denver" label="City of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536096" start="23090" end="23103" title="tree planting" label="tree planting"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207950" start="24621" end="24627" title="i-Tree" label="i-Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q500094" start="25259" end="25266" title="pruning" label="pruning"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="25534" end="25542" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="25547" end="25554" title="logging" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302557" start="26881" end="26895" title="Reclaimed lumber" label="reclaimed wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q28797" start="26975" end="26995" title="practical discipline" label="practical discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536096" start="27012" end="27025" title="Tree planting" label="Tree planting"/>
<link wikidata="Q30686917" start="27027" end="27031" title="Tree care" label="care"/>
<link wikidata="Q41500" start="27192" end="27196" title="root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134228" start="27201" end="27207" title="Canopy (forest)" label="canopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034420" start="27220" end="27232" title="soil quality" label="soil quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q267917" start="27537" end="27544" title="parking" label="parking"/>
<link wikidata="Q221488" start="27568" end="27578" title="pedestrian" label="pedestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q320173" start="27768" end="27786" title="automobile exhaust" label="automobile exhaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q942890" start="27988" end="27995" title="rigging" label="rigging"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979283" start="28882" end="28910" title="National Urban Forestry Unit" label="National Urban Forestry Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q918385" start="29096" end="29104" title="training" label="training"/>
<link wikidata="Q16861606" start="29109" end="29119" title="credential" label="credential"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543547" start="29247" end="29258" title="stewardship" label="stewardship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428433" start="29260" end="29271" title="Restoration ecology" label="restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134228" start="29293" end="29305" title="Canopy (biology)" label="urban canopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q553270" start="29347" end="29362" title="Group cohesiveness" label="social cohesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053460" start="29613" end="29631" title="Certified Arborist" label="Certified Arborist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895303" start="29643" end="29651" title="Forester" label="Forester"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978655" start="29682" end="29701" title="Consultant" label="Consulting Forester"/>
<link wikidata="Q127213" start="29923" end="29936" title="arboriculture" label="arboriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="29938" end="29946" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="29948" end="29960" title="horticulture" label="horticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743137" start="29962" end="29989" title="natural resource management" label="natural resource management"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="29991" end="30005" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q188847" start="30011" end="30032" title="environmental science" label="environmental science"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="30040" end="30057" title="Interdisciplinarity" label="interdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862829" start="30070" end="30081" title="Academic discipline" label="disciplines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134228" start="30542" end="30553" title="Canopy (biology)" label="tree canopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306047" start="30900" end="30915" title="Pest control" label="pest management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413287" start="30958" end="30971" title="social skills" label="social skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283504" start="31265" end="31282" title="Social engagement" label="Social engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500754" start="31450" end="31460" title="internship" label="internship"/>
<link wikidata="Q374814" start="31616" end="31629" title="certification" label="certification"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053460" start="31719" end="31722" title="International Society of Arboriculture" label="ISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053460" start="32075" end="32093" title="Certified Arborist" label="Certified Arborist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="32131" end="32140" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152556" start="32167" end="32199" title="commercial driver&amp;#x27;s license" label="commercial driver&amp;#x27;s license"/>
<link wikidata="Q83620" start="33733" end="33745" title="thoroughfare" label="thoroughfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128254" start="33809" end="33821" title="right of way (transit)" label="right-of-way"/>
<link wikidata="Q295865" start="33853" end="33870" title="ecosystem service" label="ecosystem service"/>
<link wikidata="Q215712" start="33954" end="33971" title="urban heat island" label="urban heat island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434713" start="34052" end="34071" title="impervious surfaces" label="impervious surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536096" start="34153" end="34174" title="Tree planting" label="planting street trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q18907302" start="34680" end="34695" title="Soil compaction (agriculture)" label="soil compaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q215108" start="34709" end="34721" title="microclimate" label="microclimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q158783" start="35655" end="35678" title="Liriodendron tulipifera" label="Liriodendron tulipifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189711" start="36025" end="36039" title="Alkali soil" label="alkaline soils"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179665" start="36143" end="36158" title="Nyssa sylvatica" label="Nyssa sylvatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q142792" start="36193" end="36208" title="Quercus bicolor" label="Quercus bicolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q161374" start="36384" end="36404" title="Platanus × hispanica" label="Platanus × hispanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536096" start="37646" end="37659" title="tree planting" label="tree planting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860310" start="37676" end="37685" title="bare root" label="bare root"/>
<link wikidata="Q22652" start="39262" end="39279" title="urban green space" label="urban green space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="39598" end="39623" title="environmental degradation" label="environmental degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="40492" end="40505" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q288706" start="40510" end="40520" title="waste heat" label="waste heat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40561" end="40570" title="Biophilia hypothesis#Biophilia and conservation" label="biophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427027" start="41329" end="41349" title="green infrastructure" label="green infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427027" start="41429" end="41449" title="green infrastructure" label="green infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536096" start="43531" end="43544" title="tree planting" label="tree planting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="45732" end="45751" title="United States Forest Service" label="USDA Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="47456" end="47475" title="United States Forest Service" label="USDA Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="48130" end="48144" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q215712" start="48287" end="48304" title="urban heat island" label="urban heat island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4257161" start="48699" end="48719" title="species distribution" label="species distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="49234" end="49241" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="49616" end="49655" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335563" start="49827" end="49842" title="riparian buffer" label="riparian buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589818" start="49852" end="49868" title="Controlled burn" label="prescribed fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q525309" start="49882" end="49908" title="integrated pest management" label="integrated pest management"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536096" start="50363" end="50377" title="Tree planting" label="planting trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="50454" end="50461" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187968" start="50771" end="50787" title="flood mitigation" label="flood mitigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="50875" end="50887" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="51194" end="51211" title="United States Forest Service" label="US Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="51385" end="51394" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="51770" end="51787" title="Amazon rainforest" label="Amazon rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="51951" end="51957" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="51961" end="51969" title="Amazonia" label="Amazonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4361" start="52587" end="52595" title="Curitiba" label="Curitiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="53486" end="53494" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="53587" end="53593" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="53635" end="53641" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="53691" end="53712" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="54090" end="54096" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="54351" end="54357" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="54565" end="54571" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="54622" end="54643" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q193871" start="54812" end="54828" title="Marshall McLuhan" label="Marshall McLuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q845598" start="54930" end="54947" title="Dutch elm disease" label="Dutch Elm Disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q845598" start="55180" end="55197" title="Dutch elm disease" label="Dutch Elm Disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="55590" end="55611" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q127213" start="55834" end="55847" title="arboriculture" label="arboriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="56308" end="56315" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="56334" end="56341" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q845598" start="56370" end="56387" title="Dutch elm disease" label="Dutch Elm Disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="56435" end="56448" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="56560" end="56581" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="56825" end="56846" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="57209" end="57223" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa, Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q22652" start="57900" end="57911" title="Urban green space" label="greenspaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q22652" start="58112" end="58123" title="Urban green space" label="greenspaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q352709" start="58190" end="58203" title="Stefano Boeri" label="Stefano Boeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="58480" end="58486" title="Native species" label="native"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="58506" end="58516" title="Perennial plant" label="perennials"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="58827" end="58835" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q215712" start="58863" end="58874" title="heat island" label="heat island"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="59777" end="59782" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="59906" end="59911" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q158722" start="60208" end="60220" title="camphor tree" label="camphor tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="60396" end="60402" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q288558" start="60408" end="60428" title="Japanese pagoda tree" label="Japanese pagoda tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="60452" end="60457" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q746052" start="60493" end="60498" title="Ginza" label="Ginza"/>
<link wikidata="Q8420" start="61175" end="61194" title="1964 Summer Olympics" label="Tokyo Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q159545" start="61405" end="61412" title="Dogwood" label="Dogwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q920344" start="61426" end="61447" title="Zelkova serrata" label="Japanese zelkova tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q43433" start="61618" end="61628" title="Chandigarh" label="Chandigarh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61633" end="61643" title="Canhinagar" label="Canhinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="61807" end="61816" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536096" start="62236" end="62249" title="Tree planting" label="Tree planting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="62269" end="62276" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q188602" start="62363" end="62370" title="Puranas" label="Puranas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11910" start="62526" end="62537" title="Gandhinagar" label="Gandhinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q80989" start="62829" end="62835" title="Bhopal" label="Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305550" start="63940" end="63960" title="carbon sequestration" label="carbon sequestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="63986" end="64000" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q156938" start="64048" end="64057" title="Teak tree" label="Teak tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="64443" end="64455" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="65386" end="65397" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145992" start="67070" end="67083" title="Picea abies" label="Norway Spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q133128" start="67099" end="67109" title="Scots pine" label="Scots Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q156895" start="67131" end="67143" title="Betula pendula" label="Silver Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q157624" start="67166" end="67176" title="Betula pubescens" label="Moor Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="67682" end="67691" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q195861" start="67717" end="67723" title="fynbos" label="fynbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="68461" end="68463" title="UK" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997770" start="68536" end="68569" title="Midland Reafforesting Association" label="Midland reafforesting association"/>
<link wikidata="Q767049" start="68594" end="68607" title="Black Country" label="Black Country"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68609" end="68641" title="England&amp;#x27;s Community Forests" label="England&amp;#x27;s Community Forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920580" start="69305" end="69331" title="Black Country Urban Forest" label="Black Country Urban Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774963" start="69479" end="69498" title="The Wildlife Trusts" label="The Wildlife Trusts"/>
<link wikidata="Q742394" start="69507" end="69521" title="Woodland Trust" label="Woodland Trust"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69565" end="69576" title="Tree warden" label="Tree warden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="69589" end="69600" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q372561" start="69701" end="69720" title="forest conservation" label="forest conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q335261" start="70056" end="70064" title="ornament (art)" label="ornament"/>
<link wikidata="Q49773" start="70197" end="70212" title="social movement" label="social movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="71023" end="71035" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323572" start="71209" end="71224" title="social reformer" label="social reformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192989" start="71540" end="71553" title="acculturation" label="acculturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q540614" start="71812" end="71819" title="synergy" label="synergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639378" start="71843" end="71856" title="social system" label="social system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815948" start="71878" end="71897" title="landscape architect" label="landscape architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q364187" start="71898" end="71919" title="Frederick Law Olmsted" label="Frederick Law Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q22746" start="71947" end="71957" title="urban park" label="urban park"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="72055" end="72082" title="urban infrastructure" label="metropolitan infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="72181" end="72190" title="spirituality" label="spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72672" end="72690" title="romantic landscape" label="romantic landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q553270" start="72781" end="72796" title="social cohesion" label="social cohesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q845598" start="73352" end="73369" title="Dutch Elm Disease" label="Dutch Elm Disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="74420" end="74430" title="non-profit" label="non-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q612741" start="74606" end="74621" title="United States National Forest" label="national forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904233" start="74837" end="74846" title="bioregion" label="bioregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q234173" start="74886" end="74906" title="ecological footprint" label="ecological footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="75142" end="75150" title="suburban" label="suburban"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="75574" end="75589" title="suburban sprawl" label="suburban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="75809" end="75821" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q864912" start="75826" end="75843" title="wildlife corridor" label="wildlife corridor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76059" end="76077" title="New England region" label="New England region"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="79021" end="79030" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q269372" start="79926" end="79935" title="Bob Hawke" label="Bob Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117048" start="80151" end="80156" title="CSIRO" label="CSIRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="80800" end="80814" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288815" start="80987" end="81008" title="Antarctic oscillation" label="Southern Annular Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421934" start="81484" end="81505" title="Nature-based solutions" label="nature-based solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="81771" end="81779" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305550" start="82040" end="82060" title="carbon sequestration" label="carbon sequestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="82075" end="82085" title="Quality of life" label="livability"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="82312" end="82320" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741" start="82396" end="82406" title="green roof" label="green roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q215712" start="82422" end="82446" title="Urban heat island" label="urban heat island effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427027" start="82618" end="82638" title="green infrastructure" label="green infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="82992" end="83001" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q219174" start="83247" end="83252" title="Pest (organism)" label="pests"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="83698" end="83710" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q56114960" start="83927" end="83946" title="land loss" label="Loss of green space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="84136" end="84149" title="building site" label="building site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554920" start="84323" end="84332" title="soil health" label="Poor soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683580" start="84412" end="84424" title="tree shelter" label="tree shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q184453" start="84435" end="84439" title="Bark (botany)" label="bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="84738" end="84746" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q585259" start="84894" end="84911" title="genetic diversity" label="genetic diversity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85018" end="85034" title="tree inventories" label="tree inventories"/>
<link wikidata="Q30686917" start="85163" end="85172" title="tree care" label="tree care"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743833" start="85243" end="85259" title="American Forests" label="American Forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048593" start="85262" end="85273" title="Casey Trees" label="Casey Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504356" start="85276" end="85303" title="Friends of the Urban Forest" label="Friends of the Urban Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098429" start="85306" end="85325" title="Greening of Detroit" label="Greening of Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252109" start="85328" end="85343" title="Hantz Woodlands" label="Hantz Woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053460" start="85346" end="85384" title="International Society of Arboriculture" label="International Society of Arboriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979283" start="85387" end="85415" title="National Urban Forestry Unit" label="National Urban Forestry Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552357" start="85418" end="85447" title="Society of American Foresters" label="Society of American Foresters"/>
<link wikidata="Q127213" start="85523" end="85536" title="Arboriculture" label="Arboriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376321" start="85538" end="85569" title="European Arboricultural Council" label="European Arboricultural Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="85571" end="85579" title="Forestry" label="Forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q660088" start="85581" end="85601" title="Garden city movement" label="Garden city movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="85603" end="85615" title="Horticulture" label="Horticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207950" start="85617" end="85623" title="i-Tree" label="i-Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q47844" start="85625" end="85647" title="Landscape architecture" label="Landscape architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859809" start="85649" end="85672" title="Million Tree Initiative" label="Million Tree Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743137" start="85674" end="85701" title="Natural resource management" label="Natural resource management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964546" start="85703" end="85720" title="Planting strategy" label="Planting strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q720362" start="85722" end="85734" title="Silviculture" label="Silviculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q30686917" start="85736" end="85745" title="Tree care" label="Tree care"/>
<link wikidata="Q123411804" start="85747" end="85768" title="Urban forest inequity" label="Urban forest inequity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900154" start="85770" end="85789" title="Urban reforestation" label="Urban reforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053460" start="86262" end="86286" title="Journal of Arboriculture" label="Journal of Arboriculture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87989" end="88028" title="Scandinavian Journal of Forest Research" label="Scandinavian Journal of Forest Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q611294" start="88260" end="88284" title="Warwick District Council" label="Warwick District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6295231" start="89842" end="89861" title="Journal of Forestry" label="Journal of Forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381116" start="91122" end="91142" title="Environmental Ethics (journal)" label="Environmental Ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15801090" start="92304" end="92317" title="Urban Ecology (journal)" label="Urban Ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899911" start="92427" end="92442" title="Urban Geography" label="Urban Geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q57037112" start="92542" end="92558" title="Urban Ecosystems" label="Urban Ecosystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053460" start="93531" end="93565" title="Arboriculture &amp;amp; Urban Forestry" label="Arboriculture &amp;amp; Urban Forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q929380" start="93745" end="93769" title="Environmental Management" label="Environmental Management"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="94266" end="94301" title="Landscape Planning and Horticulture" label="Landscape Planning and Horticulture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="94401" end="94427" title="Urban Agriculture Magazine" label="Urban Agriculture Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="94552" end="94565" title="Arborist News" label="Arborist News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278607" start="95164" end="95183" title="Geographical Review" label="Geographical Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969973" start="95277" end="95292" title="Natural History (magazine)" label="Natural History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610846" wikidata="Q1643159" url="?curid=610846" title="Hotel 2 Fevrier Lomé">
<text>The Hôtel 2 Février is a 102m, 36-story hotel in Lomé, Togo on Place De L&#x27;Indépendance street, opened in 1980. It is the tallest building in Togo. Because it is the only high-rise in Lomé (and in Togo), it is visible from just about anywhere in the city.

The hotel was constructed at a cost of 35 billion West African CFA francs and opened in June 1980 by Togolese President Gnassingbé Eyadéma. It was named for the date, February 2, 1974, on which he nationalized the country&#x27;s phosphate mines, following his survival of the 1974 Togo presidential C-47 crash. The hotel was originally managed by Sofitel as Hotel Sofitel du 2 Février

The hotel closed in 2000 and in February of that year, the government of Togo was loaned $20 million to renovate the property by the Libyan African Investment Company (LAICO). On May 8, 2002, Malta-based Corinthia Hotels International was signed to manage the property after its intended renovation. The shuttered hotel was sold outright to LAICO in 2006, in exchange for forgiveness of the loan and a promise to renovate the hotel. When LAICO had not carried out the renovations after 8 years, the hotel was nationalized by the Togolese government on November 10, 2014 and renovations were begun.

While the hotel was being renovated, the Carlson Rezidor group assumed management on February 26, 2015. The hotel reopened in April 2016 as the Radisson Blu Hotel du 2 Février. Radisson ceased managing the hotel in August 2017 and it became the Hotel 2 Février. On June 27, 2018, it was announced that the hotel would be managed by Emaar Hospitality, a division of UAE-based Emaar Properties. The hotel was to be operated under their Address Hotels brand as Address Hotel 2 Février Lomé Togo. This never occurred and as of 2024 the hotel remains independently operated.

==References==

==External links==

*Hôtel 2 Février official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1643159" start="4" end="19" title="Hotel 2 Fevrier Lomé" label="Hôtel 2 Février"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792" start="49" end="59" title="Lomé, Togo" label="Lomé, Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="146" end="150" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q861690" start="311" end="333" title="West African CFA franc" label="West African CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q155385" start="381" end="399" title="Gnassingbé Eyadéma" label="Gnassingbé Eyadéma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941687" start="537" end="570" title="1974 Togo presidential C-47 crash" label="1974 Togo presidential C-47 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q749431" start="608" end="615" title="Sofitel" label="Sofitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643159" start="619" end="645" title="Hotel 2 Fevrier Lomé" label="Hotel Sofitel du 2 Février"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170680" start="851" end="881" title="Corinthia Hotels International" label="Corinthia Hotels International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643159" start="1390" end="1421" title="Hotel 2 Fevrier Lomé" label="Radisson Blu Hotel du 2 Février"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643159" start="1491" end="1506" title="Hotel 2 Fevrier Lomé" label="Hotel 2 Février"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153463" start="1621" end="1637" title="Emaar Properties" label="Emaar Properties"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610848" wikidata="Q704728" url="?curid=610848" title="Johann Caspar Ferdinand Fischer">
<text>Johann Caspar Ferdinand Fischer (some authorities use the spelling Johann Kaspar Ferdinand Fischer) (1656 August 27, 1746) was a German Baroque composer. Johann Nikolaus Forkel ranked Fischer as one of the best composers for keyboard of his day; however, partly due to the rarity of surviving copies of his music, his music is rarely heard today.

== Life ==
Fischer seems to have been of Bohemian origin, possibly born at Schönfeld, but details about his life are sketchy. Fischer was baptized and spent his youth in Schlackenwerth, north-west Bohemia.

The first record of his existence is found in the mid-1690s: by 1695 he was Kapellmeister to Ludwig Wilhelm of Baden, and he may have remained with the court until his death in Rastatt.

== Works ==

Much of Fischer&#x27;s music shows the influence of the French Baroque style, exemplified by Jean Baptiste Lully, and he was responsible for bringing the French influence to German music. Fischer&#x27;s harpsichord suites updated the standard Froberger model (Allemande - Courante - Sarabande - Gigue); he was also one of the first composers to apply the principles of the orchestral suite to the harpsichord, replacing the standard French ouverture with an unmeasured prelude. Both Bach and Handel knew Fischer&#x27;s work and sometimes borrowed from it.

Many compositions by Fischer were published during his lifetime. These published pieces include:
* &quot;Le journal du printemps&quot; (1695), a collection of eight orchestral suites (&quot;ouvertures&quot;) for strings (the first and last with two trumpets ad libitum, that is, optional.) Each suite begins with an introductory ouverture and ends with a chaconne or a passacaglia. &quot;Le Journal du printemps&quot;, Georg Muffat&#x27;s &quot;Florilegium&quot; and Benedikt Anton Aufschnaiter&#x27;s &quot;Concors Discordia&quot; (all published the same year) were the first collections of orchestral suites published in Germany.
* &quot;Pièces de Clavessin&quot; (1696), several harpsichord suites. The suites explore different styles and genres: for instance, the 5th one consists of an aria and nine variations, and the 8th only includes a prelude and a chaconne. This collection was later expanded by Fischer and the new version was published in 1698 under the title &quot;Musicalisches Blumen-Büchlein&quot;.
* &quot;Vesperae seu Psalmi vespertini&quot; (1701), a collection of sacred music.
* &quot;Ariadne musica&quot; (also known as &quot;Ariadne musica Neo-organoedum&quot;, 1702). This is a collection of pipe organ pieces (most written for manuals only or have optional pedal) in two parts:
** The first part contains twenty preludes and fugues in nineteen different keys and one in the Phrygian mode based on E. It is considered a significant precursor to Johann Sebastian Bach&#x27;s &quot;The Well-Tempered Clavier&quot;. Bach held Fischer&#x27;s work in high regard.
** The second part contains five ricercars based on chorale melodies.
* &quot;Lytaniae Lauretanae VII&quot; (1711), a collection of sacred music.
* &quot;Blumen-Strauss&quot; (before 1736), a collection of organ pieces, with eight sets each containing a prelude, six fugues and a finale or postlude according to the ecclesiastical 8-tone Gregorian mode tradition
* &quot;Musikalischer Parnassus&quot; (&quot;Musical Parnassus&quot;, c. 1738), nine dance suites for harpsichord, each named after one of the Muses. The suites represent a fusion of German and French styles, updating the old Froberger model by inserting many additional movements, making use of the latest dance forms of the time and using new ideas such as double minuets and double rigaudons. As a result, some of the suites include as many as nine parts and are quite long. The longest movement of all in the &quot;Musikalischer Parnassus&quot; and the longest movement by Fischer still extant is the Passacaglia from the &quot;Uranie&quot; suite, which some experts believe may recount the tragedy of Orpheus and Eurydice. This movement is probably Fischer&#x27;s best-known piece, and has been recorded by William Christie, Trevor Pinnock, and by other harpsichordists.

Evidence exists of numerous lost works, among them an opera in Italian style, miscellaneous chamber works, court music and keyboard pieces.

== References ==
== Sources ==
* by Johann Nikolaus Forkel, translated by Charles Sanford Terry. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Howe. 1920 (e-version: 2011).
* &quot;Johann Caspar Ferdinand Fischer, Hofkapellmeister der Markgrafen von Baden (Quellen und Studien zur Musikgeschichte von der Antike bis in die Gegenwart)&quot;, Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang (1990) 

== External links ==

; About the composer and his music
* Johann Caspar Ferdinand Fischer im Verlag Dohr Extensive biography and miscellaneous details about keyboard compositions 
* Review of &quot;L&#x27;Œuvre pour orgue (Intégrale)&quot; at abeillemusique.com Includes a large essay about Fischer&#x27;s life and organ works 

; Scores
* Free scores at the Mutopia Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q704728" start="0" end="31" title="Johann Caspar Ferdinand Fischer" label="Johann Caspar Ferdinand Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q704728" start="67" end="98" title="Johann Caspar Ferdinand Fischer" label="Johann Kaspar Ferdinand Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57922" start="154" end="176" title="Johann Nikolaus Forkel" label="Johann Nikolaus Forkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790515" start="423" end="432" title="Krásno (Sokolov District)" label="Schönfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q215793" start="631" end="644" title="Kapellmeister" label="Kapellmeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q58755" start="648" end="671" title="Louis William, Margrave of Baden-Baden" label="Ludwig Wilhelm of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6874" start="732" end="739" title="Rastatt" label="Rastatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="818" end="825" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192" start="848" end="867" title="Jean Baptiste Lully" label="Jean Baptiste Lully"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="958" end="969" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q203005" start="970" end="975" title="Suite (music)" label="suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q60724" start="998" end="1007" title="Johann Jakob Froberger" label="Froberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q214305" start="1015" end="1024" title="Allemande" label="Allemande"/>
<link wikidata="Q664056" start="1027" end="1035" title="Courante" label="Courante"/>
<link wikidata="Q208593" start="1038" end="1047" title="Sarabande" label="Sarabande"/>
<link wikidata="Q567915" start="1050" end="1055" title="Gigue" label="Gigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759224" start="1213" end="1231" title="unmeasured prelude" label="unmeasured prelude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="1238" end="1242" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="1247" end="1253" title="George Frideric Handel" label="Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q202287" start="1641" end="1650" title="ouverture" label="ouverture"/>
<link wikidata="Q841238" start="1667" end="1675" title="chaconne" label="chaconne"/>
<link wikidata="Q752329" start="1681" end="1692" title="passacaglia" label="passacaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170401" start="1731" end="1743" title="Georg Muffat" label="Georg Muffat"/>
<link wikidata="Q322878" start="1779" end="1806" title="Benedikt Anton Aufschnaiter" label="Benedikt Anton Aufschnaiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790186" start="2419" end="2433" title="Ariadne musica" label="Ariadne musica"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="2529" end="2539" title="pipe organ" label="pipe organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978691" start="2565" end="2571" title="Manual (music)" label="manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758965" start="2595" end="2600" title="Pedal clavier" label="pedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q181014" start="2663" end="2668" title="fugue" label="fugue"/>
<link wikidata="Q534932" start="2692" end="2695" title="key (music)" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342409" start="2712" end="2725" title="Phrygian mode" label="Phrygian mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="2782" end="2803" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q211971" start="2817" end="2842" title="The Well-Tempered Clavier" label="The Well-Tempered Clavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q746743" start="2929" end="2937" title="ricercar" label="ricercar"/>
<link wikidata="Q724473" start="2948" end="2955" title="chorale" label="chorale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058106" start="3234" end="3248" title="Gregorian mode" label="Gregorian mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q105261" start="3312" end="3321" title="Parnassus" label="Parnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="3402" end="3406" title="Muse" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q60724" start="3485" end="3494" title="Johann Jakob Froberger" label="Froberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q205734" start="3625" end="3631" title="minuet" label="minuet"/>
<link wikidata="Q383845" start="3644" end="3652" title="rigaudon" label="rigaudon"/>
<link wikidata="Q752329" start="3864" end="3875" title="Passacaglia" label="Passacaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174353" start="3965" end="3972" title="Orpheus" label="Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208588" start="3977" end="3985" title="Eurydice" label="Eurydice"/>
<link wikidata="Q376588" start="4071" end="4087" title="William Christie (musician)" label="William Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q434774" start="4089" end="4103" title="Trevor Pinnock" label="Trevor Pinnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="4190" end="4195" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="4199" end="4206" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="4228" end="4241" title="chamber music" label="chamber works"/>
<link wikidata="Q57922" start="4313" end="4335" title="Johann Nikolaus Forkel" label="Johann Nikolaus Forkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082345" start="4351" end="4372" title="Charles Sanford Terry (historian)" label="Charles Sanford Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542831" start="5001" end="5016" title="Mutopia Project" label="Mutopia Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610849" wikidata="Q832791" url="?curid=610849" title="Focaccia">
<text>Focaccia is a flat leavened oven-baked Italian bread. In Rome, it is similar to a type of flatbread called (). Focaccia may be served as a side dish or as sandwich bread and it may be round, rectangular or square shape.

==Etymology==

In ancient Rome, was a flatbread baked on the hearth. The word is derived from the Latin , &#x27;hearth, place for baking&#x27;. The basic recipe is thought by some to have originated with the Etruscans, but today it is widely associated with Ligurian cuisine, while outside Liguria the word usually refers to the Genoese variants.

The first attestation of the word dates back to the 14th century.

Focaccia is sometimes considered to be a variant of pizza in publications outside Italy, although focaccia is left to rise after being flattened, while pizza is baked immediately.

==Regional variants==

===Ligurian variants===

 (), marked by its finger-sized holes on its surface called dimples ( in Genoese dialect), is brushed or sprinkled with olive oil, coarse salt, and sometimes water before the final rise.

In Genoa, focaccia is eaten in the morning at breakfast or during the day. It is often dipped in milk or in cappuccino at breakfast and eaten warm and wet.

====Other Ligurian variants====

Focaccia has countless variations along the Ligurian coast, from the biscuit-hard () to the corn-flour, oily, soft Voltri version.

An extreme example is (), also called or , which is made in Recco, near Genoa. This version has cheese sandwiched between two layers of paper-thin dough.

===Other variants===
In northwest Italy, a popular variant is (), which is sprinkled lightly with sugar, and may include raisins or honey. In northeast Italy, () is typical for Easter; it is based on eggs, sugar, and butter. In the city of Rimini, is a sweet focaccia topped with raisins, almonds, walnuts, and pine nuts, and traditionally eaten in November for All Souls&#x27; Day.

In South Tyrol and the Austrian village of Krimml, (locally ) is a traditional Easter gift from godparents to their godchildren. It is made slightly thinner in the centre so that dyed eggs may be placed there.
 () is topped with rosemary. It may be served as an antipasto, table bread or snack. Whole or sliced fresh rosemary leaves may be used, as can dried rosemary. It may be garnished with sprigs of fresh rosemary, after baking, and sprinkled with salt. Potato rosemary focaccia is sometimes called &quot;potato pizza&quot; in New York City.

Although rosemary is the most common herb used to flavor focaccia, sage is also used, and the variant is called .

 may have a moist texture, and the exact recipe varies. It may be savory or sweet. It typically is baked, although it is sometimes fried. Garlic or basil may be added. It is sometimes served accompanied with slices of prosciutto. It may be used in the preparation of sandwiches.

==See also==

* Cuisine of Liguria
* Fougasse (bread)

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q832791" start="0" end="8" title="Focaccia" label="Focaccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q666242" start="14" end="18" title="Flatbread" label="flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q908833" start="19" end="27" title="leavening agent" label="leavened"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="39" end="46" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="47" end="52" title="bread" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="57" end="61" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q666242" start="90" end="99" title="flatbread" label="flatbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q21080963" start="155" end="169" title="sandwich bread" label="sandwich bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="239" end="251" title="ancient Rome" label="ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q585473" start="282" end="288" title="hearth" label="hearth"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="319" end="324" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="429" end="438" title="Etruscans" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q47175" start="479" end="495" title="Ligurian cuisine" label="Ligurian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479433" start="938" end="953" title="Genoese dialect" label="Genoese dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="985" end="994" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q159774" start="1161" end="1171" title="cappuccino" label="cappuccino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516072" start="1358" end="1364" title="Voltri" label="Voltri"/>
<link wikidata="Q266648" start="1435" end="1440" title="Recco" label="Recco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725942" start="1554" end="1569" title="northwest Italy" label="northwest Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13186" start="1651" end="1657" title="raisin" label="raisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="1662" end="1667" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q579075" start="1672" end="1687" title="northeast Italy" label="northeast Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="1707" end="1713" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369" start="1770" end="1776" title="Rimini" label="Rimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545507" start="1819" end="1825" title="almond" label="almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q208021" start="1828" end="1834" title="walnut" label="walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q212933" start="1841" end="1849" title="pine nut" label="pine nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033140" start="1892" end="1911" title="All Souls&amp;#x27; Day" label="All Souls&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="1917" end="1928" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q253792" start="1957" end="1963" title="Krimml" label="Krimml"/>
<link wikidata="Q102240169" start="2143" end="2151" title="rosemary" label="rosemary"/>
<link wikidata="Q622440" start="2176" end="2185" title="antipasto" label="antipasto"/>
<link wikidata="Q59541" start="2293" end="2302" title="Garnish (food)" label="garnished"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="2499" end="2503" title="herb" label="herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111359" start="2529" end="2533" title="Salvia officinalis" label="sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065033" start="2795" end="2805" title="prosciutto" label="prosciutto"/>
<link wikidata="Q47175" start="2873" end="2891" title="Cuisine of Liguria" label="Cuisine of Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751128" start="2894" end="2910" title="Fougasse (bread)" label="Fougasse (bread)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610851" wikidata="Q7803256" url="?curid=610851" title="Tim Burstall">
<text>Timothy Burstall AM (20 April 1927 – 19 April 2004) was an English Australian film director, writer and producer, best known for hit Australian movie &quot;Alvin Purple&quot; (1973) and its sequel &quot;Alvin Rides Again&quot; (1974).

Burstall&#x27;s films featured early appearances by many legendary Australian actors including Jack Thompson, Bruce Spence, Jacki Weaver, &quot;Alvin&quot; star Graeme Blundell, John Waters and Judy Davis.

Speaking just after Burstall&#x27;s death, David Williamson said that Burstall &quot;couldn&#x27;t stomach&quot; Australia&#x27;s lack of a film industry. &quot;He was determined to do something about it and he had the energy and spirit to do it. (He) was a very important cultural figure: highly intelligent, widely read, with a succinct and often highly controversial opinion on everything.&quot;

==Life==
Burstall was born in Stockton-on-Tees, County Durham, England in April 1927. His family came to Australia in 1937 after his father took up a chair as professor of engineering at the University of Melbourne. Attending Geelong Grammar, Burstall was taught by historian Manning Clark. When his parents returned to England after World War II he remained in Australia. He graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree with Honours in History from the University of Melbourne in 1946, where he resided at Queen&#x27;s College. He met Betty, whom he married, at the university. They built a mud brick house at Eltham, Victoria. The family home from 1967-2013 was 148 Nicholson Street, Fitzroy (sold, 2013). He later attended the University of Sydney and the University of California, Los Angeles.

Burstall originally wanted to be a novelist and thought that if he worked in film it might be a way to move into writing. He went to work for the National Film Library with a view to getting a job at the Commonwealth Film Unit as a scriptwriter. He worked on a series of documentaries, editing and writing for the Antarctic Division. He became interested in film making after seeing 1953 French film &quot;White Mane&quot; at the Melbourne International Film Festival.

He and Patrick Ryan established Eltham Films in 1959.

In February 2012 sections of Burstall&#x27;s personal journals from 1953–1955 were published by Melbourne University Press, under the title &quot;Memoirs of a Young Bastard&quot;.

==Early career==
Burstall&#x27;s first film was a black-and-white short, &quot;The Prize&quot;. With photography by Gérard Vandenberg, &quot;The Prize&quot; won a &quot;bronze&quot; at the 1960 Venice Film Festival. Burstall&#x27;s two young sons had acting roles.

Working with David Bilcock, Dusan Marek, Giorgio Mangiamele, Gérard Vandenburg, Alan Harkness and composer George Dreyfus, Eltham Films made many short subjects, including acclaimed documentaries on Australian art, and early children&#x27;s puppet series &quot;Sebastian the Fox&quot;. The latter first screened on the ABC in 1962-63, and Burstall later described the title character as &quot;one of the first recessive Oz heroes&quot;.

From 1965 to 67 Burstall was in the United States on a Harkness Fellowship. He studied scriptwriting with Paddy Chayefsky, directing with Martin Ritt, and acting with Lee Strasberg and the Actors Studio in New York.

==La Mama Theatre==
One of the results of the trip was the founding by Burstall&#x27;s wife, Betty, of La Mama Theatre, in the Melbourne suburb of Carlton. La Mama opened on 30 July 1967, modelled on the &quot;off-off-Broadway&quot; theatre of the same name in New York City.

==After America==

Burstall wrote and directed the 1969 feature &quot;2000 Weeks&quot;. A commercial failure, savaged by the critics, the film&#x27;s poor reception would lead Burstall to move to more populist works with his next films, &quot;Stork&quot; and sex comedy &quot;Alvin Purple&quot;. The film&#x27;s failure also influenced Bruce Beresford and Phillip Adams to move in a more populist direction when they came to make early Australian hit &quot;The Adventures of Barry McKenzie&quot; in 1972.

Burstall then formed a new company with Pat Ryan, David Bilcock and Rob Copping, Bilock and Copping with the view to making commercials to fund features. He looked at making a film called &quot;Filth&quot; and had money to develop it, but decided to make &quot;Stork&quot; instead.

==&quot;Stork&quot; and David Williamson ==
&quot;Stork&quot; appeared in 1971, and proved a moderate commercial success. Stork won multiple Australian Film Institute awards, including best narrative feature, best director and best actor.

After the breakout success of &quot;Alvin Purple&quot;, Burstall would later return to work with Williamson on three further films: social drama &quot;Petersen&quot; (1974), which was seen in England and the United States (for which Stanley Kubrick praised Burstall for his direction and Jack Thompson for his acting), big-budget romp &quot;Eliza Fraser&quot; (1976) and &quot;Duet for Four&quot; (1982), the tale of a mid-life crisis. Burstall has argued that &quot;Eliza Fraser&quot; was made for an increased budget after Roadshow insisted on overseas stars; Susannah York played Eliza, and the cast also included Trevor Howard.

==&quot;Alvin Purple&quot;==

After forming Hexagon Productions, Burstall directed, produced and co-wrote (with Alan Hopgood) his next feature, sex comedy &quot;Alvin Purple&quot; (1973). The film was released in some territories as &quot;The Sex Therapist&quot;. Burstall estimated that he made $120,000 from &quot;Alvin Purple&quot;. The film spawned a successful sequel which Burstall co-wrote. Later Hexagon films performed less well at the box office. In 1980 Burstall made a film for another company when he took over war movie &quot;Attack Force Z&quot; after Phillip Noyce had creative disagreements with the producers just before filming was due to begin.

==Television==
Burstall directed episodes of series including &quot;Special Squad&quot;, &quot;Return to Eden II&quot;, &quot;The Man from Snowy River&quot; and &quot;Water Rats&quot;. His miniseries &quot;Great Expectations: The Untold Story&quot; was the first co-production between an independent filmmaker and ABC TV.

==Recognition and achievements==

Burstall won a number of Australian Film Institute awards for his work, including best director for &quot;Stork&quot; (which also won the grand prize) and a best director nomination for his 1976 thriller &quot;End Play&quot;. His final theatrical feature was an adaptation of DH Lawrence novel &quot;Kangaroo&quot; in 1986. He was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia (AM) in the Australia Day Honours 1996. His wife Betty had been similarly honoured in 1993.

==Death==
On the evening of 18 April 2004 Burstall suffered a stroke. He was 76. He was survived by his wife Betty (d. 2013) and his sons Dan and Tom.

==Awards and nominations==
*1960?: Venice Film Festival. Award for &quot;The Prize&quot;
*1969: 6th Moscow International Film Festival - Golden Prize for &quot;2000 Weeks&quot;
*1987: 15th Moscow International Film Festival - Golden Prize for &quot;Kangaroo&quot;
*1996: Member of the Order of Australia

==Selected filmography==
*&quot;Sebastian the Fox&quot; (1961, director, children&#x27;s television series)
*&quot;Nullarbor Hideout&quot; (1964, director, children&#x27;s feature)
*&quot;Hombre&quot; (1967, assistant, feature)
*&quot;2000 Weeks&quot; (1969, director and scriptwriter, feature film)
*&quot;Getting Back to Nothing&quot; (1970, director, documentary)
*&quot;Stork&quot; (1971, director, feature film)
*&quot;Libido&quot; (1973, director, one part of the four part feature film - &quot;The Child&quot;)
*&quot;Alvin Purple&quot; (1973, director, feature film)
*&quot;Petersen&quot; (1974, director, feature film)
*&quot;Alvin Rides Again&quot; (1974, producer and co-writer, feature film)
*&quot;End Play&quot; (1975, director, feature film)
*&quot;Eliza Fraser&quot; (1976, director, feature film)
*&quot;High Rolling&quot; (1977, producer, feature film)
*&quot;The Last of the Knucklemen&quot; (1979, director, feature film)
*&quot;Attack Force Z&quot; (1981, director, feature film)
*&quot;Duet for Four&quot; (1982, director, feature film)
*&quot;A Descant for Gossips&quot; (1983, director and co-scriptwriter, three-part miniseries)
*&quot;The Naked Country&quot; (1985, director)
*&quot;Kangaroo&quot; (1986, director, feature film)
*&quot;Great Expectations: The Untold Story&quot; (1987, director and scriptwriter, miniseries)
*&quot;Nightmare at Bittercreek&quot; (1988, director, feature film)
*&quot;Water Rats: Dead in the Water&quot; (1996, director, telemovie length first episode of &quot;Water Rats&quot;)

===Shorts===
*&quot;The Prize&quot; (1960)
*&quot;Nullabor Hideout&quot; (1964)
*&quot;Kropp&#x27;s Last Tape&quot; (1966)
*&quot;The Hot Centre of the World&quot; (1971)
*&quot;Three Old Friends&quot; (1974)
*&quot;Blues From the Jungle&quot; (1977)

===Documentaries===
*&quot;Australian Art&quot; (1960–63) - 13 x 10 minute films
*&quot;Painting People&quot; (1965)
*&quot;Sculpture - Australia&quot; (1969)
*&quot;Getting Back to Nothing&quot; (1970)

===Unmade Films===
*&quot;Man in Iron&quot; (1960) - Burstall&#x27;s first screenplay, about Ned Kelly - he only managed to raise half the £50,000 budget required
*&quot;From the Other Island&quot; (early 1960s) - treatment about a juvenile delinquent who escapes from French Island prison
*&quot;Filth&quot; (1970) - based on an incident involving John Romeril&#x27;s play &quot;Mr Big, The Big Fat Pig&quot;
*&quot;Pendegast&quot; (1974) - meant to follow &quot;Alvin Purple&quot;, but an Alvin sequel was made instead

==Notes==
==References==
*Murray, Scott &#x27;Tim Burstall&#x27;, &quot;Cinema Papaers&quot; Sept-Oct 1979 p491 - 577.
*Obituary on Ninemsn
*Perry, Roland (2004) &quot;Not just films but an industry too: Tim Burstall, Filmmaker, 1927-2004&quot; (Obituary) in &quot;The Sydney Morning Herald&quot;, 22 April 2004, p. 30

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7803256" start="0" end="16" title="Tim Burstall" label="Timothy Burstall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="17" end="19" title="Member of the Order of Australia" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065203" start="59" end="77" title="English Australian" label="English Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526255" start="78" end="91" title="film director" label="film director"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738201" start="156" end="168" title="Alvin Purple" label="Alvin Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738206" start="203" end="220" title="Alvin Rides Again" label="Alvin Rides Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q356383" start="331" end="344" title="Jack Thompson (actor)" label="Jack Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q704314" start="346" end="358" title="Bruce Spence" label="Bruce Spence"/>
<link wikidata="Q241897" start="360" end="372" title="Jacki Weaver" label="Jacki Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592208" start="397" end="412" title="Graeme Blundell" label="Graeme Blundell"/>
<link wikidata="Q363876" start="414" end="425" title="John Waters (actor)" label="John Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q307882" start="430" end="440" title="Judy Davis" label="Judy Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q968980" start="486" end="502" title="David Williamson" label="David Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q989418" start="873" end="889" title="Stockton-on-Tees" label="Stockton-on-Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q23082" start="891" end="904" title="County Durham" label="County Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="906" end="913" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q319078" start="1034" end="1057" title="University of Melbourne" label="University of Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q633448" start="1069" end="1084" title="Geelong Grammar" label="Geelong Grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890752" start="1119" end="1132" title="Manning Clark" label="Manning Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="1236" end="1252" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q319078" start="1293" end="1316" title="University of Melbourne" label="University of Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269954" start="1346" end="1366" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s College (University of Melbourne)" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q15992823" start="1375" end="1380" title="Betty Burstall" label="Betty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437209" start="1450" end="1466" title="Eltham, Victoria" label="Eltham, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421389" start="1525" end="1532" title="Fitzroy, Victoria" label="Fitzroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="1569" end="1589" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="1598" end="1635" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199820" start="2044" end="2054" title="White Mane" label="White Mane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252683" start="2068" end="2105" title="Melbourne International Film Festival" label="Melbourne International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811908" start="2259" end="2285" title="Melbourne University Press" label="Melbourne University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="2410" end="2415" title="Short film" label="short"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2460" end="2477" title=":de:Gérard Vandenberg" label="Gérard Vandenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q873364" start="2513" end="2519" title="Bronze medal" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="2538" end="2558" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231407" start="2623" end="2636" title="David Bilcock" label="David Bilcock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2638" end="2649" title="Dusan Marek" label="Dusan Marek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563487" start="2651" end="2669" title="Giorgio Mangiamele" label="Giorgio Mangiamele"/>
<link wikidata="Q869751" start="2717" end="2731" title="George Dreyfus" label="George Dreyfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031619" start="2871" end="2888" title="Sebastian the Fox" label="Sebastian the Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="2929" end="2932" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658217" start="3103" end="3122" title="Harkness Fellowship" label="Harkness Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q180251" start="3154" end="3169" title="Paddy Chayefsky" label="Paddy Chayefsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q287451" start="3186" end="3197" title="Martin Ritt" label="Martin Ritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q297945" start="3215" end="3228" title="Lee Strasberg" label="Lee Strasberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q216458" start="3237" end="3250" title="Actors Studio" label="Actors Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q15992823" start="3358" end="3363" title="Betty Burstall" label="Betty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6463660" start="3368" end="3383" title="La Mama Theatre (Melbourne)" label="La Mama Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="3392" end="3401" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q47002" start="3412" end="3419" title="Carlton, Victoria" label="Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501058" start="3475" end="3491" title="off-off-Broadway" label="off-off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119375" start="3509" end="3522" title="La MaMa Experimental Theatre Club" label="the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597966" start="3612" end="3622" title="2000 Weeks" label="2000 Weeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q449220" start="3878" end="3893" title="Bruce Beresford" label="Bruce Beresford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130016" start="3898" end="3911" title="Phillip Adams (writer)" label="Phillip Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620062" start="4381" end="4386" title="Stork (film)" label="Stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178200" start="4722" end="4730" title="Petersen (film)" label="Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="4804" end="4819" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362135" start="4912" end="4924" title="Eliza Fraser (film)" label="Eliza Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312255" start="4948" end="4961" title="Duet for Four" label="Duet for Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q225509" start="5133" end="5146" title="Susannah York" label="Susannah York"/>
<link wikidata="Q343037" start="5188" end="5201" title="Trevor Howard" label="Trevor Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006540" start="5248" end="5267" title="Hexagon Productions" label="Hexagon Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706887" start="5316" end="5328" title="Alan Hopgood" label="Alan Hopgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738201" start="5365" end="5377" title="Alvin Purple" label="Alvin Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q463579" start="5744" end="5758" title="Attack Force Z" label="Attack Force Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q543563" start="5771" end="5784" title="Phillip Noyce" label="Phillip Noyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574733" start="5938" end="5951" title="Special Squad (1984)" label="Special Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081942" start="5965" end="5979" title="Return to Eden" label="Return to Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259533" start="5996" end="6020" title="The Man from Snowy River (1982 film)" label="The Man from Snowy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271561" start="6037" end="6047" title="Water Rats (TV series)" label="Water Rats"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6076" end="6112" title="Great Expectations: The Untold Story" label="Great Expectations: The Untold Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="6184" end="6190" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q781399" start="6252" end="6277" title="Australian Film Institute" label="Australian Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375802" start="6437" end="6445" title="End Play" label="End Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="6584" end="6602" title="Order of Australia" label="Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="6758" end="6764" title="Cerebrovascular accident" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156459" start="6944" end="6982" title="6th Moscow International Film Festival" label="6th Moscow International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597966" start="7008" end="7018" title="2000 Weeks" label="2000 Weeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053342" start="7032" end="7071" title="15th Moscow International Film Festival" label="15th Moscow International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6362508" start="7097" end="7105" title="Kangaroo (1987 film)" label="Kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="7133" end="7151" title="Order of Australia" label="Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783741" start="7341" end="7347" title="Hombre (film)" label="Hombre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597966" start="7388" end="7398" title="2000 Weeks" label="2000 Weeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620062" start="7527" end="7532" title="Stork (film)" label="Stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542266" start="7577" end="7583" title="Libido (1973 film)" label="Libido"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738201" start="7678" end="7690" title="Alvin Purple" label="Alvin Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178200" start="7735" end="7743" title="Petersen (film)" label="Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738206" start="7788" end="7805" title="Alvin Rides Again" label="Alvin Rides Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375802" start="7864" end="7872" title="End Play" label="End Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362135" start="7917" end="7929" title="Eliza Fraser (film)" label="Eliza Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756374" start="7974" end="7986" title="High Rolling" label="High Rolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746251" start="8031" end="8057" title="The Last of the Knucklemen" label="The Last of the Knucklemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q463579" start="8102" end="8116" title="Attack Force Z" label="Attack Force Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312255" start="8161" end="8174" title="Duet for Four" label="Duet for Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039369" start="8219" end="8240" title="A Descant for Gossips (miniseries)" label="A Descant for Gossips"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039744" start="8314" end="8331" title="The Naked Country" label="The Naked Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6362508" start="8362" end="8370" title="Kangaroo (1987 film)" label="Kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8415" end="8451" title="Great Expectations: The Untold Story" label="Great Expectations: The Untold Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q4237136" start="8511" end="8535" title="Nightmare at Bittercreek" label="Nightmare at Bittercreek"/>
<link wikidata="Q301816" start="9241" end="9250" title="Ned Kelly" label="Ned Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255535" start="9497" end="9509" title="John Romeril" label="John Romeril"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610852" wikidata="Q5539833" url="?curid=610852" title="George Goschen, 2nd Viscount Goschen">
<text>George Joachim Goschen, 2nd Viscount Goschen, (15 October 1866 – 24 July 1952), was a British Conservative politician who served as Governor of Madras from 1924 to 1929, and acting Viceroy of India from 1929 to 1931.

Goschen was the son of prominent Conservative (formerly Liberal and Liberal Unionist) politician and Chancellor of the Exchequer, George Goschen, 1st Viscount Goschen. He had his early education in the United Kingdom and served as Secretary to Victor Child Villiers, 7th Earl of Jersey, the Governor of New South Wales in Australia from 1890 to 1892. In 1895 and 1900, he was elected to the House of Commons from East Grinstead and served as a Member of Parliament from 1895 to 1906 and as the Parliamentary Secretary to the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries from March to June 1918. In 1924, he was appointed Governor of Madras Presidency, India, and served there from 1924 to 1929. He acted as the Viceroy of India in place of Edward Wood, 1st Earl of Halifax from 1929 to 1931. He died in 1952 at the age of 85.

Goschen was knighted the grace of Order of Saint John in 1921 and made a Knight Grand Commander of Order of the Star of India in March 1924. He was also a member of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom.

== Early life and family ==

Goschen was born the eldest son of George Joachim Goschen, 1st Viscount Goschen and his wife Lucy Dalley (1830–1898), daughter of John Dalley, on 15 October 1866 at St Leonards-on-Sea, Hastings. The Goschen family was eminent in both Germany and Britain; indeed, his grandfather, Wilhelm Heinrich Göschen, who settled in England in 1814 during the Napoleonic wars, was co-founder of the merchant banking firm Frühling &amp; Göschen and the son of publisher Georg Joachim Göschen, of Leipzig, Kingdom of Saxony. He was educated at Rugby School, and Balliol College, Oxford.

Goschen fell in love with Lady Margaret Evelyn Gathorne-Hardy, the youngest daughter the Earl of Cranbrook, who was eight years older than he was, but still desired to marry her. His father, the 1st Viscount, was, however, strongly opposed to their marriage and used his influence to get an appointment for his son as a Private Secretary to Lord Jersey, the Governor of New South Wales in Australia. Goschen calmly obeyed his father&#x27;s orders and worked in Australia from 1890 to 1892. On his return from Australia, however, he married Margaret in 1893.

He was a Major in the 2nd Volunteer Battalion of The Buffs (East Kent Regiment), and from February 1901 served as an Aide-de-camp (ADC) to Lord Roberts, Commander-in-Chief during the Second Boer War. He fought in the First World War as Commandant of the 2nd/5th Battalion, East Kent Regiment.

== Member of Parliament for East Grinstead ==
Goschen entered politics early in life. In 1895, he was elected to the House of Commons of the United Kingdom as a Conservative for the then East Grinstead constituency in Sussex and served as a member of parliament for two terms from 18 July 1895 to 25 January 1906. In July 1913, he was elected Chairman of the Council of the Corporation of Foreign Bondholders which comprised some of the leading financiers in England. Goschen served as the Parliamentary Secretary to the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries from March to June 1918.

Goschen succeeded his father as Viscount Goschen on the latter&#x27;s death on 7 February 1907. In December 1910, he was appointed a deputy lieutenant (DL) of Kent. He was also appointed Justice of the peace (JP) for Sussex.

== Governor of Madras ==
Goschen was appointed Governor of Madras in 1924 and he arrived at Madras in May 1924 to take charge. Goschen was awarded the Order of the Star of India (GCSI) in March 1924.

The Madras Presidency Radio Club started a radio transmission service in Madras, the first in the city, in 1924, under Goschen&#x27;s patronage. This service lasted from 1924 to 1927. Goschen was also involved in the early stages of the Loyola College, Chennai, and presided over its first college day in 1928. The Children&#x27;s Hospital at Mangalore was refurbished and renamed as Lady Goschen Hospital while the SPG College, Trichinopoly, was renamed as Bishop Heber College and Goschen presided over its diamond jubilee celebrations in 1926.

In November 1926, the Pykara hydroelectric project across the Moyar river was conceived by Lord Goschen.

Goschen maintained friendly relations with the Raja of Panagal who was the Chief Minister of Madras Presidency. However, in the 1926 elections to the Madras Legislative Assembly, the Justice Party, to which the Raja belonged, was reduced to a minority winning only 21 out of 98 seats in the assembly. The Raja stepped down as Chief Minister and handed over his resignation to the Governor. Goschen invited S. Srinivasa Iyengar, the leader of the Swarajya Party which had won a majority, to form the government, but he refused as the acceptance of public posts would defeat the very purpose of the Swarajists to disrupt the working of the dyarchy. Goschen, therefore, made an independent, P. Subbarayan, the Chief Minister, and nominated 34 members to the council to support him. As the government was set up by Goschen and all the members nominated by him, it functioned more or less like a puppet government.

Subbarayan&#x27;s government was the subject of much controversy and survived a no-confidence motion on 23 August 1927. Its position became more precarious when the Simon Commission arrived in India in 1928. The Swarajya Party moved a resolution exhorting a boycott of the commission and the Justice Party supported them. The motion was passed 65 to 50 with both of Subbarayan&#x27;s ministers in favour of a boycott. Subbarayan responded by resigning his post. Goschen, however, mediated a settlement with the Raja of Panagal and appointed a Justice Party nominee, Krishnan Nair to the Executive Council. The Justice Party, immediately, withdrew their support to the resolution and welcomed the commission. Just before his retirement from active politics in 1925, the Justice Party insisted upon a gift of land to their leader Theagaroya Chetty from the Madras government but Goschen staunchly refused to make the grant. A block named &quot;Goschen Block&quot; was constructed in the Government Estate (presently Omandurar Estate) in Mount Road. This had a number of houses allotted to Government officials and later to MLAs (P. Kakkan, Minister in the Kamaraj Government, lived in one). Goschen Block was demolished when construction of the new Assembly building (now a hospital) started.

During his tenure, the Yanam-Neelapalli bridge was constructed. Yanam was then a French colony. He laid the foundation stone for the bridge on 10 December 1927.

== Acting Viceroy of India ==

Lord Irwin, the Viceroy of India, left for London on leave in June 1929. He appointed Goschen to act as Viceroy and Governor-General during his absence, which lasted until November. He acted when Lord Irwin was periodically absent between 1929 and 1931. Indeed, as Irwin&#x27;s deputy, he was acting Viceroy several further times during Irwin&#x27;s tenure, such as in February 1930, when Irwin left India, and again in 1931 when he was overseeing the beginning of the Round Table conferences in Britain.

Lord Goschen&#x27;s tenure as Governor of Madras and then acting Viceroy was a period of lavish splendour. He partook in tiger hunting and horse racing, and hosted large, luxurious banquets and high-society weddings, such as that of his daughter to his ADC.

George Goschen&#x27;s father, the 1st Viscount, had been offered the Viceroyalty of India by British Liberal Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone in 1880, but had declined the offer.

== Later life ==
In 1933, a group which called itself the Union of Britain and India was formed in London. This group was in favour of an Indian federation. Goschen served as the first President of the union. Goschen also wrote a chapter titled &quot;Provincial Autonomy&quot; in the 1934 book &quot;India from a Back Bench&quot; where he criticized the dyarchy system regarding it as a failure based on his experience as an administrator in India.

== Personal life ==
On 26 January 1893, at Benenden, Kent, Lord Goschen married Lady Margaret Evelyn Gathorne-Hardy (27 May 1858 – 11 July 1943), youngest daughter of Gathorne Gathorne-Hardy, 1st Earl of Cranbrook by his wife Jane (née Stewart-Orr). Lady Goschen gave her name to the Viscountess Goschen Government Girls (Muslim) High School in Tharanallur, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, and to the Lady Goschen Hospital in Mangalore.

They had three children:

*Lt. Hon. George Joachim Goschen (18 November 1893 – 16 January 1916), 7th Battalion, The Buffs (East Kent Regiment); expected to succeed, but died of wounds received in action at the Siege of Kut
*Hon. Phyllis Evelyn Goschen (5 August 1895 – 27 May 1976), Lady-in-Waiting to Her Royal Highness the Princess Royal 1948–1965, married Lt Col. Francis Cecil Campbell Balfour, nephew of Prime Minister Arthur Balfour and grandson of the Duke of Argyll
*Hon. Cicely Winifred Goschen (29 April 1899 – 1980), married Maj. Melville Edward Bertram Portal, who had previously served as secretary to the Governor of Madras, in India

Goschen died on 25 July 1952 at the age of 85. His title passed to his nephew John Goschen.

Goschen owned Seacox Heath, a country house in East Sussex for many decades.

== References ==
== Sources ==

== Further reading ==
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5539833" start="0" end="44" title="George Goschen, 2nd Viscount Goschen" label="George Joachim Goschen, 2nd Viscount Goschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="94" end="106" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610749" start="132" end="150" title="Governor of Madras" label="Governor of Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="181" end="197" title="Governor-General of India" label="Viceroy of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="251" end="263" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="274" end="281" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754707" start="286" end="302" title="Liberal Unionist Party" label="Liberal Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q333749" start="348" end="384" title="George Goschen, 1st Viscount Goschen" label="George Goschen, 1st Viscount Goschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q336737" start="462" end="503" title="Victor Child Villiers, 7th Earl of Jersey" label="Victor Child Villiers, 7th Earl of Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="521" end="536" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="540" end="549" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139030" start="712" end="777" title="Parliamentary Secretary to the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries" label="Parliamentary Secretary to the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772596" start="841" end="858" title="Madras Presidency" label="Madras Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q333426" start="948" end="980" title="Edward Wood, 1st Earl of Halifax" label="Edward Wood, 1st Earl of Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1069" end="1088" title="Order of Saint John#Order of Saint John" label="Order of Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330936" start="1108" end="1160" title="Order of the Star of India" label="Knight Grand Commander of Order of the Star of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="1204" end="1217" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Honourable Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1225" end="1239" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q333749" start="1306" end="1350" title="George Goschen, 1st Viscount Goschen" label="George Joachim Goschen, 1st Viscount Goschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495335" start="1436" end="1454" title="St Leonards-on-Sea" label="St Leonards-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="1619" end="1634" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026849" start="1680" end="1702" title="Frühling &amp;amp; Göschen" label="Frühling &amp;amp; Göschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q97527" start="1728" end="1749" title="Georg Joachim Göschen" label="Georg Joachim Göschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="1754" end="1761" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q153015" start="1763" end="1780" title="Kingdom of Saxony" label="Kingdom of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143281" start="1801" end="1813" title="Rugby School" label="Rugby School"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="1819" end="1842" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q75263726" start="1871" end="1906" title="Margaret Goschen, Viscountess Goschen" label="Lady Margaret Evelyn Gathorne-Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527395" start="1934" end="1951" title="Gathorne Gathorne-Hardy, 1st Earl of Cranbrook" label="Earl of Cranbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q336737" start="2186" end="2197" title="Victor Child Villiers, 7th Earl of Jersey" label="Lord Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="2215" end="2230" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2234" end="2243" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896145" start="2413" end="2418" title="Major (British Army)" label="Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941026" start="2430" end="2439" title="Volunteer Army (British)" label="Volunteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899477" start="2453" end="2483" title="The Buffs (East Kent Regiment)" label="The Buffs (East Kent Regiment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="2521" end="2533" title="Aide-de-camp" label="Aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q335008" start="2543" end="2555" title="Frederick Roberts, 1st Earl Roberts" label="Lord Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713569" start="2557" end="2575" title="Commander-in-Chief of the Forces" label="Commander-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="2587" end="2602" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2621" end="2636" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="2815" end="2853" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="2859" end="2871" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q593845" start="2885" end="2912" title="East Grinstead Constituency" label="East Grinstead constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172538" start="3072" end="3106" title="Corporation of Foreign Bondholders" label="Corporation of Foreign Bondholders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139030" start="3188" end="3253" title="Parliamentary Secretary to the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries" label="Parliamentary Secretary to the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528184" start="3312" end="3328" title="Viscount Goschen" label="Viscount Goschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023512" start="3413" end="3430" title="deputy lieutenant" label="deputy lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="3467" end="3487" title="Justice of the peace" label="Justice of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="3598" end="3604" title="Madras" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330936" start="3657" end="3683" title="Order of the Star of India" label="Order of the Star of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694542" start="3944" end="3967" title="Loyola College, Chennai" label="Loyola College, Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q127041" start="4050" end="4059" title="Mangalore" label="Mangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q207754" start="4136" end="4148" title="Trichinopoly" label="Trichinopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q38198" start="4277" end="4283" title="Pykara" label="Pykara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531838" start="4408" end="4423" title="Raja of Panagal" label="Raja of Panagal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387908" start="4767" end="4787" title="S. Srinivasa Iyengar" label="S. Srinivasa Iyengar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605500" start="4807" end="4821" title="Swarajya Party" label="Swarajya Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q936648" start="4999" end="5006" title="dyarchy" label="dyarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117559" start="5049" end="5062" title="P. Subbarayan" label="P. Subbarayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642187" start="5437" end="5453" title="Simon Commission" label="Simon Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117577" start="6100" end="6117" title="Theagaroya Chetty" label="Theagaroya Chetty"/>
<link wikidata="Q277322" start="6587" end="6592" title="Yanam" label="Yanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q333426" start="6757" end="6767" title="Lord Irwin" label="Lord Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6800" end="6806" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735594" start="7226" end="7249" title="Round Table Conferences (India)" label="Round Table conferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801524" start="7384" end="7397" title="tiger hunting" label="tiger hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q16735902" start="7402" end="7414" title="Horse racing in India" label="horse racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="7516" end="7519" title="Aide-de-camp" label="ADC"/>
<link wikidata="Q333749" start="7556" end="7568" title="George Goschen, 1st Viscount Goschen" label="1st Viscount"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="7646" end="7669" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Ewart Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="7807" end="7813" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q936648" start="8062" end="8069" title="dyarchy" label="dyarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686542" start="8201" end="8215" title="Benenden, Kent" label="Benenden, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q75263726" start="8238" end="8273" title="Margaret Goschen, Viscountess Goschen" label="Lady Margaret Evelyn Gathorne-Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527395" start="8325" end="8371" title="Gathorne Gathorne-Hardy, 1st Earl of Cranbrook" label="Gathorne Gathorne-Hardy, 1st Earl of Cranbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710742" start="8503" end="8514" title="Tharanallur" label="Tharanallur"/>
<link wikidata="Q207754" start="8516" end="8531" title="Tiruchirappalli" label="Tiruchirappalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q127041" start="8581" end="8590" title="Mangalore" label="Mangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899477" start="8705" end="8735" title="The Buffs (East Kent Regiment)" label="The Buffs (East Kent Regiment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q815166" start="8803" end="8815" title="Siege of Kut" label="Siege of Kut"/>
<link wikidata="Q233913" start="8918" end="8932" title="Mary, Princess Royal and Countess of Harewood" label="Princess Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480451" start="8960" end="8990" title="Francis Balfour (colonial administrator)" label="Francis Cecil Campbell Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q19008" start="9017" end="9031" title="Arthur Balfour" label="Arthur Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q335300" start="9048" end="9066" title="George Campbell, 8th Duke of Argyll" label="the Duke of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231486" start="9134" end="9164" title="Portal baronets" label="Melville Edward Bertram Portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967527" start="9320" end="9332" title="John Goschen, 3rd Viscount Goschen" label="John Goschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q26564310" start="9349" end="9361" title="Seacox Heath" label="Seacox Heath"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610855" wikidata="Q2469078" url="?curid=610855" title="Crown Estate">
<text>The Crown Estate is a collection of lands and holdings in the United Kingdom belonging to the British monarch as a corporation sole, making it &quot;the sovereign&#x27;s public estate&quot;, which is neither government property nor part of the monarch&#x27;s private estate. The Crown Estate in England, Wales, and Northern Ireland is managed by the Crown Estate Commissioners, which trades as The Crown Estate. In Scotland, the Crown Estate is managed by Crown Estate Scotland, since the Scottish estate was devolved in 2017.

The sovereign has official ownership of the estate but is not involved with its management or administration; nor does the sovereign have personal control of its affairs. For all practical purposes, the Estate Commissioners shall exercise &quot;all such acts as belong to the Crown&#x27;s rights of ownership&quot; for the Estate &quot;on behalf of the Crown&quot;. The proceeds of the Estate, in part, funds the monarchy. The estate&#x27;s extensive portfolio is overseen by a semi-independent, incorporated public body headed by the Crown Estate Commissioners, who exercise &quot;the powers of ownership&quot; of the estate, although they are not &quot;owners in their own right&quot;. The revenues from these hereditary possessions have been placed by the monarch at the disposition of His Majesty&#x27;s Government in exchange for relief from the responsibility to fund the Civil Government. These revenues proceed directly to His Majesty&#x27;s Treasury, for the benefit of the British nation; a percentage of them is then distributed back to the monarch. The Crown Estate is formally accountable to the Parliament of the United Kingdom, where it is legally mandated to provide an annual report for the sovereign, a copy of which is forwarded to the House of Commons. 

The Crown Estate is one of the largest property managers in the United Kingdom, administering property worth £15.6 billion, with urban properties, valued at £9.1 billion, representing the majority of the estate by value. These include many properties in central London, but the estate also controls  of agricultural land and forest and more than half of the UK&#x27;s foreshore, and retains various other traditional holdings and rights, including Ascot Racecourse and Windsor Great Park. While Windsor Home Park is also part of the Crown Estate, occupied royal palaces, such as Windsor Castle itself, are not part of the Crown Estate, but are managed through the Royal Household. Naturally occurring gold and silver in the UK, collectively known as &quot;Mines Royal&quot;, are managed by the Crown Estate and leased to mining operators.

Historically, Crown Estate properties were administered by the reigning monarch to help fund the business of governing the country. However, in 1760, George III surrendered control over the estate&#x27;s revenues to the Treasury, thus relieving him of the responsibility of paying for the costs of the civil service, defence costs, the national debt, and his own personal debts. In return, he received an annual grant known as the Civil List.

By tradition, each subsequent monarch agreed to this arrangement upon his or her accession. On 1 April 2012, under the terms of the Sovereign Grant Act 2011 (SSG), the Civil List was abolished and the monarch has since been provided with a stable source of revenue indexed to a percentage of the Crown Estate&#x27;s annual net income. This was intended to provide a long-term solution and remove the politically sensitive issue of Parliament having to debate the Civil List allowance every ten years. Subsequently, the Sovereign Grant Act allows for all future monarchs to simply extend these provisions for their reigns by Order in Council. The act does not imply any legal change in the nature of the estate&#x27;s ownership, but is simply a benchmark by which the sovereign grant is set as a grant by Parliament. 

King Charles III Accession Council on 10 September 2022 &quot;was the first to include provision for the royal finances&quot;, and in one of his first signed Orders in Council, he confirmed his willingness to surrender control of the Crown&#x27;s hereditary revenues from the Crown Estate in exchange for the Sovereign Grant.

== History ==

=== Crown land in England and Wales ===
The history of the Crown lands in England and Wales begins with the Norman Conquest in 1066. By right of conquest, William I (r. 1066–1087) owned all the land in England and was able to redistribute it based on feudal principles. Tenants-in-chief received land directly from the king in return for military service. The land that the king kept for himself was called the royal demesne and divided into royal manors. 

When the Domesday survey was completed in 1086, the king was still the largest single landholder, possessing over 18 percent of the landed estates in England. Between 10 and 30 percent of each county belonged to the royal demesne. The king delegated management of royal lands to his sheriffs. Each year, the sheriff paid the king a fixed sum called the &quot;county farm&quot; and was allowed to keep any surplus. The county farms were the largest source of royal revenue, totaling over £10,000 annually.

The size of the royal demesne fluctuated over time. The 70 years after William I died saw substantial alienation of lands, especially during the Anarchy when King Stephen and Empress Matilda attempted to buy support with land grants. Crown lands were often used as patronage to reward the king&#x27;s family, friends, and servants. At the same time, the Crown lands also grew through confiscations and escheat.

The Crown lands were augmented as well as depleted over the centuries: Edward I extended his possessions into Wales, and James (VI &amp; I) had his own Crown lands in Scotland which were ultimately combined with the Crown lands of England and Wales. The disposals outweighed the acquisitions: at the time of the Restoration in 1660, the total revenue arising from Crown lands was estimated to be £263,598 (equal to £ today). By the end of the reign of William III (1689–1702) it was reduced to some £6,000 (equal to £ today).

Before the reign of William III all the revenues of the kingdom were bestowed on the monarch for the general expenses of government. These revenues were of two kinds:
*the hereditary revenues, derived principally from the Crown lands, feudal rights (commuted for the hereditary excise duties in 1660), profits of the post office, with licences, etc.
*the temporary revenues derived from taxes granted to the king for a term of years or for life.

After the Glorious Revolution, Parliament retained under its own control the greater part of the temporary revenues, and relieved the sovereign of the cost of the naval and military services and the burden of the national debt. During the reigns of William III, Anne, George I and George II the sovereign remained responsible for the maintenance of the civil government and for the support of the royal household and dignity, being allowed for these purposes the hereditary revenues and certain taxes.

As the state machinery expanded, the cost of the civil government exceeded the income from the Crown lands and feudal rights; this created a personal debt for the monarch.

On George III&#x27;s accession he surrendered the income from the Crown lands to Parliament, and abrogated responsibility for the cost of the civil government and the clearance of associated debts. As a result, and to avoid pecuniary embarrassment, he was granted a fixed civil list payment and the income retained from the Duchy of Lancaster. The King surrendered to parliamentary control the hereditary excise duties, post office revenues, and &quot;the small branches&quot; of hereditary revenue including rents of the Crown lands in England (which amounted to about £11,000, or £ today), and was granted a civil list annuity of £800,000 (equal to £ today) for the support of his household, subject to the payment of certain annuities to members of the royal family.

Although the King had retained large hereditary revenues, his income proved insufficient for his charged expenses because he used the privilege to reward supporters with bribes and gifts. Debts amounting to over £3 million (equal to £ today) over the course of George&#x27;s reign were paid by Parliament, and the civil list annuity was then increased from time to time.

Every succeeding sovereign down to and including Charles III renewed the arrangement made between George III and Parliament. By the 19th century the practice was recognised as &quot;an integral part of the Constitution [which] would be difficult to abandon&quot;. Nevertheless, a review of funding arrangements for the monarchy led to the passage of the Sovereign Grant Act 2011, which according to HM Treasury, is:

A new consolidated grant rounding together the Civil List, Royal Palaces and Royal Travel grants-in-aid. It is intended that future funding will be set as a fraction of The Crown Estate revenue and paid through the annual Treasury Estimates process, and subject to full National Audit Office audit...

The Grant is to enable The Queen to discharge her duties as Head of State. i.e. it meets the central staff costs and running expenses of Her Majesty&#x27;s official Household – such things as official receptions, investitures, garden parties and so on. It will also cover the maintenance of the Royal Palaces in England and the cost of travel to carry out royal engagements such as opening buildings and other royal visits...

While the amount of the Grant will be linked to the profits of the Crown Estate, those profits will continue to be paid in to the Exchequer; they are not to be hypothecated. Setting the Grant at a percentage of profits of the Crown Estate will help to put in place a durable and transparent framework.

In April 2014 it was reported that the Crown Estate was proposing to sell about 200 of its 750 rural homes in the UK, and was evicting tenants in preparation.

==== Wales ====
The Crown Estate in Wales includes the coastal seabed up to 12 nautical miles, approximately 65% of the foreshore as well as the Welsh river bed and ports and marinas. The estate also owns over 50,000 acres of Welsh upland and common land, mainly rough grazing land, and 250,000 acres of mineral deposits and the rights to gold and silver.
Various offshore wind projects are part of the Crown Estate in Wales, including the proposed Awel y Môr, Erebus 100MW Test and Demonstration project, and three 100M projects (in their assessment stage). The Crown Estate announced £1.2million would be invested into the Morlais tidal stream demonstration zone, developed by Menter Môn.

The value of the Welsh Crown Estate has risen from £49.2m in 2020 to £549.1m in 2021, and then to £603m in 2022. The revenue of the Welsh Crown Estate in 2021 was £8.7m. Of the Crown Estate revenue; 75% goes to the UK Treasury whilst 25% is given to the monarch.

In Wales, there have been multiple calls for the Crown Estate in Wales to be devolved, including by Plaid Cymru, Welsh Labour and the Welsh Liberal Democrats. An opinion poll in May 2023 also showed strong support for devolving the estate in Wales with a majority of 58% of the people of Wales supporting the devolution of the Crown Estate compared to 19% who are opposed and 23% who don&#x27;t know. Poll breakdown showed that all major political party voters supported devolution of the estate in Wales. 

In January 2025, a UK government minister stated no discussions with the Welsh government had taken place, although by February 2025 they clarified that the Welsh government had asked for devolution. The UK government stated they view devolution not to be in &quot;[Wales&#x27;s] best interests&quot; and expressed concerns over the impact to the energy sector, while the Welsh government says devolution would allow money raised by the estate to be spent in Wales. Eluned Morgan, First Minister and Welsh Labour leader admitted Labour is split on the issue.
By 21 February 2025, a majority of Wales principal area councils supported motions advocating to devolve the Crown Estate in Wales. On 24 February 2025, the UK Government rejected calls for the Crown Estate to be devolved to Wales.

=== Crown land in Ireland ===
In 1793, George III surrendered the hereditary revenues of the Kingdom of Ireland, and was granted a civil list annuity for certain expenses of Irish civil government. Most of the Crown land by then was from forfeitures after the 1641 rebellion or the 1688–91 revolution, with some smaller older parcels remaining from earlier rebellions, the Dissolution of the Monasteries and the Norman period. Most confiscated land had been granted away again, as under the Adventurers&#x27; Act 1642, Act of Settlement 1662, and the Act of Resumption 1700.

The balance which remained in Crown hands included the &quot;undisposed lands&quot; of the 1662 settlement (worth less than the small quit rent that a grantee would have had to pay) and the balance unsold by the trustees under the 1700 act at its 1703 time limit. The scattered Crown lands were farmed out on long leases with little regard to the collection of rent. Responsibility lay with the Quit Rent Office, which was absorbed in 1827 by the Commissioners of Woods, Forests and Land Revenues. The largest Crown estate in the 1820s was Pobble O&#x27;Keefe in Sliabh Luachra at .

In 1828 the lease expired, and Richard Griffith was appointed to supervise its improvement, including the foundation of the model village of Kingwilliamstown. In the early 1830s the Crown Estate resumed possession of land in Ballykilcline following the insanity of the head lessee. The occupational sub-lessees were seven years in arrears with their rent and the result was the Ballykilcline &quot;removals&quot; – free emigration to the new world in 1846. There was further state-assisted emigration from overpopulated Crown estates during the Great Famine. There is evidence of Crown Estate public work schemes to employ the more distressed in improving drainage etc. In 1854 a select committee of the House of Lords concluded that the small estates in Ireland should be sold. were subsequently sold for circa £25,000 (equal to £million today) at auction and £10,000 (equal to £million today) by private treaty: a major disinvestment, with reinvestment in Great Britain.

Article 11 of the 1922 Constitution of the Irish Free State provided that Crown Estate land within the Irish Free State would belong to the state, which took over administrative responsibilities on 1 April 1923. At the time of handover, quit rents totalled £23,418 (equal to £million today) and rent from property £1,191 (equal to £ today). The estates handed over mostly comprised foreshore.

The Crown Estate in Northern Ireland in 1960 comprised &quot;a few quit rents ... yielding yearly only £38.&quot; By 2016 it had an income of £1.4million, from cables, pipelines and windfarms on the foreshore, and goldmining in County Tyrone. Development of the seabed below low tide is hampered by a sovereignty dispute with the Republic of Ireland.

=== Crown land in Scotland ===
It was not until 1830 that King William IV revoked the income from the Crown estates in Scotland. The hereditary land revenues of the Crown in Scotland, formerly under the management of the Barons of the Exchequer, were transferred to the Commissioners of Woods, Forests, Land Revenues, Works and Buildings and their successors under the Crown Lands (Scotland) Acts of 1832, 1833 and 1835. These holdings mainly comprised former ecclesiastical land (following the abolition of the episcopacy in 1689) in Caithness and Orkney, and ancient royal possession in Stirling and Edinburgh, and feudal dues.

There was virtually no urban property. Most of the present Scottish estate excepting foreshore and salmon fishing is due to inward investment, including Glenlivet Estate, the largest area of land managed by the Crown Estate in Scotland, purchased in 1937, Applegirth, Fochabers and Whitehill estates, purchased in 1963, 1937 and 1969 respectively.

After winning the 2011 Scottish election, the Scottish National Party (SNP) called for the devolution of the Crown Estate income to Scotland. In response to this demand, the Scotland Office decided against dividing up the Crown Estates. However, plans were developed to allocate some of the Crown Estate income to the Big Lottery Fund, which would then distribute funds to coastal communities. These plans were criticised by the SNP.

==== Crown Estate Scotland ====
The Scotland Act 2016 allowed the Scottish Government to take control of a portfolio of assets totalling £272 million ($339.6 million) after a devolved Scottish Crown Estate was established, including the rights to develop marine energy projects in the country. A new public body, Crown Estate Scotland (CES), was established to manage these assets. The Scotland Act 2016 allowed a transfer scheme to for devolution of powers over the management of revenue management of Scottish assets on 1 April 2017.

Prior to the handover, the Crown Estate owned a multi-million stake in Fort Kinnaird retail park in Edinburgh representing about 60% of the value of all Crown assets in Scotland. This was not passed to Crown Estates Scotland with other Scottish properties in 2016. Two years later, the Crown Estate sold its stake and used the funds to assume full ownership of the Gallagher Retail Park in Cheltenham.

== Present day ==
=== Crown Estate Act 1961 ===

The Crown Estate is now a statutory corporation run on commercial lines by the Crown Estate Commissioners under the provisions of the Crown Estate Act 1961 (9 &amp; 10 Eliz. 2. c. 55). Under that act, the Crown Estate Commissioners have a duty &quot;while maintaining the Crown Estate as an estate in land [...] to maintain and enhance its value and the return obtained from it, but with due regard to the requirements of good management&quot;.

The act provides among other things that (Section 1(5)) &quot;The validity of transactions entered into by the Commissioners shall not be called in question on any suggestion of their not having acted in accordance with the provisions of this Act regulating the exercise of their powers, or of their having otherwise acted in excess of their authority, nor shall any person dealing with the Commissioners be concerned to inquire as to the extent of their authority or the observance of any restrictions on the exercise of their powers&quot;.

==== Summary of the act ====
The act includes the following:
*The Crown Estate is an estate in land only, apart from cash and gilts holdings necessary for the conduct of business.
*The Crown Estate Commissioners, who comprise the main board, are approved by the monarch on the advice of the Prime Minister. They are limited to eight persons.
*The board of commissioners have a duty to:
**maintain and enhance the capital value of the estate and its revenue income; but at the same time
**take into account the need to observe a high standard of estate management practice.
*When selling or letting its property the Crown Estate should always seek to achieve the best consideration (i.e. price) which can reasonably be obtained in all the circumstances, but discounting any monopoly value (mainly from ownership of the foreshore and seabed).
*The Crown Estate cannot grant leases for a term of longer than 150 years.
*The Crown Estate cannot grant land options for more than ten years unless the property is re-valued when the option is exercised.
*The Crown Estate cannot borrow money.
*Donations can be made for religious or educational purposes connected with the estate or for tenants&#x27; welfare. Otherwise, charitable donations are forbidden.
*The character of the Windsor Estate (park and forest) must be preserved; no part of the estate may be sold.
*A report should be submitted to the monarch and to Parliament annually, showing the performance of the estate over the previous year.
*The Crown Estate should observe professional accounting practices and distinguish in its accounts between capital and revenue.
*Money received as a premium from a tenant on the granting of a new lease should be allocated between capital and revenue as follows:
**where the lease is for a term of thirty years or less it must be treated as revenue;
**for leases of more than thirty years it must be treated as capital.

In 2010 a UK Parliament Treasury Committee report on the Crown Estate, the first for twenty years, reported that
* it is &quot;alarmed&quot; that the Crown Estate in 2007 started investing in joint ventures such as the Gibraltar Limited Partnership, which it says is in &quot;grave&quot; financial difficulties. The Crown Estate owns 50% of the partnership, which owns the Fort Kinnaird retail park near Edinburgh;
* the Crown Estate has a monopoly over the marine environment, and has focused too strongly on collecting revenues rather than acting in the long-term public interest around ports and harbours;
* the quality of residential property management in the urban estate falls short. Consultation processes have lacked transparency, and the committee was &quot;particularly concerned&quot; that the Crown Estate had failed to consult local bodies which had rights to nominate key workers;
* some non-commercial historic properties should be reviewed with a view to transferring management to conservation bodies such as English Heritage;
* ministers should take a greater interest in the Crown Estate, because its overall management struggles to balance revenue generation with acting in the wider public interest.

Crown Estate chief executive Roger Bright said: &quot;We welcome the Committee’s recognition that we run a successful business operation.&quot;

== Holdings ==

=== Urban portfolio ===

This includes the entirety of Regent Street and around half of St James&#x27;s in London&#x27;s West End as well as retail property across the UK in locations including Oxford, Exeter, Nottingham, Newcastle, Harlow, and Swansea.

In 2002 the Crown Estate began implementing a £1 billion investment programme to improve Regent Street&#x27;s commercial, retail, and visitor facilities and public realm. In addition, it is investing £500 million in St James&#x27;s, including a number of major redevelopments.

=== Rural portfolio ===

Holdings consist of around 116,000 hectares (287,000 acres) of agricultural land and forests, together with minerals and residential and commercial property.

=== Windsor Estate ===

The Windsor Estate covers approximately 6,300 hectares and includes Windsor Great Park, the Home Park of Windsor Castle, extensive forests, residential and commercial properties, golf courses, a racecourse and let farms.

=== Marine holdings ===

The Crown Estate&#x27;s marine holdings consist of:

The Crown Estate plays a major role in the development of the offshore wind energy industry in the UK. Other commercial activity managed by the Crown Estate on the seabed includes wave and tidal energy, carbon capture and storage, aggregates, submarine cables and pipelines and the mining of potash. In terms of the foreshore, the Crown Estate issue licences or leases for around 850 aquaculture sites and owns marina space for approximately 18,000 moorings. , marine holdings had a value of £4.1 billion.

=== Other rights and interests ===
Other rights and interests include:
=== Finances ===
In the 2021/2022 fiscal year, the Crown Estate&#x27;s property evaluation was £15.6 billion with a £312.7 million net revenue profit, which is paid into the Consolidated Fund of the UK government.

== Governance ==
=== Historical ===
Previous officials responsible for managing what is now the Crown Estate were:
*Surveyor General of Woods, Forests, Parks, and Chases and Surveyor General of the Land Revenues of the Crown, 17th century to 1810
*Commissioners of Woods, Forests and Land Revenues, 1810–1831
*Commissioners of Woods, Forests, Land Revenues, Works and Buildings, 1832–1850
*Commissioners of Woods, Forests and Land Revenues, 1851–1924
*Commissioners of Crown Lands, 1924–1954

=== Chairmen and chief executives of the Crown Estate Commissioners ===
Chairmen (First Commissioner)
*1955–62 – Sir Malcolm Trustram Eve (later Lord Silsoe) (1894–1976)
*1962–77 – John Drummond, 8th Earl of Perth (1907–2002)
*1977–80 – George Thomson, Baron Thomson of Monifieth (1921–2008)
*1980–85 – Robert Lindsay, 29th Earl of Crawford (1927–2023)
*1985–95 – William Murray, 8th Earl of Mansfield and Mansfield (1930–2015)
*1995–2002 – Sir Denys Henderson (1932–2016)
*2002–2009 – Sir Ian David Grant (1943–2022)
*2010–2016 – Sir Stuart Hampson (born 1947)
*2016 – Sir Robin Budenberg (born 1959)

Chief executives (Second Commissioner)
*1955–60 – Sir Ronald Montague Joseph Harris (1913–1995)
*1960–68 – Sir Jack Alexander Sutherland-Harris (1908–1986)
*1968–78 – Sir William Alan Wood (1916–2010)
*1978–83 – Sir John Michael Moore (1921–2016)
*1983–89 – Dr Keith Dexter (1928–1989)
*1989-2001 – Sir Christopher Howes (born 1942)
*2001–2011 – Roger Martin Francis Bright (born 1951)
*2012–2019 – Dame Alison Nimmo (born 1964)
*2019 – Dan Labbad

The chairman (formally titled &quot;first commissioner&quot;) is part-time. The chief executive (the &quot;second commissioner&quot;) is the only full-time executive member of the Crown Estate&#x27;s board.

== See also ==
*Balmoral Castle
*Crown Estate Paving Commission
*Crown Estate Scotland
*Duchy of Cornwall
*Duchy of Lancaster
*Prince&#x27;s Coverts – Area of managed woodland in Oxshott, Surrey
*Regent Street
*Sandringham House
*Windsor Great Park
* Patrimonio Nacional

== Notes ==

== References ==
*Annual Reports of Commissioners of Woods and Forests 1811, 1853 and 1855
* 
*Crown Estate, Annual report and accounts 2009. Retrieved July 2009
*

==Further reading==

== External links ==
**Crown Estate annual report of assets</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2469078" start="0" end="16" title="Crown Estate" label="The Crown Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="62" end="76" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="94" end="109" title="British monarch" label="British monarch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="115" end="131" title="Corporation sole#The Crown" label="corporation sole"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="295" end="302" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="304" end="309" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="315" end="331" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469078" start="350" end="376" title="Crown Estate" label="Crown Estate Commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417728" start="384" end="393" title="trade name" label="trades as"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="415" end="423" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30603015" start="456" end="477" title="Crown Estate Scotland" label="Crown Estate Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="528" end="541" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="The sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340806" start="979" end="988" title="financial portfolio" label="portfolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="1317" end="1346" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Government" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q578269" start="1459" end="1486" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Treasury" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="1637" end="1669" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="1783" end="1799" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q421069" start="2171" end="2180" title="foreshore" label="foreshore"/>
<link wikidata="Q723336" start="2251" end="2267" title="Ascot Racecourse" label="Ascot Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569306" start="2272" end="2290" title="Windsor Great Park" label="Windsor Great Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139618" start="2298" end="2315" title="Home Park, Windsor" label="Windsor Home Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="2382" end="2396" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q56877" start="2467" end="2482" title="Royal Households of the United Kingdom" label="Royal Household"/>
<link wikidata="Q48698799" start="2787" end="2791" title="Civil List Act 1760" label="1760"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="2793" end="2803" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3074" end="3084" title="civil list#United Kingdom" label="Civil List"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571601" start="3219" end="3243" title="Sovereign Grant Act 2011" label="Sovereign Grant Act 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="3711" end="3727" title="Order in Council" label="Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156248" start="4321" end="4338" title="England and Wales" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="4355" end="4370" title="Norman Conquest" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895359" start="4383" end="4400" title="right of conquest" label="right of conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="4402" end="4411" title="William the Conqueror" label="William I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446027" start="4498" end="4504" title="Feudalism in England" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518201" start="4517" end="4533" title="Tenant-in-chief" label="Tenants-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q155231" start="4664" end="4671" title="demesne" label="demesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="4714" end="4722" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138494" start="4898" end="4904" title="Historic counties of England" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="4988" end="4996" title="Sheriff" label="sheriffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379785" start="5064" end="5075" title="Farm (revenue leasing)" label="county farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519156" start="5313" end="5323" title="Alienation (property law)" label="alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q743768" start="5352" end="5363" title="the Anarchy" label="the Anarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60849" start="5369" end="5381" title="Stephen, King of England" label="King Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q150872" start="5386" end="5401" title="Empress Matilda" label="Empress Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="5476" end="5485" title="patronage" label="patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q552592" start="5613" end="5620" title="escheat" label="escheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="5694" end="5702" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="5733" end="5738" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="5744" end="5762" title="James I of England" label="James (VI &amp;amp; I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="5935" end="5946" title="English Restoration" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="6075" end="6086" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="6607" end="6626" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="6628" end="6638" title="English Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="6810" end="6823" title="Government debt" label="national debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="6865" end="6873" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="6878" end="6887" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q206874" start="7545" end="7555" title="civil list" label="civil list"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914544" start="7597" end="7615" title="Duchy of Lancaster" label="Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="8465" end="8476" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571601" start="8770" end="8794" title="Sovereign Grant Act 2011" label="Sovereign Grant Act 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q20599453" start="10704" end="10714" title="Menter Môn" label="Menter Môn"/>
<link wikidata="Q118142554" start="11058" end="11066" title="Proposed further Welsh devolution" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q336521" start="11955" end="11968" title="Eluned Morgan" label="Eluned Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979307" start="12089" end="12103" title="principal areas of Wales" label="principal area"/>
<link wikidata="Q123758171" start="12104" end="12112" title="local government in Wales" label="councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="12374" end="12392" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Kingdom of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461147" start="12541" end="12555" title="Irish Rebellion of 1641" label="1641 rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320981" start="12563" end="12581" title="Williamite War in Ireland" label="1688–91 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="12654" end="12684" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="Dissolution of the Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910686" start="12693" end="12706" title="Norman Ireland" label="Norman period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753051" start="12772" end="12793" title="Adventurers&amp;#x27; Act" label="Adventurers&amp;#x27; Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676696" start="12800" end="12822" title="Act of Settlement 1662" label="Act of Settlement 1662"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624082" start="12991" end="13000" title="quit rent" label="quit rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379785" start="13152" end="13158" title="Farm (revenue leasing)" label="farmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152876" start="13304" end="13353" title="Commissioners of Woods, Forests and Land Revenues" label="Commissioners of Woods, Forests and Land Revenues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291278" start="13420" end="13434" title="Sliabh Luachra" label="Sliabh Luachra"/>
<link wikidata="Q454700" start="13472" end="13488" title="Sir Richard Griffith, 1st Baronet" label="Richard Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888356" start="13565" end="13578" title="model village" label="model village"/>
<link wikidata="Q4076747" start="13582" end="13598" title="Kingwilliamstown" label="Kingwilliamstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809078" start="13856" end="13871" title="Assisted colonization" label="free emigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="13986" end="13998" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="14196" end="14203" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282250" start="14363" end="14376" title="disinvestment" label="disinvestment"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="14399" end="14412" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515419" start="14438" end="14474" title="Constitution of the Irish Free State" label="Constitution of the Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="14518" end="14534" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624082" start="14652" end="14662" title="quit-rent" label="quit rents"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="14829" end="14845" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192229" start="15037" end="15050" title="County Tyrone" label="County Tyrone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15108" end="15129" title="Republic of Ireland–United Kingdom border#Waters around Northern Ireland" label="a sovereignty dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="15139" end="15158" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130822" start="15219" end="15234" title="William IV of the United Kingdom" label="King William IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="15280" end="15288" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178372" start="15382" end="15405" title="Court of Exchequer (Scotland)" label="Barons of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152876" start="15431" end="15498" title="Commissioners of Woods, Forests and Land Revenues" label="Commissioners of Woods, Forests, Land Revenues, Works and Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q864668" start="15696" end="15705" title="Caithness" label="Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="15710" end="15716" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q182923" start="15750" end="15758" title="Stirling" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568580" start="15945" end="15961" title="Glenlivet Estate" label="Glenlivet Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862416" start="16159" end="16181" title="2011 Scottish Parliament election" label="2011 Scottish election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="16187" end="16210" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q744894" start="16232" end="16242" title="devolution in the United Kingdom" label="devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q277020" start="16315" end="16330" title="Scotland Office" label="Scotland Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905974" start="16459" end="16475" title="Big Lottery Fund" label="Big Lottery Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713000" start="16612" end="16629" title="Scotland Act 2016" label="Scotland Act 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="16642" end="16661" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q30603015" start="16889" end="16910" title="Crown Estate Scotland" label="Crown Estate Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471430" start="17184" end="17197" title="Fort Kinnaird" label="Fort Kinnaird"/>
<link wikidata="Q206988" start="17503" end="17513" title="Cheltenham" label="Cheltenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q699386" start="17591" end="17612" title="statutory corporation" label="statutory corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q108179451" start="17722" end="17740" title="9 &amp;amp; 10 Eliz. 2" label="9 &amp;amp; 10 Eliz. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q566087" start="18680" end="18685" title="gilts" label="gilts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471430" start="20841" end="20854" title="Fort Kinnaird" label="Fort Kinnaird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123106" start="21907" end="21920" title="Regent Street" label="Regent Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q124234" start="21940" end="21955" title="St James&amp;#x27;s" label="St James&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q460735" start="21959" end="21981" title="West End of London" label="London&amp;#x27;s West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="22046" end="22052" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="22054" end="22060" title="Exeter" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="22062" end="22072" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="22074" end="22083" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q852729" start="22085" end="22091" title="Harlow" label="Harlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="22097" end="22104" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569306" start="22661" end="22679" title="Windsor Great Park" label="Windsor Great Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139618" start="22685" end="22694" title="Home Park, Windsor" label="Home Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="22698" end="22712" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41491" start="23096" end="23122" title="carbon capture and storage" label="carbon capture and storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564271" start="23185" end="23191" title="potash" label="potash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163273" start="23645" end="23662" title="Consolidated Fund" label="Consolidated Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="23670" end="23683" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="UK government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647132" start="23802" end="23855" title="Surveyor General of Woods, Forests, Parks, and Chases" label="Surveyor General of Woods, Forests, Parks, and Chases"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647133" start="23860" end="23910" title="Surveyor General of the Land Revenues of the Crown" label="Surveyor General of the Land Revenues of the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152877" start="23934" end="23983" title="Commissioners of Woods and Forests" label="Commissioners of Woods, Forests and Land Revenues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152876" start="23996" end="24063" title="Commissioners of Woods, Forests and Land Revenues" label="Commissioners of Woods, Forests, Land Revenues, Works and Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152876" start="24076" end="24125" title="Commissioners of Woods, Forests and Land Revenues" label="Commissioners of Woods, Forests and Land Revenues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152874" start="24138" end="24166" title="Commissioners of Crown Lands (UK)" label="Commissioners of Crown Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742674" start="24296" end="24316" title="Malcolm Trustram Eve, 1st Baron Silsoe" label="Malcolm Trustram Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230181" start="24360" end="24392" title="John Drummond, 8th Earl of Perth" label="John Drummond, 8th Earl of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q332630" start="24416" end="24458" title="George Thomson, Baron Thomson of Monifieth" label="George Thomson, Baron Thomson of Monifieth"/>
<link wikidata="Q335822" start="24482" end="24519" title="Robert Lindsay, 29th Earl of Crawford" label="Robert Lindsay, 29th Earl of Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614992" start="24543" end="24594" title="William Murray, 8th Earl of Mansfield and Mansfield" label="William Murray, 8th Earl of Mansfield and Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259852" start="24624" end="24639" title="Denys Henderson" label="Denys Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5981366" start="24669" end="24684" title="Ian David Grant" label="Ian David Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626623" start="24714" end="24728" title="Stuart Hampson" label="Stuart Hampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239225" start="24753" end="24768" title="Robin Budenberg" label="Robin Budenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q64562709" start="24953" end="24970" title="William Alan Wood" label="William Alan Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q65031416" start="24998" end="25016" title="John Moore (civil servant)" label="John Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112578" start="25085" end="25102" title="Christopher Howes" label="Christopher Howes"/>
<link wikidata="Q20027880" start="25186" end="25198" title="Alison Nimmo" label="Alison Nimmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42049" start="25455" end="25470" title="Balmoral Castle" label="Balmoral Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189355" start="25472" end="25502" title="Crown Estate Paving Commission" label="Crown Estate Paving Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q30603015" start="25504" end="25525" title="Crown Estate Scotland" label="Crown Estate Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q876107" start="25527" end="25544" title="Duchy of Cornwall" label="Duchy of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914544" start="25546" end="25564" title="Duchy of Lancaster" label="Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243732" start="25566" end="25587" title="Prince&amp;#x27;s Coverts" label="Prince&amp;#x27;s Coverts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123106" start="25635" end="25648" title="Regent Street" label="Regent Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q935116" start="25650" end="25667" title="Sandringham House" label="Sandringham House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569306" start="25669" end="25687" title="Windsor Great Park" label="Windsor Great Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891189" start="25690" end="25709" title="Patrimonio Nacional" label="Patrimonio Nacional"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610858" wikidata="Q2891174" url="?curid=610858" title="Biblical Hittites">
<text>The Hittites, also spelled Hethites, were a group of people mentioned in the Hebrew Bible. Under the names (&quot;bny-ḥt&quot; &quot;children of Heth&quot;, who was the son of Canaan) and (&quot;ḥty&quot; &quot;native of Heth&quot;) they are described several times as living in or near Canaan between the time of Abraham (estimated to be between 2000 BC and 1500 BC) and the time of Ezra after the return of the Jews from the Babylonian exile (around 450 BC). Their ancestor was Heth ().

In the late 19th century, the biblical Hittites were identified with a newly discovered Indo-European-speaking empire of Anatolia, a major regional power through most of the second millennium BC, who therefore came to be known as the Hittites. This nomenclature is used today as a matter of convention, regardless of debates about possible identities between the Anatolian Hittite Empire and the biblical Hittites.

==Identification hypotheses==

According to Genesis, the Hittite Ephron sold Abraham the cave of Machpelah in Hebron for use as a family tomb. Later, Esau married wives from the Hittites. In the Book of Joshua , when the Lord tells Joshua &quot;From the wilderness and this Lebanon even unto the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the great sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your border&quot;, this &quot;land of the Hittites&quot; on Canaan&#x27;s border is seen to stretch between Lebanon and the Euphrates, and from there toward the setting Sun (i.e., to the west).

According to the Book of Judges , when the Israelites captured Bethel, they allowed one man to escape, and he went to the &quot;land of the Hittites&quot; where he founded the settlement of Luz. In King Solomon&#x27;s era the Hittites are depicted in the Hebrew Bible along with Syria as among his powerful neighbors.

From around 1900, archaeologists were aware of a country established in Anatolia and known to Assyrians as &quot;Hatti&quot;. Because it was initially assumed that the people of &quot;Hatti&quot; were identical to the &quot;Hetti&quot; of the Hebrew Bible, the term Hittite Empire is still today used to describe the Anatolian state. Their language is known to have been a member of the Indo-European family. Because its speakers were originally based in Kanesh, they called their language &quot;Neshili&quot;. The former inhabitants of Hatti and Hattusas are now called &quot;Hattites&quot;; and their Hattic language was not Indo-European, but is of unknown linguistic relationship.

After the fall of the Hittite Empire around 1178 BC, a remnant of them, still using the name &quot;people of Hatti&quot;, established some city-states in the region of northern Syria. Therefore these are usually assumed to be the Hittites mentioned in Solomon&#x27;s time. 

===The case for identity===
Some scholars take the view that the two peoples are identical. Apart from the similarity in names, the Anatolian Hittites were a powerful political entity in the region before the collapse of their empire in the 14th-12th centuries BC and so one would expect them to be mentioned in the Bible, just as the &quot;ḤTY&quot; post-Exodus are. Moreover, in the account of the conquest of Canaan, the Hittites are said to dwell &quot;in the mountains&quot; and &quot;towards the north&quot; of Canaan, a description that matches the general direction and geography of the original Hittite Empire, which had been influential in the region prior to the Battle of Kadesh.

Modern academics propose, based on much onomastic and archaeological evidence, that Anatolian populations moved south into Canaan as part of the waves of Sea Peoples who were migrating along the Mediterranean coastline at the time of the collapse of the Hittite Empire. Many kings of local city-states are shown to have had Hittite and Luwian names in the Late Bronze to Early Iron Age transition period. Indeed, even the name of Mount Zion may be Hittite in origin.

===The case for separation===
Because of the perceived discrepancy between the picture of the Hittites as developed in the Bible and the archaeological discoveries, some biblical scholars reject Archibald Sayce&#x27;s identification of the two peoples, and believe that the similarity in names is only a coincidence. For example E. A. Speiser, referring to &quot;the children of Heth&quot; in the Book of Genesis writes &quot;For reasons of both history and geography, it is most unlikely that this group name has any direct connection either with the Hattians of Anatolia or with their &#x27;Hittite&#x27; successors.&quot;

===Intermediate hypotheses===
Trevor Bryce suggests that biblical references to Hittites may be separated into two distinct groups. The first, the majority, are to a Canaanite tribe as encountered by Abraham and his family. The names of these Hittites are for the most part of a Semitic type; for example Ephron at etc., Judith at and Zohar at . These were presumably the Hittites who were subject to Solomon (, , ) and who were elsewhere in conflict with the Israelites (, ). They were a small group living in the hills, and clearly to be distinguished from the Hittites of the Anatolian Kingdom.

But there are other biblical references which are not compatible with the notion of a small Canaanite hill tribe. Most notable among these is : &quot;For the Lord had made the host of the Syrians to hear a noise of chariots, and a noise of horses, even the noise of a great host: and they said one to another, Lo, the king of Israel hath hired against us the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of the Egyptians, to come upon us.&quot;

This conveys the impression that the Hittite kings were commensurate in importance and power with the Egyptian pharaohs. A similar impression is conveyed by : &quot;And they fetched up, and brought forth out of Egypt a chariot for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for a hundred and fifty: and so brought they out horses for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, by their means.&quot; In these cases there can be little doubt that the references are to the neo-Hittite kingdoms of Syria.

If the references to the Canaanite tribe are distinct from those to the neo-Hittite kingdom, the similarity between the names (only two significant consonants) could easily be due to chance.

==List of Biblical references==

===Source and ordering of citations===

Listed below are all the occurrences of the words &quot;Heth&quot;, &quot;Hittite&quot; or &quot;Hittites&quot; in the King James Bible, found through a University of Virginia search service.
The same information is available in book form in Jones. Compare also the occurrences of &quot;cheth&quot; (H2845) and &quot;chittiy&quot; (H2850) in &quot;Strong&#x27;s Concordance&quot;.

The citations were arranged approximately in chronological order, more precisely according to the epoch in which the events in question are supposed to have occurred. Note that this is not always the time in which the words were actually written. In particular, the covenant with Abraham about the future conquest of Canaan is treated as if it were contemporary with the latter. The epochs are indicated by the names of the biblical characters (Patriarchs, Judges, Kings or Prophets) prominent at the time.

===From Noah to Abraham===

The biblical view of the genetic relationships among humanity is set forth in Genesis 10 (the &quot;Table of Nations&quot;), where various peoples are described as different lines of descent from Noah. In particular, Canaan is one of the sons of Ham, who is also said to be the ancestor of the Egyptians and the Philistines. The sons of Canaan are given as Sidon, Heth, then the Jebusites, Amorites, Girgasites, Hivites, Arkites, Sinites, Arvadites, Zemarites, and the Hamathites.

====Noah====

* &quot;Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth: and unto them were sons born after the flood. [...] 6 And the sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan. 7 And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabtecha: and the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan. 8 And Cush begat Nimrod [...] 10 And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, [...]. 13 And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim, 14 And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (out of whom came Philistim,) and Caphtorim. 15 And Canaan begat Sidon his firstborn, and Heth, 16 And the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgasite, 17 And the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite, 18 And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite: and afterward were the families of the Canaanites spread abroad. 19 And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as thou comest to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou goest, unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha. 20 These are the sons of Ham, after their families, after their tongues, in their countries, and in their nations.&quot;
* &quot;And Canaan begat Zidon his firstborn, and Heth, [...]&quot;

===From Abraham to Egypt===
In this period, which is conjectured to start sometime after 2000 BC and end sometime before 1200 BC, the &quot;children of Heth&quot; (בני-חת, &quot;BNY-HT&quot;) and the label &quot;Hittite&quot; (&quot;HTY&quot;) are mentioned multiple times, but referring to essentially only two events.

In , towards the end of Abraham&#x27;s life, he was staying in Hebron, on lands belonging to the &quot;children of Heth&quot;, and from them he obtained a plot of land with a cave to bury his wife Sarah. One of them (Ephron) is labeled &quot;the Hittite&quot;, several times. This deal is mentioned three more times (with almost the same words), upon the deaths of Abraham and Jacob.

Decades later, in , Abraham&#x27;s grandson Esau is said to have taken two Hittite wives, and a Hivite one. This claim is repeated, with somewhat different names, in . In , Rebekah is worried that Jacob will do the same.

====Abraham====
* &quot;And Sarah died in Kirjath-arba; the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan: and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her. 3 And Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the sons of Heth, saying, 4 I am a stranger and a sojourner with you: give me a possession of a burying place with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight. 5 And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him, 6 Hear us, my lord: thou art a mighty prince among us [or &#x27;a prince of God among us&#x27;]: in the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy dead. 7 And Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the land, even to the children of Heth. 8 And he communed with them, saying, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead out of my sight; hear me, and intreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar, 9 That he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he hath, which is in the end of his field; for as much money as it is worth he shall give it me for a possession of a burying place amongst you. 10 And Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth: and Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the audience of the children of Heth, even of all that went in at the gate of his city, saying, 11 Nay, my lord, hear me: the field give I thee, and the cave that is therein, I give it thee; in the presence of the sons of my people give I it thee: bury thy dead. [...] 16 And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver, which he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchant. 17 And the field of Ephron, which was in Machpelah, which was before Mamre, the field, and the cave which was therein, and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all the borders round about, were made sure 18 Unto Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children of Heth, before all that went in at the gate of his city. 19 And after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah before Mamre: the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan. 20 And the field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure unto Abraham for a possession of a buryingplace by the sons of Heth.&quot;
* &quot;Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an old man, and full of years; and was gathered to his people. 9 And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, which is before Mamre; 10 The field which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth: there was Abraham buried, and Sarah his wife.&quot;

====Esau and Jacob====
* &quot;And Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite: 35 Which were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah.&quot;
* &quot;And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth: if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do me?&quot;
* &quot;Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan; Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite; 3 And Bashemath Ishmael&#x27;s daughter, sister of Nebajoth.&quot;
* &quot;And he [Jacob] charged them, and said unto them, I am to be gathered unto my people: bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittite 30 In the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field of Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a buryingplace. 31 There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife; there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife; and there I buried Leah. 32 The purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was from the children of Heth.&quot;
* &quot;For his [Jacob] sons carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham bought with the field for a possession of a burying place of Ephron the Hittite, before Mamre.&quot;

This passage refers to Jacob being buried in Machpelah. Joseph was buried in Shechem (Joshua 24.32): &quot;And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought up out of Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in the parcel of ground which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor the father of Shechem for a hundred pieces of money; and they became the inheritance of the children of Joseph.&quot;

===Exodus and the conquest of Canaan===

This period is conjectured to start sometime after 1800 BC and end sometime before 1000 BC. In this period (in which can be included the promise made to Abraham, centuries earlier, and its recall by Nehemiah half a millennium later), the Hittites are mentioned about a dozen times as part of an almost fixed formula that lists the &quot;seven nations greater and mightier than [the Hebrews]&quot; whose lands will be eventually conquered. Five other &quot;major nations&quot; are mentioned in almost all instances of the formula: Canaanites, Amorites, Hivites, Jebusites, and Perizzites. The Girgashites are mentioned only five times. Abraham&#x27;s covenant in omits the Hivites but includes the Kadmonites, Kenites, Kenizzites, and Rephaim.

Among the five references to the Hittites that cannot be classified as a variant of that formula, two ( and ) declare that the Hittites &quot;dwell in the mountains&quot;, together with the Jebusites, Amorites, and Perizzites, whereas the Canaanites live &quot;on the east and on the west&quot;, on the coast of Jordan, and the Amalekites live &quot;in the south&quot;. In the land of the Hittites is said to extend &quot;from the wilderness and this Lebanon&quot;, from &quot;the Euphrates unto the great sea&quot;. In , the traitor from Bethel who led the Hebrews into the city is said to have gone to live among the Hittites where he built a city called Luz. Finally in it is said that the Hebrews lived and intermarried with the Hittites as well as with the other five &quot;major nations&quot;.

====Abraham&#x27;s covenant====

* &quot;In the same day the made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates: 19 The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites, 20 And the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims, 21 And the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.&quot;
* And foundest his heart faithful before thee, and madest a covenant with him to give the land of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Jebusites, and the Girgashites, to give it, I say, to his seed, and hast performed thy words; for thou art righteous: [...]&quot;

====Moses====

* &quot;But thou shalt utterly destroy them; namely, the Hittites, and the Amorites, the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusite; as the thy God hath commanded thee: [...]&quot;
* &quot;When the thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou goest to possess it, and hath cast out many nations before thee, the Hittites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, seven nations greater and mightier than thou; [...]&quot;
* &quot;The Amalekites dwell in the land of the south: and the Hittites, and the Jebusites, and the Amorites, dwell in the mountains: and the Canaanites dwell by the sea, and by the coast of Jordan.&quot;

====Joshua====

* &quot;And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey; unto the place of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites. [...] 17 And I have said, I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt unto the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.&quot;
* &quot;And it shall be when the shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this service in this month.&quot;
* &quot;For mine Angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the Amorites, and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites: and I will cut them off. [...] 28 And I will send hornets before thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite, from before thee.&quot;
* &quot;And I will send an angel before thee; and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite: [...]
* &quot;Observe thou that which I command thee this day: behold, I drive out before thee the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.&quot;
* &quot;From the wilderness and this Lebanon even unto the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the great sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your coast.&quot;
* &quot;And to the Canaanite on the east and on the west, and to the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in the mountains, and to the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mizpeh.&quot;
* &quot;In the mountains, and in the valleys, and in the plains, and in the springs, and in the wilderness, and in the south country; the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites: [...]
* &quot;And ye went over Jordan, and came unto Jericho: and the men of Jericho fought against you, the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Girgashites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites; and I delivered them into your hand.&quot;
* &quot;And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall know that the living God is among you, and that he will without fail drive out from before you the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Hivites, and the Perizzites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Jebusites.&quot;
* &quot;And it came to pass, when all the kings which were on this side Jordan, in the hills, and in the valleys, and in all the coasts of the great sea over against Lebanon, the Hittite, and the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, heard thereof.&quot;

====Judges====

* &quot;Also Judah took Gaza with the coast thereof, and Askelon with the coast thereof, and Ekron with the coast thereof. 19 And the was with Judah; and he drave out the inhabitants of the mountain; but could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley, because they had chariots of iron. [...] 21 And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that inhabited Jerusalem; but the Jebusites dwell with the children of Benjamin in Jerusalem unto this day. 22 And the house of Joseph, they also went up against Bethel: and the was with them. 23 And the house of Joseph sent to descry Bethel. (Now the name of the city before was Luz.) 24 And the spies saw a man come forth out of the city, and they said unto him, Shew us, we pray thee, the entrance into the city, and we will shew thee mercy. 25 And when he shewed them the entrance into the city, they smote the city with the edge of the sword; but they let go the man and all his family. 26 And the man went into the land of the Hittites, and built a city, and called the name thereof Luz: which is the name thereof unto this day. 27 Neither did Manasseh drive out the inhabitants of Beth-shean and her towns, nor Taanach and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns: but the Canaanites would dwell in that land.&quot;
* &quot;Now these are the nations which the left, to prove Israel by them, even as many of Israel as had not known all the wars of Canaan; 2 Only that the generations of the children of Israel might know, to teach them war, at the least such as before knew nothing thereof; 3 Namely, five lords of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and the Sidonians, and the Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount Baal-hermon unto the entering in of Hamath. 4 And they were to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would hearken unto the commandments of the , which he commanded their fathers by the hand of Moses. 5 And the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, Hittites, and Amorites, and Perizzites, and Hivites, and Jebusites: 6 And they took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to their sons, and served their gods. 7 And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the , and forgat the their God, and served Baalim and the groves. 8 Therefore the anger of the was hot against Israel, and he sold them into the hand of Chushan-rishathaim king of Mesopotamia: and the children of Israel served Chushan-rishathaim eight years.&quot;

===Kingdoms period===

In this period the Hittites are mentioned as the ethnic label of two soldiers under king David (around 1000 BC), Ahimelech and Uriah; the latter is murdered by David for the sake of his wife Bathsheba.

In Solomon&#x27;s reign (around 950 BC), the Hittites are listed as people whom the Hebrews had not been able &quot;utterly to destroy&quot; in their conquest of Canaan and who paid tribute to Israel. The kings of the Hittites are mentioned (in two similar passages), together with Egypt and the kings of Syria, as senders of lavish tribute to Solomon. Then Hittites are said to be among the &quot;strange women&quot; that Solomon loved, along with &quot;the daughter of the pharaoh&quot; and women from the other peoples in the region.

In the time of the prophet Elisha (around 850 BC) there is a passage in 2 Kings 7:6 where the Syrians flee in the night after hearing a terrible noise of horses and chariots, believing that Israel had hired &quot;the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of the Egyptians&quot;.

====Saul====

* &quot;And David arose, and came to the place where Saul had pitched: and David beheld the place where Saul lay, and Abner the son of Ner, the captain of his host: and Saul lay in the trench, and the people pitched round about him. 6 Then answered David and said to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother to Joab, saying, Who will go down with me to Saul to the camp? And Abishai said, I will go down with thee.&quot;

====David====

* &quot;These be the names of the mighty men whom David had: [...] 39 Uriah the Hittite: thirty and seven in all.&quot;
* &quot;These also are the chief of the mighty men whom David had, who strengthened themselves with him in his kingdom, and with all Israel, to make him king, according to the word of the concerning Israel. [...] 41 Uriah the Hittite, Zabad the son of Ahlai, [...]
* &quot;And David sent and inquired after the woman. And one said, Is not this Bath-sheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite? 4 And David sent messengers, and took her; and she came in unto him, and he lay with her; for she was purified from her uncleanness: and she returned unto her house.&quot; Uriah the Hittite is named four more times in this chapter.
* &quot;[Nathan:] Wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the , to do evil in his sight? thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon. 10 Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house; because thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife.&quot;
* &quot;Because David did that which was right in the eyes of the , and turned not aside from any thing that he commanded him all the days of his life, save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite.&quot;

====Solomon====

* &quot;And all the people that were left of the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, which were not of the children of Israel, 21 Their children that were left after them in the land, whom the children of Israel also were not able utterly to destroy, upon those did Solomon levy a tribute of bondservice unto this day.&quot;
* &quot;As for all the people that were left of the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which were not of Israel, [...]&quot;
* &quot;And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the king&#x27;s merchants received the linen yarn at a price. 29 And a chariot came up and went out of Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for a hundred and fifty: and so for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, did they bring them out by their means.&quot;
* &quot;And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the king&#x27;s merchants received the linen yarn at a price. 17 And they fetched up, and brought forth out of Egypt a chariot for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for a hundred and fifty: and so brought they out horses for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, by their means.&quot;
* &quot;But king Solomon loved many strange women, together with the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and Hittites; 2 Of the nations concerning which the said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall not go in to them, neither shall they come in unto you: for surely they will turn away your heart after their gods: Solomon clave unto these in love. 3 And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred concubines: and his wives turned away his heart. 4 For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with the his God, as was the heart of David his father. 5 For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites. 6 And Solomon did evil in the sight of the , and went not fully after the , as did David his father. 7 Then did Solomon build a high place for Chemosh, the abomination of Moab, in the hill that is before Jerusalem, and for Molech, the abomination of the children of Ammon. 8 And likewise did he for all his strange wives, which burnt incense and sacrificed unto their gods.&quot;

====Elisha====
* &quot;For the Lord had made the host of the Syrians to hear a noise of chariots, and a noise of horses, even the noise of a great host: and they said one to another, Lo, the king of Israel hath hired against us the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of the Egyptians, to come upon us. 7 Wherefore they arose and fled in the twilight, and left their tents, and their horses, and their asses, even the camp as it was, and fled for their life.&quot;

===Babylonian exile and return===

In Ezekiel 16:1, Jerusalem is said to be the daughter of a Hittite mother and an Amorite father, sister of Samaria and Sodom. The intent is clearly offensive, but it is not clear whether the reference to the Hittites is concrete or only symbolic. However, a century later, Ezra is dismayed to learn, on his arrival from Babylon, that the leaders who had remained on the land had been &quot;polluted&quot; by mixing with other people, including the Hittites.

====Ezekiel====

* &quot;Again the word of the came unto me, saying, 2 Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations, 3 And say, Thus saith the Lord unto Jerusalem; Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan; thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite. [...] 44 Behold, every one that useth proverbs shall use this proverb against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her daughter. 45 Thou art thy mother&#x27;s daughter, that lotheth her husband and her children; and thou art the sister of thy sisters, which lothed their husbands and their children: your mother was an Hittite, and your father an Amorite. 46 And thine elder sister is Samaria, she and her daughters that dwell at thy left hand: and thy younger sister, that dwelleth at thy right hand, is Sodom and her daughters.&quot;

====Ezra====

* (disputed canonicity) &quot;This Esdras went up from Babylon, as a scribe, being very ready in the law of Moses, that was given by the God of Israel. 4 And the king [Artaxerxes] did him honour: for he found grace in his sight in all his requests. 5 There went up with him also certain of the children of Israel, of the priest of the Levites, of the holy singers, porters, and ministers of the temple, unto Jerusalem, [...] 68 Now when these things were done, the rulers came unto me, and said, 69 The nation of Israel, the princes, the priests and Levites, have not put away from them the strange people of the land, nor the pollutions of the Gentiles to wit, of the Canaanites, Hittites, Pheresites, Jebusites, and the Moabites, Egyptians, and Edomites.&quot;
* &quot;Now when these things were done, the princes came to me, saying, The people of Israel, and the priests, and the Levites, have not separated themselves from the people of the lands, doing according to their abominations, even of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Amorites.&quot;

==See also==
*Hattians
*Habiru
*Hittites
*Neo-Hittites
*Uriah the Hittite

==References==
==Books==

* D. J. Wiseman, &quot;Peoples of the Old Testament Times&quot;, Clarendon Press, Oxford (1973)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2891174" start="4" end="12" title="Biblical Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891174" start="27" end="35" title="Biblical Hittites" label="Hethites"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="77" end="89" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="287" end="293" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="314" end="321" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q191787" start="384" end="388" title="Ezra" label="Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="427" end="443" title="Babylonian captivity of Judah" label="Babylonian exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335214" start="480" end="484" title="Heth (Bible)" label="Heth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="578" end="591" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="611" end="619" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="724" end="732" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q21494337" start="971" end="977" title="Ephron" label="Ephron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="983" end="990" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q204200" start="995" end="1012" title="Cave of the Patriarchs" label="cave of Machpelah"/>
<link wikidata="Q168225" start="1016" end="1022" title="Hebron" label="Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q47680" start="1101" end="1115" title="Book of Joshua" label="Book of Joshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q81240" start="1544" end="1558" title="Book of Judges" label="Book of Judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876767" start="1590" end="1596" title="Bethel" label="Bethel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706509" start="1717" end="1720" title="Luz (biblical place)" label="Luz"/>
<link wikidata="Q31107" start="2449" end="2464" title="Hattic language" label="Hattic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q203729" start="3481" end="3497" title="Battle of Kadesh" label="Battle of Kadesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q175156" start="3540" end="3549" title="onomastic" label="onomastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193850" start="3654" end="3665" title="Sea Peoples" label="Sea Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q10713" start="3836" end="3842" title="Luwian" label="Luwian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="3856" end="3867" title="Bronze Age" label="Late Bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="3871" end="3885" title="Iron Age" label="Early Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q205318" start="3936" end="3940" title="Zion" label="Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q716584" start="4163" end="4178" title="Archibald Sayce" label="Archibald Sayce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346814" start="4297" end="4310" title="E. A. Speiser" label="E. A. Speiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="4365" end="4380" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323892" start="4624" end="4636" title="Trevor Bryce" label="Trevor Bryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="4995" end="5002" title="Solomon" label="Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252171" start="5295" end="5305" title="hill tribe" label="hill tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q770281" start="6118" end="6129" title="neo-Hittite" label="neo-Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="6568" end="6590" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188118" start="6763" end="6788" title="Strong&amp;#x27;s Concordance" label="Strong&amp;#x27;s Concordance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="7411" end="7418" title="Book of Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033715" start="7433" end="7449" title="Table of Nations" label="Table of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q81422" start="7529" end="7533" title="Noah" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q204797" start="7550" end="7556" title="Canaan (son of Ham)" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q229702" start="7579" end="7582" title="Ham (son of Noah)" label="Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="7627" end="7636" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q193776" start="7645" end="7656" title="Philistines" label="Philistines"/>
<link wikidata="Q163490" start="7690" end="7695" title="Sidon" label="Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123697" start="7712" end="7721" title="Jebusites" label="Jebusites"/>
<link wikidata="Q203507" start="7723" end="7731" title="Amorites" label="Amorites"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000181" start="7733" end="7743" title="Girgasites" label="Girgasites"/>
<link wikidata="Q552421" start="7745" end="7751" title="Hivite" label="Hivite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000181" start="7754" end="7761" title="Arkites" label="Arkites"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000181" start="7763" end="7770" title="Sinites" label="Sinites"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000181" start="7772" end="7781" title="Arvadites" label="Arvadites"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000181" start="7783" end="7792" title="Zemarites" label="Zemarites"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000181" start="7802" end="7812" title="Hamathites" label="Hamathites"/>
<link wikidata="Q200637" start="7903" end="7910" title="Japheth" label="Japheth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138595" start="7987" end="7991" title="Biblical Cush" label="Cush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369215" start="7997" end="8004" title="Mizraim" label="Mizraim"/>
<link wikidata="Q946939" start="8010" end="8014" title="Phut" label="Phut"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068232" start="8052" end="8056" title="Seba (biblical figure)" label="Seba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591658" start="8062" end="8069" title="Havilah" label="Havilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068232" start="8075" end="8081" title="Sabtah (biblical figure)" label="Sabtah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085764" start="8087" end="8093" title="Raamah" label="Raamah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068232" start="8099" end="8107" title="Sabtecha" label="Sabtecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q216068" start="8133" end="8138" title="Sheba" label="Sheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824836" start="8144" end="8149" title="Dedanites" label="Dedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q201861" start="8168" end="8174" title="Nimrod" label="Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="8221" end="8226" title="Babylon" label="Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="8232" end="8237" title="Erech" label="Erech"/>
<link wikidata="Q150996" start="8243" end="8248" title="Akkad (city)" label="Accad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647375" start="8278" end="8283" title="Ludim" label="Ludim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294442" start="8289" end="8295" title="Anamim" label="Anamim"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000181" start="8301" end="8308" title="Lehabim" label="Lehabim"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068232" start="8314" end="8323" title="Naphtuhim" label="Naphtuhim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144855" start="8332" end="8341" title="Pathrusim" label="Pathrusim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048978" start="8347" end="8355" title="Casluhim" label="Casluhim"/>
<link wikidata="Q193776" start="8375" end="8384" title="Philistim" label="Philistim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728546" start="8391" end="8400" title="Caphtorim" label="Caphtorim"/>
<link wikidata="Q163490" start="8422" end="8427" title="Sidon" label="Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510126" start="8754" end="8759" title="Gerar" label="Gerar"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492" start="8766" end="8770" title="Gaza City" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q180141" start="8792" end="8811" title="Sodom and Gomorrah" label="Sodom, and Gomorrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605670" start="8817" end="8822" title="Admah" label="Admah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618797" start="8828" end="8834" title="Zeboim (biblical)" label="Zeboim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6493160" start="8846" end="8851" title="Lasha" label="Lasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q194808" start="9561" end="9566" title="Sarah" label="Sarah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712858" start="9581" end="9587" title="Ephron (biblical figure)" label="Ephron"/>
<link wikidata="Q40520" start="9922" end="9929" title="Rebekah" label="Rebekah"/>
<link wikidata="Q289957" start="9946" end="9951" title="Jacob" label="Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025598" start="14808" end="14816" title="Nehemiah" label="Nehemiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="15139" end="15145" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q203507" start="15151" end="15159" title="Amorites" label="Amorites"/>
<link wikidata="Q552421" start="15161" end="15168" title="Hivites" label="Hivites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123697" start="15170" end="15179" title="Jebusites" label="Jebusites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071158" start="15185" end="15195" title="Perizzites" label="Perizzites"/>
<link wikidata="Q12205145" start="15201" end="15212" title="Girgashites" label="Girgashites"/>
<link wikidata="Q552421" start="15281" end="15288" title="Hivites" label="Hivites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3956407" start="15306" end="15316" title="Kadmonites" label="Kadmonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915101" start="15318" end="15325" title="Kenites" label="Kenites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924177" start="15327" end="15336" title="Kenizzite" label="Kenizzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972451" start="15343" end="15350" title="Rephaim" label="Rephaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123697" start="15543" end="15552" title="Jebusites" label="Jebusites"/>
<link wikidata="Q203507" start="15554" end="15562" title="Amorites" label="Amorites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071158" start="15568" end="15578" title="Perizzites" label="Perizzites"/>
<link wikidata="Q372091" start="15681" end="15691" title="Amalekites" label="Amalekites"/>
<link wikidata="Q203507" start="16949" end="16957" title="Amorites" label="Amorites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071158" start="16983" end="16993" title="Perizzites" label="Perizzites"/>
<link wikidata="Q552421" start="16999" end="17006" title="Hivites" label="Hivites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123697" start="17016" end="17024" title="Jebusites" label="Jebusite"/>
<link wikidata="Q71267" start="23378" end="23383" title="Uriah the Hittite" label="Uriah"/>
<link wikidata="Q272277" start="23442" end="23451" title="Bathsheba" label="Bathsheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="23759" end="23764" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q206238" start="24019" end="24025" title="Elisha" label="Elisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q71267" start="25449" end="25466" title="Uriah the Hittite" label="Uriah the Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="29115" end="29124" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294629" start="29205" end="29212" title="Samaria" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q180141" start="29217" end="29222" title="Sodom and Gomorrah" label="Sodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="29418" end="29425" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q201410" start="30391" end="30410" title="Deuterocanonical books" label="disputed canonicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322482" start="31531" end="31539" title="Hattians" label="Hattians"/>
<link wikidata="Q618656" start="31541" end="31547" title="Habiru" label="Habiru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="31549" end="31557" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q770281" start="31559" end="31571" title="Neo-Hittites" label="Neo-Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q71267" start="31573" end="31590" title="Uriah the Hittite" label="Uriah the Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295320" start="31620" end="31633" title="D. J. Wiseman" label="D. J. Wiseman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610859" wikidata="Q751366" url="?curid=610859" title="Lindsay Owen-Jones">
<text>Sir Lindsay Owen-Jones, KBE (born 17 March 1946), born in Wallasey, Cheshire (now Merseyside) to a Welsh family, was the chairman and CEO of the cosmetics and beauty company L&#x27;Oréal from 1988 to 2011.

In May 2019, he was ranked as the 292nd richest person in UK by The &quot;Sunday Times Rich List&quot; with a net worth of £467 million.

== Education ==
Owen-Jones went to Uppingham School in Rutland, before going on to study Modern Languages at Worcester College, Oxford, and Master of Business Administration at INSEAD. He has recently donated what the Provost termed a transformational £30 million to Worcester College.

== Career ==
He got his first job as a sales representative at L&#x27;Oréal in 1969, selling Dop shampoo in Normandy. In 1988, he was appointed Chairman and chief executive officer of L&#x27;Oréal, at age 42. Under his tenure, L&#x27;Oreál has widened its market; turning it from an almost entirely Europe-based organization to sell its products in countries around the world. Lindsay Owen-Jones resigned as Executive Chairman in 2011, but stays on as &quot;Honorary President&quot;.

Owen-Jones is also a member of the board of directors at Ferrari SpA, BNP Paribas and Sanofi, and a member of the supervisory board of Air Liquide. A successful &quot;gentleman&quot; racing driver in sports and GT cars for many years, he is currently President of the FIA&#x27;s Endurance Commission.

== Awards ==
Owen-Jones is a Commandeur of the Légion d&#x27;Honneur and a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire. In 2002, he was named &quot;Best European Manager&quot; by the Spanish &quot;Futuro&quot; magazine, and the U.S. magazine &quot;Business Week&quot; named him one of Europe&#x27;s &quot;Business Stars&quot;. Owen-Jones became the first foreign head of a French company to be awarded the &quot;Manager of the Year 2002 Award&quot; from French Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin.

In 2004, Owen-Jones was named one of the &quot;25 Most Influential People in Fashion&quot; by &quot;Time Magazine&quot;.

He was the only British head of a company listed on Paris&#x27;s CAC 40.

In April 2005, Lindsay Owen-Jones was recognised for his significant contribution to France when he was decorated by the French Minister of Foreign Affairs as Commander of the Légion d’Honneur.

In 2005, he was awarded Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire (KBE) in the Queen&#x27;s Birthday Honours List.

== References ==
== External links ==

* Business Week article</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q751366" start="0" end="22" title="Lindsay Owen-Jones" label="Sir Lindsay Owen-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="24" end="27" title="Order of the British Empire" label="KBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q780923" start="58" end="66" title="Wallasey" label="Wallasey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="68" end="76" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23100" start="82" end="92" title="Merseyside" label="Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="99" end="104" title="Wales" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="134" end="137" title="chief executive officer" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q131207" start="145" end="154" title="cosmetics" label="cosmetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242" start="159" end="165" title="beauty" label="beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q156077" start="174" end="186" title="L&amp;#x27;Oréal" label="L&amp;#x27;Oréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q612780" start="281" end="303" title="Sunday Times Rich List" label="Sunday Times Rich List"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403302" start="380" end="396" title="Uppingham School" label="Uppingham School"/>
<link wikidata="Q780745" start="454" end="479" title="Worcester College, Oxford" label="Worcester College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="485" end="518" title="Master of Business Administration" label="Master of Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136829" start="522" end="528" title="INSEAD" label="INSEAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q194189" start="671" end="676" title="sales" label="sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q180204" start="729" end="736" title="shampoo" label="shampoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="740" end="748" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q140686" start="776" end="784" title="Chairman of the board" label="Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="931" end="937" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="1174" end="1181" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q499707" start="1187" end="1198" title="BNP Paribas" label="BNP Paribas"/>
<link wikidata="Q158205" start="1203" end="1209" title="Sanofi" label="Sanofi"/>
<link wikidata="Q407448" start="1252" end="1263" title="Air Liquide" label="Air Liquide"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="1466" end="1487" title="Légion d&amp;#x27;Honneur" label="Légion d&amp;#x27;Honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="1518" end="1545" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="1589" end="1596" title="Management" label="Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q571755" start="1624" end="1630" title="Futuro" label="Futuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q833195" start="1675" end="1688" title="Business Week" label="Business Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587677" start="1881" end="1902" title="French Prime Minister" label="French Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q63263" start="1903" end="1923" title="Jean-Pierre Raffarin" label="Jean-Pierre Raffarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="2026" end="2039" title="Time Magazine" label="Time Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q648828" start="2113" end="2119" title="CAC 40" label="CAC 40"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610868" wikidata="Q334677" url="?curid=610868" title="DjVu">
<text>DjVu is a computer file format designed primarily to store scanned documents, especially those containing a combination of text, line drawings, indexed color images, and photographs. It uses technologies such as image layer separation of text and background/images, progressive loading, arithmetic coding, and lossy compression for bitonal (monochrome) images. This allows high-quality, readable images to be stored in a minimum of space, so that they can be made available on the web.

DjVu has been promoted as providing smaller files than PDF for most scanned documents. The DjVu developers report that color magazine pages compress to 40–70 kB, black-and-white technical papers compress to 15–40 kB, and ancient manuscripts compress to around 100 kB; a satisfactory JPEG image typically requires 500 kB. Like PDF, DjVu can contain an OCR text layer, making it easy to perform copy and paste and text search operations.

Free creators, manipulators, converters, web browser plug-ins, and desktop viewers are available. DjVu is supported by a number of multi-format document viewers and e-book reader software on Linux (Okular, Evince, Zathura), Windows (Okular, SumatraPDF), and Android (Document Viewer, FBReader, EBookDroid, PocketBook).

==History==
The DjVu technology was originally developed by Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Patrick Haffner, Paul G. Howard, Patrice Simard, and Yoshua Bengio at AT&amp;T Labs from 1996 to 2001.

Prior to the standardization of PDF in 2008, DjVu was considered superior because it is an open file format, in contrast to the proprietary nature of PDF at the time. The declared higher compression ratio (and thus smaller file size) and the claimed ease of converting large volumes of text into DjVu format were other arguments for DjVu&#x27;s superiority over PDF in 2004. Independent technologist Brewster Kahle in a 2004 talk on IT Conversations discussed the benefits of allowing easier access to DjVu files.

The DjVu library distributed as part of the open-source package &quot;DjVuLibre&quot; has become the reference implementation for the DjVu format. DjVuLibre has been maintained and updated by the original developers of DjVu since 2002.

The DjVu file format specification has gone through a number of revisions, the most recent being from 2005.


===Role in the software ecosystem===
The primary usage of the DjVu format has been the electronic distribution of documents with a quality comparable to that of printed documents. As that niche is also the primary usage for PDF, it was inevitable that the two formats would become competitors. It should however be observed that the two formats approach the problem of delivering high resolution documents in very different ways: PDF primarily encodes graphics and text as vectorised data, whereas DjVu primarily encodes them as pixmap images. This means PDF places the burden of rendering the document on the reader, whereas DjVu places that burden on the creator.

During a number of years, significantly overlapping with the period when DjVu was being developed, there were no PDF viewers for free operating systems—a particular stumbling block was the rendering of vectorised fonts, which are essential for combining small file size with high resolution in PDF. Since displaying DjVu was a simpler problem for which free software was available, there were suggestions that the free software movement should employ DjVu instead of PDF for distributing documentation; rendering for creating DjVu is in principle not much different from rendering for a device-specific printer driver, and DjVu can as a last resort be generated from scans of paper media. However, when FreeType 2.0 in 2000 began to provide rendering of all major vectorised font formats, that specific advantage of DjVu began to erode.

In the 2000s, with the growth of the World Wide Web and before widespread adoption of broadband, DjVu was often adopted by digital libraries as their format of choice, thanks to its integration with software like Greenstone and the Internet Archive, browser plugins which allowed advanced online browsing, smaller file size for comparable quality of book scans and other image-heavy documents and support for embedding and searching full text from OCR.
Some features such as the thumbnail previews were later integrated in the Internet Archive&#x27;s BookReader and DjVu browsing was deprecated in its favour as around 2015 some major browsers stopped supporting NPAPI and DjVu plugins with them.

&quot;DjVu.js Viewer&quot; attempts to replace the missing browser plugins.

==Technical overview==

===File structure===
The DjVu file format is based on the Interchange File Format and is composed of hierarchically organized chunks. The IFF structure is preceded by a 4-byte codice_1 magic number. Following is a single codice_2 chunk with a secondary identifier of either codice_3 or codice_4 for a single-page or a multi-page document, respectively.

All the chunks can be contained in a single file in the case of the so called bundled documents, or can be contained in several files: one file for every page plus some files with shared chunks.

====Chunk types====
===Compression===
DjVu divides a single image into many different images, then compresses them separately. To create a DjVu file, the initial image is first separated into three images: a background image, a foreground image, and a mask image. The background and foreground images are typically lower-resolution color images (e.g., 100 dpi); the mask image is a high-resolution bilevel image (e.g., 300 dpi) and is typically where the text is stored. The background and foreground images are then compressed using a wavelet-based compression algorithm named IW44. The mask image is compressed using a method called JB2 (similar to JBIG2). The JB2 encoding method identifies nearly identical shapes on the page, such as multiple occurrences of a particular character in a given font, style, and size. It compresses the bitmap of each unique shape separately, and then encodes the locations where each shape appears on the page. Thus, instead of compressing a letter &quot;e&quot; in a given font multiple times, it compresses the letter &quot;e&quot; once (as a compressed bit image) and then records every place on the page it occurs.

Optionally, these shapes may be mapped to UTF-8 codes (either by hand or potentially by a text recognition system) and stored in the DjVu file. If this mapping exists, it is possible to select and copy text.

Since JB2 (also called DjVuBitonal) is a variation on JBIG2, working on the same principles, both compression methods have the same problems when performing lossy compression. In 2013 it emerged that Xerox photocopiers and scanners had been substituting digits for similar looking ones, for example replacing a 6 with an 8. A DjVu document has been spotted in the wild with character substitutions, such as an n with bleeding serifs turning into a u and an o with a spot inside turning into an e. Whether lossy compression has occurred is not stored in the file. Thus the DjView viewing application can&#x27;t warn the user that glyph substitutions might have occurred, neither when opening a lossy compressed file, nor in the Information or Metadata dialogue boxes.

==Format licensing==
DjVu is an open file format with patents. The file format specification is published, as well as source code for the reference library. The original authors distribute an open-source implementation named &quot;DjVuLibre&quot; under the GNU General Public License and a patent grant. The rights to the commercial development of the encoding software have been transferred to different companies over the years, including AT&amp;T Corporation, LizardTech, &quot;Celartem&quot; and &quot;ePapyrus Solutions K.K.&quot; (formerly &quot;Cuminas&quot; before joining ePapyrus Solutions, Inc.). Patents typically have an expiry term of about 20 years.

Celartem acquired LizardTech and Extensis.

==Support==
The selection of downloadable DjVu viewers is wider on Linux distributions than it is on Windows or macOS. Additionally, the format is rarely supported by proprietary scanning software.

In 2002, the DjVu file format was chosen by the Internet Archive as a format in which its &quot;Million Book Project&quot; provides scanned public-domain books online (along with TIFF and PDF). In February 2016, the Internet Archive announced that DjVu would no longer be used for new uploads, among other reasons citing the format&#x27;s declining use and the difficulty of maintaining their Java applet based viewer for the format.

Wikimedia Commons, a media repository used by Wikipedia among others, conditionally permits PDF and DjVu media files.

==See also==
* Comparison of e-book formats
* International Image Interoperability Framework (IIIF)
* JPEG 2000 Compound image file format (JPM)
* Mixed raster content (MRC)

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* DjVu.js Viewer use with Firefox and Chrome
* pdf2djvu Jakub Wilk&#x27;s tools
* Software Downloads – Cuminas Corporation
* DjVu SDK decoder/encoder library – Cuminas Corporation

sites
* DjVuLibre by Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, and Patrick Guy Haffner
* djvu.com – Cuminas Corporation
* djvu.org – the original developers, Yann LeCun and Leon Bottou
* djvuzone.org – AT&amp;T Labs Research and the original developers, Yann LeCun and Leon Bottou

DjVu documents
* 2001_efficient_compression.djvu
* A collection of DjVu documents (mostly unbundled)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334677" start="0" end="4" title="DjVu" label="DjVu"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="10" end="18" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q235557" start="19" end="30" title="file format" label="file format"/>
<link wikidata="Q82744" start="59" end="76" title="image scanner" label="scanned documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661673" start="144" end="164" title="Indexed color" label="indexed color images"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666173" start="266" end="285" title="Interlacing (bitmaps)" label="progressive loading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651" start="287" end="304" title="arithmetic coding" label="arithmetic coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q55564" start="310" end="327" title="lossy compression" label="lossy compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q864118" start="332" end="339" title="binary image" label="bitonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10770146" start="341" end="351" title="monochrome" label="monochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="481" end="484" title="World Wide Web" label="web"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="542" end="545" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195" start="770" end="774" title="JPEG" label="JPEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q167555" start="838" end="841" title="optical character recognition" label="OCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058748" start="880" end="894" title="copy and paste" label="copy and paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165933" start="1122" end="1128" title="Okular" label="Okular"/>
<link wikidata="Q737139" start="1130" end="1136" title="Evince" label="Evince"/>
<link wikidata="Q19612984" start="1138" end="1145" title="Zathura (document viewer)" label="Zathura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165933" start="1157" end="1163" title="Okular" label="Okular"/>
<link wikidata="Q479808" start="1165" end="1175" title="SumatraPDF" label="SumatraPDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571662" start="1304" end="1314" title="Yann LeCun" label="Yann LeCun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711047" start="1316" end="1327" title="Léon Bottou" label="Léon Bottou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1329" end="1344" title="Patrick Haffner" label="Patrick Haffner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1346" end="1360" title="Paul G. Howard" label="Paul G. Howard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1362" end="1376" title="Patrice Simard" label="Patrice Simard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572699" start="1382" end="1395" title="Yoshua Bengio" label="Yoshua Bengio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654544" start="1399" end="1412" title="AT&amp;amp;T Labs" label="AT&amp;amp;T Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="1465" end="1468" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056408" start="1524" end="1540" title="open file format" label="open file format"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720536" start="1561" end="1572" title="proprietary file format" label="proprietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q92945" start="1833" end="1847" title="Brewster Kahle" label="Brewster Kahle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136722" start="2049" end="2073" title="reference implementation" label="reference implementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="2768" end="2778" title="vector graphics" label="vectorised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194708" start="2824" end="2830" title="pixmap" label="pixmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q176953" start="2875" end="2884" title="rendering (computer graphics)" label="rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076638" start="3376" end="3398" title="free software movement" label="free software movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326617" start="3665" end="3673" title="FreeType" label="FreeType"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="3837" end="3851" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="3886" end="3895" title="broadband" label="broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q212805" start="3923" end="3940" title="digital library" label="digital libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540516" start="4013" end="4023" title="Greenstone (software)" label="Greenstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="4032" end="4048" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q167555" start="4248" end="4251" title="optical character recognition" label="OCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532873" start="4463" end="4468" title="NPAPI" label="NPAPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569639" start="4657" end="4680" title="Interchange File Format" label="Interchange File Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q284099" start="4784" end="4796" title="magic number (programming)" label="magic number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5685" end="5710" title="wavelet compression#Wavelet compression" label="wavelet-based compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143961" start="5800" end="5805" title="JBIG2" label="JBIG2"/>
<link wikidata="Q193537" start="6347" end="6352" title="UTF-8" label="UTF-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q167555" start="6395" end="6411" title="text recognition" label="text recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q36975" start="7143" end="7148" title="glyph" label="glyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056408" start="7314" end="7330" title="open file format" label="open file format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="7474" end="7485" title="open-source software" label="open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="7539" end="7565" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="7723" end="7743" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421965" start="7745" end="7755" title="LizardTech" label="LizardTech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421965" start="7981" end="7989" title="Extensis" label="Extensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131669" start="8059" end="8078" title="Linux distributions" label="Linux distributions"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="8239" end="8255" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118210" start="8287" end="8307" title="Million Book Project" label="Million Book Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="8331" end="8344" title="public-domain" label="public-domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q215106" start="8370" end="8374" title="TIFF" label="TIFF"/>
<link wikidata="Q865817" start="8584" end="8595" title="Java applet" label="Java applet"/>
<link wikidata="Q565" start="8626" end="8643" title="Wikimedia Commons" label="Wikimedia Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="8672" end="8681" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438330" start="8760" end="8788" title="Comparison of e-book formats" label="Comparison of e-book formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q22682088" start="8791" end="8837" title="International Image Interoperability Framework" label="International Image Interoperability Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q931783" start="8847" end="8856" title="JPEG 2000" label="JPEG 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940878" start="8892" end="8912" title="Mixed raster content" label="Mixed raster content"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="8991" end="8998" title="Firefox" label="Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571662" start="9167" end="9177" title="Yann LeCun" label="Yann LeCun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711047" start="9179" end="9190" title="Léon Bottou" label="Léon Bottou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571662" start="9287" end="9297" title="Yann LeCun" label="Yann LeCun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711047" start="9302" end="9313" title="Leon Bottou" label="Leon Bottou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654544" start="9331" end="9353" title="AT&amp;amp;T Labs Research" label="AT&amp;amp;T Labs Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571662" start="9383" end="9393" title="Yann LeCun" label="Yann LeCun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711047" start="9398" end="9409" title="Leon Bottou" label="Leon Bottou"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610869" wikidata="Q584605" url="?curid=610869" title="Nuzi">
<text>Nuzi (Hurrian Nuzi/Nuzu; Akkadian Gasur) at modern Yorghan Tepe (also Yorgan Tepa and Jorgan Tepe), Iraq was an ancient Mesopotamian city 12 kilometers southwest of the city of Arrapha (modern Kirkuk) and 70 kilometers southwest of Sātu Qala, located near the Tigris river. It was occupied from
the Ubaid period in the 5th millennium BC until late in the 2nd millennium BC then, after
a period of abandonment, in the Parthian era. It reached major importance in the Akkadian Empire period when it was known as Gasur and again in the Mitanni period when its name was Nuzi.

==History==
The site has about 15 occupational layers with 12 major strata several of which have subdivisions. The majority of excavation work at the site was on the Late Bronze Age levels with only some soundings to the older strata. Traces of Parthian era occupation were found on the surface.

===Late Chalcolithic===
Pottery sherds were found from the Halaf/Ubaid periods. In the Uruk period levels
mudbrick construction occurred and finds included spouted vessels, bevel-rimmed bowls, a small copper animal figurine and a cache of drilled marble stamp and cylinder seals.

===Early Bronze===
Early dynastic pottery was found in one pit, from pavements and graves, with no interruption with the following Akkadian Empire occupation.

====Akkadian Period====
During the Akkadian Empire (c. 2334-2154 BC), the city was probably known as Gasur. There is some debate about whether the city name was Ga-surki or Ga-sagki. It was a provincial seat of a governor known from a clay sealing reading: &quot;Itbe-labba, govern[or] of Gasur&quot; found at Tell Brak in modern Syria. 222 Akkadian Empire period (c. 2334–2154 BC) cuneiform tablets were found at the site. They are primarily dated to the time of rulers Naram-Sin and Shar-kali-sharri and written in Old Akkadian. A school tablet mentioned Tuṭṭanabšum, daughter of Naram-Sin. Finds at
this level included stone figurines, a copper axe and copper daggers, a shell seal
mounted on a copper pin, and 5 cylinder seals. Gasur had strong
trading contacts with a number of cities including Assur, Sabum, Susa, and the city of
Akkad.
The most famous item found at this level is the Nuzi map, the oldest known map discovered. Although the majority of the tablet is preserved, it is unknown exactly what the Nuzi map shows. The Nuzi map is actually one of the so-called Gasur texts, and predates destruction
by fire of the city at this end of the Early Bronze Age. Gasur was a thriving commercial center, and the texts reveal a diverse business community with far-reaching commercial activities. It is possible that Ebla was a trading partner, and that the tablet, rather than a record of land-holdings, might indeed be a road map. The tablet, which is approximately 6 centimeters by 6.5 centimeters, is inscribed only on the obverse. It shows the city of Maskan-dur-ebla in the lower left corner, as well as a canal/river and two mountain ranges. The area
below the Rahium river is labeled &quot;20(bur) – 1(eše) of irrigated gardens, belonging to Azala&quot;.

====Ur III Period====
A stone plaque, of uncertain original provenance, was found at the temple of Istar at Assur reading &quot;Ititi, the ruler, son of Ininlaba, dedicated (this object) from the booty of Gasur to the goddess Istar&quot;. Alternative reading of the inscription has Inanna vs Istar. The city name is written as Ga-sagki vs the Ga-surki found at Gasur. The father&#x27;s name means &quot;Innin is a lion&quot; (Innin is another name of Inanna) and is known from a text found at Yorghan Tepe. The name of Ititi is also found in 5 Yorghan Tepe texts. The city of Assur is also mentioned in those texts, once in the same form as the Ititi inscription. The sign forms have been dated to either the Akkadian period or shortly thereafter. An Ititi was appointed as governor of the northern province at Kazallu by Ur III ruler Shulgi (c. 2094–2046 BC). With the
uncertainty on the degree of overlap between the Ur III empire and Akkadian Empire
it is unclear if this is the same person.

===Middle Bronze===
The site was occupied to a lesser extent in the Ur III, Isin-Larsa, and Old
Babylonian periods following a sack of the city. The relevant deposits were thick
but without architectural remains. A few cuneiform tablets from this era were found.

===Late Bronze===
====Mitanni Period====
In the middle of the second millennium the Hurrians gained control of the town and renamed it Nuzi. The history of the site during the intervening period is unclear, though the presence of a few cuneiform tablets from Assyria indicates that trade with nearby Assur was taking place.

After the fall of the Hurrian kingdom of Mitanni Nuzi went into gradual decline. Note that while the Hurrian period is well known from full excavation of those strata, the earlier history is not as reliable because of less substantive digging. The history of Nuzi is closely interrelated with that of the nearby towns of Eshnunna and Khafajah.

====Nuzi, a provincial town in the 14th century BC====

The best-known period in the history of Yorghan Tepe is by far one of the city of Nuzi in the 15th-14th centuries BC. At this time the central complex contained two temples (to Šawuška/Ištar and Teššub) and a palace. The tablets of this period indicate that Nuzi was a small provincial town of northern Mesopotamia at this time in an area populated mostly by Hurrians. Despite the presence of two temples most votive activity
at Nuzi in this period is that of household religions with elements of ancestor
worship where the eldest son inherits the family cult statue. Usually the tablets of Yorghan Tepe, Kirkuk, and Tell al-Faḫḫar are grouped together under banner of Nuzi tablets. Only 0.18% of tablets contained a date formula
of any kind, generally local. They can, however, be chronologically ordered by internal
clues such as the names of officials and prosopographical data.

====Administration====
Nuzi was a provincial town of Arrapha. It was administered by a governor (&quot;šaknu&quot;) from the palace. The tripartite palace, situated in the center of the mound, had many rooms arranged around a central courtyard. The functions of some of those rooms have been identified: reception areas, apartments, offices, kitchens, stores. The walls were painted, as was seen in fragments unearthed in the ruins of the building.

Archives that have been exhumed tell us about the royal family, as well as the organization of the internal administration of the palace and its dependencies, and the payments various workers received. Junior officers of the royal administration had such titles as &quot;sukkallu&quot; (often translated as &quot;vizier&quot;, the second governor), &quot;district manager&quot; (&quot;halṣuhlu&quot;), and &quot;mayor&quot; (&quot;hazannu&quot;). Justice was rendered by these officers, but also by judges (&quot;dayānu&quot;) installed in the districts. Free subjects of the state were liable to a conscription, the &quot;Ilku&quot;, which consisted of a requirement to perform various types of military and civilian services, such as working the land.

==Archaeology==

The site has a roughly square 200 meter by 200 meter main mound which was protected
by a city wall. Only a small portion of the wall was excavated but gates are apparent
by deep wadis in the northeast, southwest, and southeast. The city&#x27;s main road, well
drained, ran from the northeast gate to the southwest gate, separating the central
temples and palace. A secondary road led from the southeast gate to join the main road.
A number of private homes were excavated 200 meters north of the main mound on two small rises. Originally thought to be extramural residences it is now believed, partly on textual evidence, that there was an outer town with its own wall, now destroyed by modern agriculture.

The excavators defined a number of occupation strata. The Nuzi occupation
lasted several centuries and its chronology is slightly disputed. The
excavators dated Stratum II, the destruction of the city, at c. 1500 BC. Later
work has proposed a more recent date of c. 1430-1330 BC. The stratigraphy is complicated
because the excavators defined these main strata, &quot;pavements&quot;, from a few deep soundings while
specifying levels A through G for the temple and a different strata I—VIII for the northwest ridge and the southeast edge of the mound. The only correlation given was Temple A equals sounding Stratum I and &quot;edge&quot; Stratum II.

*Stratum I - Nuzi Post-Destruction level
*Stratum II - Nuzi Destruction level
*Stratum III - IV - Nuzi
*Stratum V - VII - Gasur/Nuzi transition, Lagash II to Old Babylonian
*Stratum VIII - IX - Gasur, Akkadian Empire, c. 2334–2154 BC
*Stratum X - XII - Prehistoric
While tablets from Yorghan Tepe began appearing back as far as 1896, the first serious archaeological efforts began in 1925 after Gertrude Bell noticed tablets appearing in the markets of Baghdad. The dig was mainly worked by Edward Chiera, Robert Pfeiffer, and Richard Starr under the auspices of the Iraq Museum and the Baghdad School of the American Schools of Oriental Research and later the Harvard University and Fogg Art Museum.
 Excavations continued through 1931 with the site showing 15 occupation levels. A number of soundings were conducted at the prehistoric site of
Kudis Sagïr about five kilometers to the south. The hundreds of tablets and other finds recovered were published in a series of volumes with ongoing publications.
To date, around 5,000 tablets are known, mostly held at the Oriental Institute, the Harvard Semitic Museum and the Iraq Museum in Baghdad. Those from Gasur are written in the Akkadian language while
though from Nuzi are in a Hurrian influenced dialect of Akkadian. Many are routine legal and business documents with about one quarter concerning the business transactions of a single family, found the homes of Tehip-tilla and Surki-tilla on the northwest rise. The vast majority of finds come from the Hurrian period during the second millennium BC with the remainder dating back to the town&#x27;s founding during the Akkadian Empire. A discovered sealing read &quot;Saustatar, son of Parsatatar, king of Mitani&quot;,
being the first, Baratarna, and second, Shaushtatar, rulers of the Mitanni Empire. An archive contemporary with the Hurrian archive at Nuzi has been excavated from the &quot;Green Palace&quot; at the site of Tell al-Fakhar, southwest of Nuzi.

The temple area had seven occupation levels, Temple G (Gasur), Temple F (Gasur/Nuzi transition), and Temples A-E (Nuzi). Temple G was a single shrine which in Temple
F was transformed into a double shrine. Temple A was contemporary with the Stratum II destruction level. All were of the &quot;bent-axis&quot; type. In the temple area a number of bronze objects were found, including a statue carved in the round, 9 sickles, 2 sun-discs, 2 crescents, 6 pins, 1 bell, 2 bracelets, and hundreds of small beads. One sickle was inscribed with &quot;An. Ud. Za.&quot; and the sun-discs were 12 centimeters in
diameter with &quot;a circular depression(about 4 cm. across) surrounded by a circle of raised dots; around this center is a six-pointed star&quot;.

=== Nuzi ware ===
In 1948, archaeologist Max Mallowan called attention to the unusual pottery he found at Nuzi, associated with the Mitanni period. This became known as the Nuzi ware. Subsequently, this highly artistic pottery was identified all over in the Upper Mesopotamia.

==See also==
*List of cities of the ancient Near East
*Nuzi texts

==References==
==Further reading==
* Chiera, Edward, &quot;Joint Expedition with the Iraq Museum at Nuzi. Vol 1 : Inheritance Texts&quot;, 1927
* Chiera, Edward, &quot;Joint Expedition with the Iraq Museum at Nuzi. Vol 2 : Declarations in court&quot;, 1930
* Chiera, Edward, &quot;Joint Expedition with the Iraq Museum at Nuzi. Vol 3 : Exchange and security documents&quot;, 1931
*Chiera, Edward, &quot;Joint Expedition with the Iraq Museum at Nuzi. Vol 4 : Proceedings in court&quot;, 1934
*Chiera, Edward, &quot;Joint Expedition with the Iraq Museum at Nuzi. Vol 5 : Mixed Texts&quot;, 1934
*Chiera, Edward, &quot;Joint Expedition with the Iraq Museum at Nuzi. Vol 6 : Miscellaneous texts&quot;, 1939
*G. R. Driver and J. Miles, &quot;Ordeal by Oath at Nuzi, Iraq&quot;, vol. 7, pp. 132, 1940
* Ignace J. Gelb et al., &quot;Nuzi Personal Names&quot;, Oriental Institute Publications 57, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1943
*Ernest R. Lacheman and Maynard P. Maidman,&quot;Studies on the Civilization and Culture of Nuzi and the Hurrians: Volume 3 – Joint Expedition with the Iraq Museum at Nuzi VII – Miscellaneous Texts&quot;, 1989, 
*Ernest R. Lacheman et al., &quot;Studies on the Civilization and Culture of Nuzi and the Hurrians: Volume 4 – The Eastern Archives of Nuzi and Excavations at Nuzi 9/2&quot;, Eisenbrauns, 1993, 
*Brigitte Lion and Diana L. Stein, &quot;Studies on the Civilization and Culture of Nuzi and the Hurrians: Volume 11 – The Pula-Hali Family Archives&quot;, CDL Press, 2001, 
*Löhnert, Anne, &quot;Aspects of Royal Authority and Local Competence: A Perspective from Nuzi&quot;, Tradition and Innovation in the Ancient Near East: Proceedings of the 57th Rencontre Assyriologique International at Rome, 4–8 July 2011, edited by Alfonso Archi, University Park, USA: Penn State University Press, pp. 335–344, 2015
*Maidman, M. P., &quot;Two Hundred Nuzi Texts from the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago, Part I&quot;, SCCNH 6, Bethesda: CDL Press, 1994
*Maynard P. Maidman, &quot;Studies on the Civilization and Culture of Nuzi and the Hurrians: Volume 6 – Two Hundred Nuzi Texts from the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago&quot;, CDL Press, 1994, 
*Martha A. Morrison and David I. Owen, &quot;Studies on the Civilization and Culture of Nuzi and the Hurrians: Volume 1 – In Honor of Ernest R. Lacheman on His Seventy-fifth Birthday, April 29, 1981&quot;, 1981, 
*David I. Owen and Ernest R. Lacheman, &quot;Studies on the Civilization and Culture of Nuzi and the Hurrians: Volume 5 – General Studies and Excavations at Nuzi 9/3&quot;, Eisenbrauns, 1995, 
*David I. Owen and Martha A. Morrison, &quot;Studies on the Civilization and Culture of Nuzi and the Hurrians: Volume 2 – General Studies and Excavations at Nuzi 9/1&quot;, 1987, 
*David I. Owen and Gernot Wilhelm, &quot;Studies on the Civilization and Culture of Nuzi and the Hurrians: Volume 7 – Edith Porada Memorial Volume&quot;, CDL Press, 1995, 
*David I. Owen and Gernot Wilhelm, &quot;Studies on the Civilization and Culture of Nuzi and the Hurrians: Volume 8 – Richard F.S. Starr Memorial Volume&quot;, CDL Press, 1997, 
*David I. Owen and Gernot Wilhelm, &quot;Studies on the Civilization and Culture of Nuzi and the Hurrians: Volume 9 – General Studies and Excavations at Nuzi&quot;, CDL Press, 1998, 
*David I. Owen and Gernot Wilhelm, &quot;Studies on the Civilization and Culture of Nuzi and the Hurrians: Volume 10 – Nuzi at seventy-five&quot;, Bethesda, Md. : CDL Press, 1999, 
*J. Paradise, &quot;A Daughter and Her Father&#x27;s Property at Nuzi&quot;, Journal of Cuneiform Studies, vol. 32, pp. 189–207, 1980
*Porada, Edith, &quot;Seal Impressions of Nuzi&quot;, The Annual of the American Schools of Oriental Research, vol. 24, pp. 1–138, 1944

==External links==
*Inscriptions found at Gasur/Nuzi - CDLI
*History of the Baghdad School of ASOR 1923–1969
*B. Lion, « Nuzi, une ville du monde hourrite » 1998</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q584605" start="0" end="4" title="Nuzi" label="Nuzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q584605" start="14" end="23" title="Nuzi" label="Nuzi/Nuzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="25" end="33" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q584605" start="34" end="39" title="Nuzi" label="Gasur"/>
<link wikidata="Q584605" start="51" end="63" title="Nuzi" label="Yorghan Tepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="100" end="104" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="120" end="131" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q672905" start="177" end="184" title="Arrapha" label="Arrapha"/>
<link wikidata="Q173310" start="193" end="199" title="Kirkuk" label="Kirkuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15876602" start="232" end="241" title="Sātu Qala" label="Sātu Qala"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="260" end="266" title="Tigris" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q245156" start="299" end="311" title="Ubaid period" label="Ubaid period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="417" end="425" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178665" start="533" end="540" title="Mitanni" label="Mitanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="818" end="826" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q731494" start="957" end="968" title="Uruk period" label="Uruk period"/>
<link wikidata="Q652502" start="1043" end="1061" title="Beveled rim bowl" label="bevel-rimmed bowls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123756" start="1134" end="1148" title="cylinder seals" label="cylinder seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="1346" end="1361" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Akkadian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q978443" start="1621" end="1630" title="Tell Brak" label="Tell Brak"/>
<link wikidata="Q297506" start="1782" end="1791" title="Naram-Sin of Akkad" label="Naram-Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q349653" start="1796" end="1812" title="Shar-kali-sharri" label="Shar-kali-sharri"/>
<link wikidata="Q200200" start="2111" end="2116" title="Assur" label="Assur"/>
<link wikidata="Q180773" start="2125" end="2129" title="Susa" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q150996" start="2147" end="2152" title="Akkad (city)" label="Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="3180" end="3185" title="Ishtar" label="Istar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200200" start="3189" end="3194" title="Assur" label="Assur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669395" start="3892" end="3899" title="Kazallu" label="Kazallu"/>
<link wikidata="Q315893" start="3916" end="3922" title="Shulgi" label="Shulgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13577667" start="4153" end="4163" title="Isin-Larsa" label="Isin-Larsa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4169" end="4191" title="Old
Babylonian periods" label="Old
Babylonian periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q190394" start="4425" end="4433" title="Hurrians" label="Hurrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="4600" end="4607" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q200200" start="4641" end="4646" title="Assur" label="Assur"/>
<link wikidata="Q178665" start="4707" end="4714" title="Mitanni" label="Mitanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q375685" start="4987" end="4995" title="Eshnunna" label="Eshnunna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305112" start="5000" end="5008" title="Khafajah" label="Khafajah"/>
<link wikidata="Q391333" start="5244" end="5251" title="Šawuška" label="Šawuška"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="5252" end="5257" title="Ištar" label="Ištar"/>
<link wikidata="Q248242" start="5262" end="5268" title="Teššub" label="Teššub"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740784" start="5684" end="5698" title="Tell al-Fakhar" label="Tell al-Faḫḫar"/>
<link wikidata="Q672905" start="6003" end="6010" title="Arrapha" label="Arrapha"/>
<link wikidata="Q231360" start="8928" end="8941" title="Gertrude Bell" label="Gertrude Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342291" start="9024" end="9037" title="Edward Chiera" label="Edward Chiera"/>
<link wikidata="Q521251" start="9100" end="9111" title="Iraq Museum" label="Iraq Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q466721" start="9142" end="9179" title="American Schools of Oriental Research" label="American Schools of Oriental Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="9194" end="9212" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783572" start="9217" end="9232" title="Fogg Art Museum" label="Fogg Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945418" start="9550" end="9570" title="Nuzi texts" label="around 5,000 tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276053" start="9601" end="9619" title="University of Chicago Oriental Institute" label="Oriental Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918448" start="9625" end="9647" title="Harvard Semitic Museum" label="Harvard Semitic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="9671" end="9678" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="9716" end="9733" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q190394" start="10043" end="10050" title="Hurrian" label="Hurrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="10160" end="10175" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Akkadian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q524972" start="10278" end="10287" title="Baratarna" label="Baratarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q978095" start="10301" end="10312" title="Shaushtatar" label="Shaushtatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740784" start="10469" end="10483" title="Tell al-Fakhar" label="Tell al-Fakhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q454442" start="11299" end="11311" title="Max Mallowan" label="Max Mallowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q104029294" start="11431" end="11440" title="Nuzi ware" label="Nuzi ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q63780" start="11550" end="11589" title="List of cities of the ancient Near East" label="List of cities of the ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945418" start="11591" end="11601" title="Nuzi texts" label="Nuzi texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576534" start="12307" end="12319" title="G. R. Driver" label="G. R. Driver"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610870" wikidata="Q6848321" url="?curid=610870" title="Mike Parry">
<text>Michael Alan Newton-Parry (born 29 December 1954) is an English broadcaster and former journalist.

==Early life==
Born in Chester, Parry attended The King&#x27;s School and later completed his education at Trent Polytechnic, now known as Nottingham Trent University.

==Journalism career==
After graduating, Parry became a &quot;Fleet Street reporter&quot; and worked for tabloid newspapers, including &quot;The Sun&quot;. In the late 1990s, he served as News Editor of the &quot;Daily Express&quot; and later as News Editor of the Press Association. He then became a Press Officer for the Football Association.

Parry has written three books. His first, &quot;Rooney Tunes&quot;, is a biography of footballer Wayne Rooney, published in 2006. He co-wrote two autobiographies of his fellow talkSPORT presenter Alan Brazil: &quot;There&#x27;s an Awful Lot of Bubbly in Brazil&quot; (2007) and &quot;Both Barrels from Brazil: My War On the Numpties&quot; (2008).

==Radio==
In 1999, Parry joined Talk Radio (later known as talkSPORT). He originally co-presented the &quot;Sports Breakfast&quot; with Alan Brazil, but after experiencing health problems in 2004, he was replaced by Graham Beecroft and later by Ronnie Irani.

Following an improvement in his health, Parry returned to co-host &quot;The Alan Brazil Sports Breakfast&quot; show on Monday and Friday mornings, and sometimes stood in for Irani when he was unavailable. In 2009, he began presenting the 10:00–13:00 slot with Andy Townsend from Monday to Friday.

From June 2010, Parry co-hosted with Mike Graham in the same slot. They were replaced by Richard Keys and Andy Gray in February 2011.

He stood in for regular presenter Mark Chapman on &quot;606&quot; on Radio 5 Live on 19 February 2011 and again on 2 April 2011 alongside Robbie Savage.

Parry presented the Saturday lunchtime &#x27;Warm-Up&#x27; show on talkSPORT from mid-2017 to August 2019. During this period, he had various co-hosts, including Brazil, Graham, Danny Kelly, and Jason Cundy. Parry left talkSPORT after 20 years in August 2019. He finished his final show by saying: &quot;I think I&#x27;ll end with words similar to those from the immortal John Lennon - &#x27;thank you very much indeed for listening, folks, and I hope I passed the audition&#x27;&quot;.

From 2020 to 2021, he presented weekend shows on talkRADIO.

==Television==
Parry began his television career as the co-presenter of the Sports Tonight Live show with Chris Cohen, which was broadcast on Freeview channel 112 (internet connection required) and online. However, Sports Tonight Live went bankrupt.

Since 2018, Parry has made regular guest appearances on &quot;Jeremy Vine&quot;, a topical discussion programme broadcast by Channel 5.

During an appearance on 1 October 2021, in a debate about protests by environmental activist group Insulate Britain, Parry controversially stated that &quot;‘the problem in this country in all areas is that minorities always get the upper hand because we’re so tolerant, and minorities have to be squashed, like that… so that the rest of society can operate normally’&quot;, while slamming his hand on the desk. The incident was widely reported and led to complaints being filed with Ofcom.

==Personal life==
In 2004, Parry suffered heart failure and was treated at Harefield Hospital. Later that year, he was diagnosed with advanced dilated cardiomyopathy and placed on the transplant list. However, in April 2005, thanks to a combination of drug treatment and improvements in Parry’s digestion and exercise, leading to a weight loss of in six months, he was removed from the transplant list.

Parry is a lifelong supporter of Everton Football Club and is also a minority shareholder in the club.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6848321" start="0" end="25" title="Mike Parry" label="Michael Alan Newton-Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="87" end="97" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170263" start="123" end="130" title="Chester" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744469" start="147" end="169" title="The King&amp;#x27;s School, Chester" label="The King&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002619" start="239" end="266" title="Nottingham Trent University" label="Nottingham Trent University"/>
<link wikidata="Q846686" start="330" end="342" title="Fleet Street" label="Fleet Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="409" end="416" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="481" end="494" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402475" start="533" end="550" title="Press Association" label="Press Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="591" end="611" title="Football Association" label="Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="687" end="696" title="biography" label="biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q266613" start="711" end="723" title="Wayne Rooney" label="Wayne Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="760" end="775" title="autobiographies" label="autobiographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632690" start="810" end="821" title="Alan Brazil" label="Alan Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679885" start="1021" end="1030" title="talkSPORT" label="talkSPORT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632690" start="1098" end="1109" title="Alan Brazil" label="Alan Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1178" end="1193" title="Graham Beecroft" label="Graham Beecroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526913" start="1207" end="1219" title="Ronnie Irani" label="Ronnie Irani"/>
<link wikidata="Q527899" start="1482" end="1495" title="Andy Townsend" label="Andy Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847051" start="1557" end="1568" title="Mike Graham (journalist)" label="Mike Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327063" start="1609" end="1621" title="Richard Keys" label="Richard Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q516216" start="1626" end="1635" title="Andy Gray (footballer, born 1955)" label="Andy Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767044" start="1689" end="1701" title="Mark Chapman (broadcaster)" label="Mark Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641522" start="1711" end="1714" title="606 (radio show)" label="606"/>
<link wikidata="Q795588" start="1724" end="1736" title="BBC Radio 5 Live" label="Radio 5 Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q350799" start="1793" end="1806" title="Robbie Savage" label="Robbie Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220508" start="1987" end="1998" title="Danny Kelly (journalist)" label="Danny Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6162297" start="2004" end="2015" title="Jason Cundy" label="Jason Cundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q108760651" start="2346" end="2355" title="talkRADIO" label="talkRADIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579806" start="2434" end="2453" title="Sports Tonight Live" label="Sports Tonight Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156823" start="2500" end="2508" title="Freeview (UK)" label="Freeview"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279877" start="2671" end="2682" title="Jeremy Vine (TV programme)" label="Jeremy Vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="2734" end="2743" title="Channel 5 (UK)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q108796018" start="2845" end="2861" title="Insulate Britain" label="Insulate Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="3230" end="3235" title="Ofcom" label="Ofcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656797" start="3313" end="3331" title="Harefield Hospital" label="Harefield Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="3675" end="3696" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton Football Club"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610871" wikidata="Q3306983" url="?curid=610871" title="Portuguese dialects">
<text>Portuguese dialects are the mutually intelligible variations of the Portuguese language in Portuguese-speaking countries and other areas holding some degree of cultural bond with the language. Portuguese has two standard forms of writing and numerous regional spoken variations, with often large phonological and lexical differences.

In Portugal, the language is regulated by the Sciences Academy of Lisbon, Class of Letters and its national dialect is called European Portuguese. This written variation is the one preferred by Portuguese ex-colonies in Africa and Asia, including Cabo Verde, Mozambique, Angola, Timor-Leste, Macau and Goa. The form of Portuguese used in Brazil is regulated by the Brazilian Academy of Letters and is known as Brazilian Portuguese.

Differences between European and Brazilian written forms of Portuguese occur in a similar way, and are often compared to, those of British English and American, though spelling divergencies were generally believed to occur with a little greater frequency in the two Portuguese written dialects until a new standard orthography came into full effect in the 2010s. Differences in syntax and word construction, not directly related to spelling, are also observed. Furthermore, there were attempts to unify the two written variations, the most recent of them being the Orthographic Agreement of 1990, which only began to take effect in the 2000s and is still under implementation in some countries. This and previous reforms faced criticism by people who say they are unnecessary or inefficient or even that they create more differences instead of reducing or eliminating them.

The differences between the various spoken Portuguese dialects are mostly in phonology, in the frequency of usage of certain grammatical forms, and especially in the distance between the formal and informal levels of speech. Lexical differences are numerous but largely confined to &quot;peripheral&quot; words, such as plants, animals, and other local items, with little impact in the core lexicon.

Dialectal deviations from the official grammar are relatively few. As a consequence, all Portuguese dialects are mutually intelligible although for some of the most extremely divergent pairs, the phonological changes may make it difficult for speakers to understand rapid speech.

== Main subdivisions ==

===Europe===
The dialects of Portugal can be divided into two major groups:
*The southern and central dialects are broadly characterized by preserving the distinction between and , and by the tendency to monophthongize &quot;ei&quot; and &quot;ou&quot; to and . They include the dialect of the capital, Lisbon, but it has some peculiarities of its own. Although the dialects of the Atlantic archipelagos of the Azores and Madeira have unique characteristics, as well, they can also be grouped with the southern dialects.
*The northern dialects are characterized by preserving the pronunciation of &quot;ei&quot; and &quot;ou&quot; as diphthongs , , and by somewhat having sometimes merged with (like in Spanish). They include the dialect of Porto, Portugal&#x27;s second largest city.

Within each of these regions, however, is further variation, especially in pronunciation. For example, in Lisbon and its vicinity, the diphthong &quot;ei&quot; is centralized to instead of being monophthongized, as in the south.

It is usually believed that the dialects of Brazil, Africa, and Asia are derived mostly from those of central and southern Portugal.

====Barranquenho====
In the Portuguese town of Barrancos (on the border between Extremadura, Andalucia and Portugal), a dialect of Portuguese heavily influenced by Southern Spanish dialects, known as &quot;barranquenho&quot; is spoken by a small community of 1500 people.

===South America===

Brazilian dialects are divided into northern and southern groups, the northern dialects tending to slightly more open pre-stressed vowels. The dialects of São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro have had some influence on the rest of the country in Brazil due to their economic and cultural dominance in the country. However, migration from the Northern states to the Southern states cause the influence to be a two-way phenomenon. Cultural issues also play their roles. Speakers of the &quot;Gaúcho&quot; accent, for example, usually have strong feelings about their own way of speaking and are largely uninfluenced by the other accents. Also, people of inland cities of the three southern states usually speak with a very notable German, Italian or Polish accent, and among the inhabitants of the Santa Catarina Island (i.e. insular Florianópolis), the Azorean Portuguese dialect, in its local variant, predominates.

Between Brazilian Portuguese, particularly in its most informal varieties, and European Portuguese, there can be noticeable differences in grammar, aside from the differences in pronunciation and vocabulary. The most prominent ones concern the placement of clitic pronouns, and the use of subject pronouns as objects in the third person. Non-standard inflections are also common in colloquial Brazilian Portuguese.
===Africa, Asia and Oceania===
For historical reasons, the dialects of Africa are generally closer to those of Portugal than the Brazilian dialects, but in some aspects of their phonology, especially the pronunciation of unstressed vowels, they resemble Brazilian Portuguese more than European Portuguese. They have not been studied as exhaustively as European and Brazilian Portuguese.

Asian Portuguese dialects are similar to the African ones and so are generally close to those of Portugal. In Macau, the syllable onset rhotic is pronounced as a voiced uvular fricative or uvular trill .

== Notable features of some dialects ==
Many dialects have special characteristics. Most of the differences are seen in phonetics and phonology, and here are some of the more prominent:

===Conservative===
*In some regions of northern Portugal and Brazil, the digraph &quot;ou&quot; still denotes a falling diphthong , but it has been monophthongized to by most speakers of Portuguese.
*In the dialects of Alto-Minho and Trás-os-Montes (northern Portugal), the digraph &quot;ch&quot; still denotes the affricate , as in Galicia, but for most speakers, it has merged with .
*Some dialects of northern Portugal still contrast the predorsodental sibilants &quot;c&quot;/&quot;ç&quot; and &quot;z&quot; with apicoalveolar sibilants &quot;s(s)&quot; and &quot;s&quot; , with minimal pairs such as &quot;passo&quot; &quot;step&quot; and &quot;paço&quot; &quot;palace&quot; or &quot;coser&quot; &quot;to sew&quot; and &quot;cozer&quot; &quot;to cook&quot;, which are homophones in most dialects. The other dialects of northern Portugal that have lost this distinction have apicoalveolar sibilants instead of the predorsodental fricatives, found in all southern dialects of Portugal as well as in Brazil. In those dialects, they also appear in syllable codas instead of the realizations that can be observed in all southern dialects.
*In northern Portugal, the pronoun &quot;vós&quot; and its associated verb forms are still in use.
*In Alentejo and parts of the Algarve (southern Portugal), one finds word-final where standard EP has , a feature shared with BP.
*Also in Brazil, Alentejo and the Algarve, progressive constructions are formed with the gerund form of verbs instead of &quot;a&quot; followed by the infinitive that one finds in most dialects of Portugal: &quot;está chovendo&quot; vs. &quot;está a chover&quot; (&quot;it&#x27;s raining&quot;).

===Innovative===
*In central and southern Portugal (except the city of Lisbon and its vicinity), the diphthong is monophthongized to . The nasal diphthong is often monophthongized to as well.
*In and near Lisbon, and are pronounced and , respectively. Furthermore, stressed is pronounced or before a palato-alveolar or a palatal consonant followed by another vowel.
*In the dialect of the Beiras (Beira Interior Norte, Cova da Beira and Beira Interior Sul) in central Portugal, the sibilant occurs at the end of words, before another word which starts with a vowel, instead of .
*In northern Portugal, the phoneme has a velar allophone at the end of words.
* In the dialects of Beira Baixa (Southern Inland Beiras, Beira Interior Sul) (Castelo Branco), Northern Portalegre and Far Western Algarve (Barlavento area) and São Miguel Island in the Azores (aka &quot;Micaelense&quot;), the near-front rounded vowel replaces , in a process similar to the one that originated the French &quot;u&quot;. (There is also front rounded vowel in Beira Baixa, Northern Portalegre and São Miguel Island dialects but not in Far Western Algarve dialect or Madeira island). These are the only Galician-Portuguese and Ibero-Romance (or Hispano-Romance) dialects to have these phonemes and they are in common with Gallo-Romance ones, which differentiate them from all the other Galician-Portuguese and Ibero-Romance dialects.(see note at the end of the article)

* Micaelense Portuguese also features other sounds in its vowel inventory that is unique to all Portuguese dialects (like the nasal ). The Micaelense vowel front rounded vowel replaces the Standard European Portuguese close-mid back rounded vowel in words spelt with &quot;ou/oi&quot;, as in &quot;outra&quot; or &quot;boi&quot;. Although all Azorean dialects are usually grouped together as a whole (for the sake of geographical grouping), these two characteristics are emblematic mostly of Micaelense Portuguese only, and is not the case in the way speakers of Azorean dialects from the other eight islands speak. However both and phonemes are also present in the some parts (locolects) of other islands, in Terceira, Graciosa, Eastern Pico, Flores and Corvo, but are totally absent in the islands of Santa Maria (although close and south of São Miguel, Santa Maria island dialect is very different from São Miguel), Faial, São Jorge and Western Pico. (see note at the end of the article)
*In northern Portugal, the close vowels and may be pronounced as diphthongs, such as in &quot;Porto&quot;, pronounced , &quot;quê&quot;: , &quot;hoje&quot;: or even 
*Some dialects of southern Portugal have gerund forms that inflect for person and number: &quot;em chegandos&quot; (&quot;when you arrive&quot;), &quot;em chegândemos&quot; (&quot;when we arrive&quot;), &quot;em chegandem&quot; (&quot;when you/they arrive&quot;). They are not used in writing.
*There are some dialectal differences in how word final [u] is realized. In Brazilian Portuguese, it is always pronounced. In Portugal, it is usually most audible when at the end of an utterance. In other contexts, it may be realized not at all or as mere labialization of the preceding consonant. The northern dialects tend to maintain it in most contexts. For instance, a sentence like &quot;o meu irmão comprou um carro novo&quot; (&quot;my brother bought a new car&quot;) would be pronounced as or in those dialects. In the Lisbon dialect the last two words would instead be pronounced , , or . In southern Portugal, word final and are also affected so in Alentejo, the same sentence would sound (in that dialect, utterance final vowels are also noticeably very prolonged so a more accurate transcription might be for this example). In the southernmost region of the country, the Algarve, the vowel is completely lost: .
*In most of Brazil, syllable-final is vocalized to , which causes &quot;mau&quot; &quot;bad&quot; and &quot;mal&quot; &quot;badly&quot; to become homophones (although Brazilians tends to use &quot;ruim&quot; in place of &quot;mau&quot;). Similarly, &quot;degrau&quot; &quot;step&quot; and &quot;jornal&quot; &quot;journal&quot; rhyme, which results in false plurals such as &quot;degrais&quot; &quot;steps&quot; (vs. correct &quot;degraus&quot;), by analogy with correct plural &quot;jornais&quot;. In the &quot;caipira&quot; dialect, and in parts of Goiás and Minas Gerais, syllable-final is instead merged with , pronounced as an alveolar approximant in the Caipira way.
*The pronunciation of syllable-initial and syllable-final &quot;r&quot; varies considerably with dialect. See Guttural R in Portuguese, for details. Syllable-initial ⟨r⟩ and doubled ⟨rr⟩ are pronounced as a guttural in most cities in Portugal, but as a traditional trill in rural Portugal. In Brazil, the sound is normally pronounced as an &quot;unvoiced&quot; guttural (), which is also used for ⟨r⟩ at the end of syllables (except in the &quot;caipira&quot; dialect, which uses an alveolar approximant , and the &quot;gaúcho&quot; dialect, &quot;sulista&quot; dialect and &quot;paulistano&quot; dialect which use an alveolar flap or trill ). In the northern dialects of Brazil, ⟨r⟩ at the end of words is normally silent or barely pronounced, it is kept, however, in most southern dialects, except in infinitives, where it tends to be omitted everywhere. In Macau, where Portuguese is spoken mostly as a second language, initial and intervocalic &quot;r&quot; is sometimes replaced with a diphthong, and ⟨r⟩ at the end of words (esp. when final-stressed) is sometimes silent.
*Some speakers of São Tomé and Príncipe produce the vibratory alveolar consonant [r] in positions that do not exist in the Portuguese spoken in Brazil and Portugal. In addition, there is still the voiced uvular fricative as a variant that clearly distinguishes two generations of Portuguese speakers, those under 39 years old and those over 40 years old, or those born before or after the independence of the country.
*Varieties in the Portuguese spoken in Uruguay share many similarities with the countryside dialects of the southern Brazilian state of Rio Grande do Sul, such as the denasalization of final unstressed nasal vowels, replacement of lateral palatal /ʎ/ with semivowel /j/, no raising of final unstressed /e/, alveolar trill /r/ instead of the guttural R, and lateral realization of coda /l/ instead of L-vocalization. Some of these sounds do not exist in Portugal.
*In Guinea-Bissau, &quot;the final ‘l’ seems weaker than in Portugal, even giving the impression of that there is a minimal pause between the preceding vowel and it, as in &#x27;Senegal&#x27;, which comes out like [seneˈga-l]&quot;. There is also height neutralization between middle vowels and, therefore, &quot;if [Guineans] say &#x27;he&#x27; (pronoun), we seem to hear &#x27;he&#x27; (letter name), and vice versa&quot;.
*The close central vowel /ɨ/ occurs only at final, unstressed syllables, e.g. presidente /pɾeziˈdẽtɨ/ in Angola. Furthermore, many Angolans usually replace the consonant /ɲ/ with [j̃], for example, &quot;ninho&quot; [ˈnĩj̃u], nasalizing the vowel that precedes it.
*The pronunciation of syllable-final &quot;s/x/z&quot; also varies with dialect. See Portuguese phonology for details. Portugal and Rio de Janeiro favor , both before a consonant and finally. Most other parts of Brazil favor , but in the Northeast, is often heard before consonants, especially (but not at the end of words).
*In the Northeast of Brazil and, to an increasing extent, in Rio de Janeiro and elsewhere, is inserted before final in a final-stressed word, which makes &quot;mas&quot; &quot;but&quot; and &quot;mais&quot; &quot;more&quot; homonyms, both pronounced or . Other affected examples are &quot;faz&quot; &quot;he does&quot;, &quot;dez&quot; &quot;ten&quot;, &quot;nós&quot; &quot;we&quot;, &quot;voz&quot; &quot;voice&quot;, &quot;luz&quot; &quot;light&quot;, &quot;Jesus&quot; &quot;Jesus&quot;, etc. Related forms like &quot;fazem&quot;, &quot;vozes&quot;, &quot;nosso&quot; are unaffected since is no longer final.
*In Mozambique at the end of words ending in &#x27;e&#x27; it changes to &#x27;i&#x27; instead of &#x27;ɨ&#x27; as in Portugal (for example [felisidádi] instead of [fɨlisidádɨ]), as well as in Brazil. Mozambicans also suppress the final /r/ phoneme (for example, estar is read [eʃ&#x27;tá] instead of [eʃ&#x27;táɾ]) and the suppression of unaccented vowels is not as strong as in Portugal.
*In Cape Verde /l/ is laminal dental [l̪], i.e., it is pronounced with the tip of the tongue touching the upper teeth. It is similar to the &quot;l&quot; sound in Spanish, French or German. The &quot;l&quot; sound in Portugal is velarized alveolar [ɫ͇], i.e., that is, it is pronounced with the tip of the tongue touching the alveoli, well behind the upper incisor teeth, with the tongue curved, with a concavity facing upwards.
*In most of Brazil, are palatalized to when they are followed by . Common sources of are the unstressed ending &quot;-e&quot;, as in &quot;gente&quot; &quot;people&quot; and &quot;de&quot; &quot;of&quot; , and the epenthetic in words such as &quot;advogado&quot; &quot;lawyer&quot; . Prefixes &quot;de-&quot;, &quot;des-&quot; and &quot;dez-&quot; (such as &quot;dezoito&quot; &quot;eighteen&quot;) vary from word to word and from speaker to speaker between and .
*Informal Brazilian Portuguese makes major changes in its use of pronouns:
**Informal &quot;tu&quot; is dropped entirely in most regions along with all second-person singular verbal inflections. When &quot;tu&quot; survives, it is used with third-person inflections.
**Clitic &quot;te&quot; survives as the normal clitic object pronoun corresponding to &quot;você&quot;.
**Clitic pronouns almost always precede the verb. Post-verbal clitics and mesoclisis are seen only in formal contexts.
**Possessives &quot;seu, sua&quot; virtually always mean &quot;your&quot;. To say &quot;his, her&quot;, constructions like &quot;o carro dele&quot; &quot;his car&quot; or &quot;o carro dela&quot; &quot;her car&quot; are used.
**Third-person clitics &quot;o, a, os, as&quot; and combined clitics like &quot;mo, no-lo&quot; are virtually never heard in speech. Instead, the clitics are simply omitted, especially to refer to objects; or a subject pronoun is placed &quot;after&quot; the verb: &quot;Eu levo&quot; &quot;I&#x27;ll get it&quot;; &quot;Vi ele&quot; &quot;I saw him&quot;.
*In East Timor, the phoneme /ʒ/ sometimes realized as [z], sometimes as [dʒ], is typical of the Creole of Malacca and Singapore and also the Creole of Bidau and the same realization was also found of Portuguese spoken on the island, such as ʒ &gt; z: já [za] ~ [dʒa]; vigésimo (twentieth) [vi.ˈzɛ.zi.mu] ~ [bi.ˈzɛ.zi.mu] ~ [vi.ˈzɛ.si.mu] ~ [bi.ˈzɛ.si.mu].

=== Homophones in dialects ===

==== &quot;Mau&quot; and &quot;mal&quot; ====
Both mean &quot;bad&quot;, but &quot;mau&quot; is an adjective, &quot;mal&quot; an adverb. In most parts of Brazil, the &quot;l&quot; before consonants and ending words, which represents a velarized alveolar lateral approximant in differing dialects, became a labio-velar approximant, making both words homophones.

==== &quot;Júri&quot; and &quot;jure&quot; ====
While &quot;júri&quot; means &quot;jury&quot;, &quot;jure&quot; is the imperative and second subjunctive third singular form of &quot;jurar&quot;, &quot;may he/she swear&quot;. In different contexts, unstressed /e/ often became a close front unrounded vowel, but in some Southern Brazilian dialects, /e/ never goes through the change.

==== &quot;Comprimento&quot; and &quot;cumprimento&quot; ====
&quot;Comprimento&quot; means &quot;length&quot;, and &quot;cumprimento&quot; means &quot;greeting&quot;. The same thing that happened with /e/ in the example of &quot;júri&quot;/&quot;jure&quot; happened to the letter /o/, such becomes a close back rounded vowel in some cases. Hispanic influence makes it never represent that sound in some Southern Brazilian.

==== &quot;Asa&quot; and &quot;haja&quot; ====
&quot;Asa&quot; means &quot;wing&quot;, and &quot;haja&quot; is the imperative and second subjunctive third singular form of &quot;haver&quot;, &quot;may he/she exist&quot;. The words are usually distinguished, but in Alto Trás-os-Montes and for some East Timorese Portuguese speakers, they are homophones, both voiced palato-alveolar sibilants.

==== &quot;Boa&quot; and &quot;voa&quot; ====
&quot;Boa&quot; means &quot;good&quot; (feminine) and &quot;voa&quot;, &quot;he/she/it flies&quot;. Unlike most of the West Iberian languages, Portuguese usually distinguishes between the voiced bilabial plosive and the voiced labiodental fricative, but the distinction used to be absent in the dialects of the northern half of Portugal, and in Uruguayan Portuguese. In these varieties, both are realized indistinctly as a voiced bilabial plosive or a voiced bilabial fricative, as in Spanish.

==== &quot;Más&quot;, &quot;mas&quot; and &quot;mais&quot; ====
&quot;Más&quot; means &quot;bad ones&quot; (feminine), &quot;mas&quot; means &quot;but&quot; and &quot;mais&quot; means &quot;more&quot; or &quot;most&quot;. In Northeastern Brazil and the metropolitan area of Rio de Janeiro, the vowels followed by coronal fricatives in the same syllable have a palatal approximant pronounced between both. The feature is very distinguishable since this combination appears in the plural forms.

==== &quot;Xá&quot; and &quot;chá&quot; ====
&quot;Xá&quot; means &quot;shah&quot;, and &quot;chá&quot; means tea. At the beginning of words, and are usually voiceless palato-alveolar fricatives, but is a voiceless palato-alveolar affricate in northern Portugal. The sound happens in other cases in Southeastern Brazil but disappeared in the rest of the Portuguese-speaking world.

== Other differences ==
Terms for modern elements often differ between variations of Portuguese, sometimes even taking different genders. The following is a basic description of the PlayStation videogame console:
In this sentence, not only is &quot;PlayStation&quot; feminine in one dialect and masculine in another (because &quot;console&quot; has different genders), but the words for &quot;console&quot; and &quot;videogame&quot; are adapted from English in Portugal (because &quot;consola&quot; is actually adapted from French, where the word &quot;console&quot; is feminine) but retained in their original form in Brazil, and &quot;video game&quot; in the phrase &quot;video game console&quot; is numbered in Portugal but singular in Brazil.

== Mixed languages ==
Portuñol/Portunhol: In regions where Spanish and Portuguese coexist, various types of language contact have occurred, ranging from improvised code-switching between monolingual speakers of each language to more or less stable mixed languages.

== Closely related languages ==
&quot;This section does not cover Galician, which is treated as a separate language from Portuguese by Galician official institutions, or Fala. For a discussion of the controversy regarding the status of Galician with respect to Portuguese, see Reintegrationism.&quot;

Portunhol Riverense is spoken in the region between Uruguay and Brazil, particularly in the twin cities of Rivera and Santana do Livramento.

The language must not be confused with Portuñol, since it is not a mixing of Spanish and Portuguese, but a variety of Portuguese language developed in Uruguay back in the time of its first settlers. It has since received influence from Uruguayan Spanish and Brazilian Portuguese.

In academic circles, the Portuguese used by the northern population of Uruguay received the name &quot;Dialectos Portugueses del Uruguay&quot; (Uruguayan Portuguese Dialects). There&#x27;s still no consensus if the language(s) is (are) a dialect or a creole, although the name given by linguists uses the term &quot;dialect&quot;. There is also no consensus on how many varieties it has, with some studies indicating that there are at least two varieties, an urban one and a rural one, while others say there are six varieties, of which Riverense Portuñol is one.
This Portuguese spoken in Uruguay is also referred by its speakers, depending on the region that they live, as &quot;Bayano&quot;, &quot;Riverense&quot;, &quot;Fronterizo&quot;, &quot;Brasilero&quot; or simply &quot;Portuñol&quot;.

==Mutual comprehension==
The different dialects and accents do not block cross-understanding among the educated. Meanwhile, the basilects have diverged more. The unity of the language is reflected in the fact that early imported sound films were dubbed into one version for the entire Portuguese-speaking market. Currently, films not originally in Portuguese (usually Hollywood productions) are dubbed separately into two accents: one for Portugal and one for Brazil; the accent used for Portugal is also the one used for Portuguese-speaking Africa and Macau, and now even in East Timor, except using regionalisms. When dubbing an African character in cartoons and TV and film productions, Portuguese people usually mimic an Angolan accent, as it is also commonly seen as the African accent of Portuguese. The popularity of &quot;telenovelas&quot; and music familiarizes the speakers with other accents of Portuguese.

Prescription and a common cultural and literary tradition, among other factors, have contributed to the formation of a Standard Portuguese, which is the preferred form in formal settings, and is considered indispensable in academic and literary writing, the media, etc. This standard tends to disregard local grammatical, phonetic and lexical peculiarities, and draws certain extra features from the commonly acknowledged , preserving (for example) certain verb tenses considered &quot;bookish&quot; or archaic in most other dialects. Portuguese has two official written standards, (i) Brazilian Portuguese (used chiefly in Brazil) and (ii) European Portuguese (used in Portugal and Angola, Cape Verde, East Timor, Guinea-Bissau, Macau, Mozambique, and São Tomé and Príncipe). The written standards slightly differ in spelling and vocabulary, and are legally regulated. Unlike the written language, however, there is no spoken-Portuguese official standard, but the European Portuguese reference pronunciation is the educated speech of Lisbon.

== List of dialects ==
== See also ==
*Dialects
*Portuguese phonology
*Galician
*Fala

== Notes ==
According to researcher Felisberto Dias in the article &quot;Origens do Português Micaelense&quot;, the dialects from Beira Baixa and Northern Portalegre (Northern Portalegre dialect is a variety of Beira Baixa dialect to south of Tagus river), Far Western Algarve, Madeira and São Miguel Island descend from the old dialect of Beira Baixa where in the 12th and 13th centuries there was some settlement by people that came mainly from Southern France (Occitan speakers) and also some from Northern France (Oïl languages speakers) that influenced the phonetics of the Galician-Portuguese dialect that was spoken in this region (very depopulated in the wars between Christians and Muslims). Some place names (toponyms) in Beira Baixa and Northern Alto-Alentejo like Proença-a-Velha, Proença-a-Nova (from Old Occitan name Proença - Provence), Ródão (from Rhodanus river), Fratel, Tolosa (from the Occitan name of Toulouse), Nisa (from Niça, Occitan name of Nice) testify a Southern France (Occitan) origin of those settlers. Those people came in the background of the Christian Reconquest (&quot;Reconquista&quot;) and Repopulation (&quot;Repovoamento&quot;) of frontier regions and were organized and helped by the military orders of the Knights Templar and Knights Hospitaller (ancestor of today&#x27;s Order of Malta) among others. With the end of Christian Reconquest in Portugal (1249) speakers of this dialect came to settle in western Algarve.
When, at the beginning of the 14th century, the Knights Templar were abolished, in Portugal they were replaced by the Order of Christ (&quot;Ordem de Cristo&quot;) and many of their members were the same the only difference being that it started to be a Portuguese Crown military order. 
Later, when Madeira and Azores were discovered, Order of Christ had an important role in the settlement of the islands. Gonçalo Velho Cabral (?-before 1500) was a knight of this military order, he was from Beira Baixa Province (Castelo Branco District) and had the lordship of several lands in Beira Baixa. He was appointed hereditary landowner responsible for administering Crown lands of São Miguel and Santa Maria islands and commissioned by Henry, the Navigator (1394-1460) (then Governor of the Order of Christ) to settle with people the then unpopulated islands. Many people that went to São Miguel Island came from the lands where he was lord and spoke the ancestor of the dialect of São Miguel island.
Summing Felisberto Dias research, São Miguel island dialect &quot;(Micaelense&quot;) is the result of the settlement, in the 15th and 16th centuries, of people that were mainly from Beira Baixa and spoke a dialect that was a descendant from a Gallo-Romance phonetically influenced Galician-Portuguese dialect that formed in the Middle Ages (people from other regions of Portugal and outside of Portugal also went to settle but were assimilated by the majority).
Contrary to a very diffused but wrong idea, São Miguel island dialect is not the result of any kind of 15th century French settlement in the island (from which there is no proof).
The other islands in the Azores were largely populated by Portuguese from other regions. A small minority of Flemish were present in the initial settlement of Central Group islands of the Azores, mostly in Faial, and some also in Pico and São Jorge, but were rapidly surpassed in number and assimilated by the Portuguese settlers some decades after the initial settlement of the islands in the 15th century. Because of that, Flemish (southern dialect of Dutch) did not phonetically influenced the Portuguese dialects of these islands and on the contrary, Faial island dialect is close to the dialect that is the basis of standard Portuguese.

== References ==
== Further reading ==


== External links ==
* Dialects of Portuguese at the website of the Instituto Camões
* Audio samples of the dialects of Portugal at the website of the Instituto Camões
* Audio samples of the dialects from outside Europe at the website of the Instituto Camões
* Audio samples of Brazilian Portuguese, European Portuguese, and Galician at the website of the Associaçom Galega da Língua
* A Pronúncia do Português Europeu at the website of the Instituto Camões
* Isoglosses of the main dialects in Portugal at the website of the Instituto Camões</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3306983" start="0" end="19" title="Portuguese dialects" label="Portuguese dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="28" end="49" title="mutual intelligibility" label="mutually intelligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="68" end="87" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="91" end="120" title="Portuguese-speaking countries" label="Portuguese-speaking countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058014" start="381" end="425" title="Academia das Ciências de Lisboa, Classe de Letras" label="Sciences Academy of Lisbon, Class of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q922399" start="461" end="480" title="European Portuguese" label="European Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="582" end="592" title="Cabo Verde" label="Cabo Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="594" end="604" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="606" end="612" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="614" end="625" title="Timor-Leste" label="Timor-Leste"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="627" end="632" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="637" end="640" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="673" end="679" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q337224" start="700" end="728" title="Academia Brasileira de Letras" label="Brazilian Academy of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q750553" start="745" end="765" title="Brazilian Portuguese" label="Brazilian Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="899" end="914" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="919" end="927" title="American English" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113432" start="1333" end="1363" title="Portuguese Language Orthographic Agreement of 1990" label="Orthographic Agreement of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="2653" end="2659" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="2761" end="2767" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="2772" end="2779" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q780518" start="3053" end="3060" title="Spanish phonology" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36433" start="3091" end="3096" title="Porto" label="Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="3410" end="3416" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="3418" end="3424" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="3430" end="3434" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q368867" start="3547" end="3556" title="Barrancos" label="Barrancos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5777" start="3580" end="3591" title="Extremadura" label="Extremadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="3593" end="3602" title="Andalucia" label="Andalucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982964" start="3706" end="3718" title="barranquenho" label="barranquenho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3907" end="3911" title="vowel#Articulation" label="open"/>
<link wikidata="Q181767" start="3916" end="3924" title="stress (linguistics)" label="stressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="3949" end="3958" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="3963" end="3977" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191273" start="4582" end="4603" title="Santa Catarina Island" label="Santa Catarina Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q132997" start="4618" end="4631" title="Florianópolis" label="Florianópolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="4638" end="4645" title="Azores" label="Azorean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296487" start="4673" end="4686" title="Florianopolitan dialect" label="local variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054276" start="5668" end="5691" title="voiced uvular fricative" label="voiced uvular fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q864677" start="5695" end="5707" title="uvular trill" label="uvular trill"/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="6018" end="6027" title="diphthong" label="diphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q17582" start="6213" end="6222" title="affricate consonant" label="affricate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="6231" end="6238" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q765443" start="6339" end="6353" title="Laminal consonant" label="predorsodental"/>
<link wikidata="Q51600" start="6354" end="6363" title="sibilant consonant" label="sibilants"/>
<link wikidata="Q618621" start="6415" end="6428" title="apicoalveolar" label="apicoalveolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q815955" start="6481" end="6493" title="minimal pair" label="minimal pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q221079" start="6671" end="6680" title="homophone" label="homophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q49748" start="7863" end="7878" title="palato-alveolar consonant" label="palato-alveolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q231978" start="7884" end="7901" title="palatal consonant" label="palatal consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q814838" start="7960" end="7980" title="Beira Interior Norte" label="Beira Interior Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137969" start="7982" end="7995" title="Cova da Beira Subregion" label="Cova da Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q814840" start="8000" end="8018" title="Beira Interior Sul" label="Beira Interior Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q463515" start="8183" end="8188" title="velar nasal" label="velar"/>
<link wikidata="Q792096" start="8241" end="8252" title="Beira Baixa Province" label="Beira Baixa"/>
<link wikidata="Q814840" start="8278" end="8296" title="Beira Interior Sul" label="Beira Interior Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q273529" start="8299" end="8313" title="Castelo Branco District" label="Castelo Branco"/>
<link wikidata="Q225189" start="8325" end="8335" title="Portalegre District" label="Portalegre"/>
<link wikidata="Q26831" start="8352" end="8359" title="Algarve region" label="Algarve"/>
<link wikidata="Q209036" start="8382" end="8399" title="São Miguel Island" label="São Miguel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="8407" end="8413" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q965123" start="8448" end="8472" title="near-close near-front rounded vowel" label="near-front rounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="8536" end="8542" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q118519" start="8573" end="8592" title="close-mid front rounded vowel" label="front rounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q749533" start="8762" end="8775" title="Ibero-Romance" label="Ibero-Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q749533" start="8780" end="8795" title="Ibero-Romance" label="Hispano-Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q500394" start="8857" end="8870" title="Gallo-Romance" label="Gallo-Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q118519" start="9162" end="9181" title="close-mid front rounded vowel" label="front rounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q862579" start="9224" end="9252" title="close-mid back rounded vowel" label="close-mid back rounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q215074" start="9716" end="9724" title="Terceira Island" label="Terceira"/>
<link wikidata="Q592315" start="9726" end="9734" title="Graciosa" label="Graciosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q210811" start="9744" end="9748" title="Pico Island" label="Pico"/>
<link wikidata="Q216752" start="9750" end="9756" title="Flores Island (Azores)" label="Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q954488" start="9761" end="9766" title="Corvo Island" label="Corvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q217262" start="9809" end="9820" title="Santa Maria Island" label="Santa Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q657187" start="9925" end="9930" title="Faial Island" label="Faial"/>
<link wikidata="Q743362" start="9932" end="9941" title="São Jorge Island" label="São Jorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q210811" start="9954" end="9958" title="Pico Island" label="Pico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147016" start="10713" end="10726" title="labialization" label="labialization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11420" end="11429" title="L-vocalization#Romance languages" label="vocalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025902" start="11888" end="11915" title="Caipira" label="&amp;quot;caipira&amp;quot; dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q121811927" start="12014" end="12034" title="alveolar approximant" label="alveolar approximant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12165" end="12189" title="Guttural R#Portuguese" label="Guttural R in Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025902" start="12495" end="12522" title="Caipira" label="&amp;quot;caipira&amp;quot; dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q121811927" start="12538" end="12558" title="alveolar approximant" label="alveolar approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q210377" start="12569" end="12595" title="Gaucho" label="&amp;quot;gaúcho&amp;quot; dialect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12597" end="12624" title="Sulista" label="&amp;quot;sulista&amp;quot; dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="12629" end="12659" title="Paulistano" label="&amp;quot;paulistano&amp;quot; dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q874996" start="12673" end="12686" title="alveolar flap" label="alveolar flap"/>
<link wikidata="Q113159186" start="12690" end="12695" title="alveolar trill" label="trill"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="12915" end="12920" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039" start="13151" end="13172" title="São Tomé and Príncipe" label="São Tomé and Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="13590" end="13597" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="13687" end="13704" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007" start="14018" end="14031" title="Guinea-Bissau" label="Guinea-Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="14544" end="14550" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14789" end="14809" title="Portuguese phonology#Fricatives" label="Portuguese phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136194" start="14942" end="14951" title="Northeast Region, Brazil" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="15646" end="15656" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="16036" end="16046" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808790" start="16485" end="16496" title="Palatalization (phonetics)" label="palatalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="18002" end="18012" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669169" start="18094" end="18125" title="Kristang language" label="Creole of Malacca and Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904029" start="18139" end="18154" title="Bidau Creole Portuguese" label="Creole of Bidau"/>
<link wikidata="Q815439" start="18622" end="18660" title="velarized alveolar lateral approximant" label="velarized alveolar lateral approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q565654" start="18693" end="18716" title="labio-velar approximant" label="labio-velar approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q320021" start="19027" end="19054" title="close front unrounded vowel" label="close front unrounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060042" start="19068" end="19086" title="South Region, Brazil" label="Southern Brazilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q29653" start="19434" end="19458" title="close back rounded vowel" label="close back rounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060042" start="19537" end="19555" title="South Region, Brazil" label="Southern Brazilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q443584" start="19823" end="19842" title="Alto Trás-os-Montes" label="Alto Trás-os-Montes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373396" start="19856" end="19880" title="East Timorese Portuguese" label="East Timorese Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q654660" start="19917" end="19948" title="voiced palato-alveolar sibilant" label="voiced palato-alveolar sibilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377152" start="20117" end="20139" title="West Iberian languages" label="West Iberian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q242797" start="20186" end="20209" title="voiced bilabial plosive" label="voiced bilabial plosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q654787" start="20218" end="20246" title="voiced labiodental fricative" label="voiced labiodental fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265815" start="20343" end="20363" title="Uruguayan Portuguese" label="Uruguayan Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q242797" start="20421" end="20444" title="voiced bilabial plosive" label="voiced bilabial plosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q181711" start="20450" end="20475" title="voiced bilabial fricative" label="voiced bilabial fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136194" start="20718" end="20737" title="Northeast Region, Brazil" label="Northeastern Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030717" start="20742" end="20781" title="Carioca" label="the metropolitan area of Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q866449" start="20806" end="20813" title="coronal consonant" label="coronal"/>
<link wikidata="Q31427" start="20814" end="20824" title="fricative consonant" label="fricatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q835992" start="20853" end="20872" title="palatal approximant" label="palatal approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q184299" start="21059" end="21063" title="shah" label="shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="21097" end="21100" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q334695" start="21145" end="21180" title="voiceless palato-alveolar fricative" label="voiceless palato-alveolar fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q518603" start="21192" end="21227" title="voiceless palato-alveolar affricate" label="voiceless palato-alveolar affricate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088815" start="21286" end="21305" title="Southeast Region, Brazil" label="Southeastern Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="21551" end="21562" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057284" start="22139" end="22147" title="Portuñol" label="Portuñol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410327" start="22225" end="22241" title="language contact" label="language contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q255615" start="22281" end="22295" title="code-switching" label="code-switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q33694" start="22365" end="22379" title="mixed language" label="mixed language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="22449" end="22457" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q300402" start="22553" end="22557" title="Fala language" label="Fala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151220" start="22660" end="22676" title="Reintegrationism" label="Reintegrationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265815" start="22685" end="22704" title="Riverense Portuñol language" label="Portunhol Riverense"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="22737" end="22744" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="22749" end="22755" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q646498" start="22792" end="22798" title="Rivera" label="Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q917693" start="22803" end="22824" title="Santana do Livramento" label="Santana do Livramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057284" start="22866" end="22874" title="Portuñol" label="Portuñol"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="23944" end="23951" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001535" start="23957" end="23963" title="Accent (sociolinguistics)" label="accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415654" start="24033" end="24041" title="basilect" label="basilect"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="24134" end="24144" title="sound film" label="sound film"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="24151" end="24157" title="Dubbing (filmmaking)" label="dubbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="24273" end="24282" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q23745" start="24735" end="24745" title="telenovela" label="telenovela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321978" start="24824" end="24836" title="Prescription and description" label="Prescription"/>
<link wikidata="Q750553" start="25410" end="25430" title="Brazilian Portuguese" label="Brazilian Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="25448" end="25454" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q922399" start="25465" end="25484" title="European Portuguese" label="European Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="25494" end="25502" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="25507" end="25513" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="25515" end="25525" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="25527" end="25537" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007" start="25539" end="25552" title="Guinea-Bissau" label="Guinea-Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="25554" end="25559" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="25561" end="25571" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039" start="25577" end="25598" title="São Tomé and Príncipe" label="São Tomé and Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="25859" end="25865" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25907" end="25915" title="Portuguese language#Dialects, accents and varieties" label="Dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q9300216" start="25917" end="25937" title="Portuguese phonology" label="Portuguese phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="25939" end="25947" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q300402" start="25949" end="25953" title="Fala language" label="Fala"/>
<link wikidata="Q792096" start="26085" end="26096" title="Beira Baixa Province" label="Beira Baixa"/>
<link wikidata="Q225189" start="26110" end="26120" title="Portalegre District" label="Portalegre"/>
<link wikidata="Q26831" start="26224" end="26231" title="Algarve" label="Algarve"/>
<link wikidata="Q30188" start="26233" end="26240" title="Madeira Island" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q209036" start="26245" end="26262" title="São Miguel Island" label="São Miguel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="26402" end="26417" title="Southern France" label="Southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="26419" end="26426" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37351" start="26473" end="26486" title="Oïl languages" label="Oïl languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072111" start="26534" end="26553" title="Galician-Portuguese" label="Galician-Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="26796" end="26804" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="26819" end="26827" title="Rhodanus" label="Rhodanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="26877" end="26885" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="26921" end="26925" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="27032" end="27052" title="Christian Reconquest" label="Christian Reconquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="27060" end="27071" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="27203" end="27218" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="27223" end="27242" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q190353" start="27269" end="27283" title="Order of Malta" label="Order of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="27315" end="27335" title="Christian Reconquest" label="Christian Reconquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="27463" end="27478" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q840941" start="27533" end="27548" title="Order of Christ (Portugal)" label="Order of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q840941" start="27556" end="27571" title="Ordem de Cristo" label="Ordem de Cristo"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="27715" end="27722" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="27727" end="27733" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q840941" start="27751" end="27766" title="Order of Christ (Portugal)" label="Order of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q681823" start="27823" end="27843" title="Gonçalo Velho Cabral" label="Gonçalo Velho Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q792096" start="27909" end="27929" title="Beira Baixa Province" label="Beira Baixa Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q273529" start="27931" end="27954" title="Castelo Branco District" label="Castelo Branco District"/>
<link wikidata="Q182897" start="28148" end="28168" title="Henry, the Navigator" label="Henry, the Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q840941" start="28203" end="28218" title="Order of Christ (Portugal)" label="Order of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q500394" start="28656" end="28669" title="Gallo-Romance" label="Gallo-Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072111" start="28694" end="28713" title="Galician-Portuguese" label="Galician-Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q242485" start="29164" end="29171" title="Flemish people" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q657187" start="29261" end="29266" title="Faial Island" label="Faial"/>
<link wikidata="Q210811" start="29285" end="29289" title="Pico Island" label="Pico"/>
<link wikidata="Q743362" start="29294" end="29303" title="São Jorge Island" label="São Jorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="29509" end="29514" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479370" start="29807" end="29823" title="Instituto Camões" label="Instituto Camões"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610875" wikidata="Q5184940" url="?curid=610875" title="Cricket (magazine)">
<text>Cricket is an illustrated literary magazine for children published in the United States, founded in September 1973 by Marianne Carus whose intent was to create &quot;&quot;The New Yorker&quot; for children.&quot;

==Description==
Each issue of &quot;Cricket&quot; is 48 pages. The magazine was published nine times a year (monthly, with some of the summer months combined) by the Carus Publishing Company of Peru, Illinois. Its target audience is children from 9 to 14 years old. Until March 1995, &quot;Cricket&quot; was published by the Open Court Publishing Company of La Salle, Illinois, now part of Carus.

&quot;Cricket&quot; publishes original stories, poems, folk tales, articles and illustrations by such notable artists as Trina Schart Hyman, the magazine&#x27;s art director from 1973 to 1979. Hyman contributed to the magazine until her death in 2004. Carus has solicited materials from well-known authors and illustrators, including Lloyd Alexander, Isaac Bashevis Singer, Hilary Knight, William Saroyan, Ursula K. Le Guin, Eric Carle, Stacy Curtis, Wallace Tripp, Charles Ghigna and Paul O. Zelinsky. &quot;Cricket&quot; also runs contests and publishes work by its readers.

One distinct feature of &quot;Cricket&quot; is the illustrated cast of recurring characters that appears in the margins of each issue, similar to a comic strip. These characters include Cricket, Ladybug, and other friends, most of whom are also insects. The characters are involved in a storyline that runs throughout the issue, but they also comment on the articles above them. They define difficult words, draw attention to unusual facts, and otherwise annotate the magazine&#x27;s content.

On the last page of each issue is the &quot;Old Cricket Says&quot; column, in which Old Cricket offers a bit of wisdom, cracks a witticism, or introduces themes to be explored in the upcoming issues of &quot;Cricket&quot;. This recurring column has been ghostwritten by a number of authors and editors who worked for &quot;Cricket&quot;, but a preponderance of them were written by author Lloyd Alexander until his death in 2007.

In 2003, Cricket Books published &quot;Celebrate Cricket: 30 Years of Stories and Art&quot;, a retrospective that republishes stories from the magazine and includes interviews with some of the founders and contributors.

==Founding==
&quot;Cricket&quot; was founded by a group of &quot;historically minded writers and their artist and designer friends&quot;, led by Marianne Carus of Open Court Publishing. She had worked on &quot;literature-based basic readers&quot; for the school markets and had learned from teachers that there was a classroom demand for high-quality, short reading material. The time was right for a &quot;new &quot;St. Nicholas Magazine&quot;.

The founding Editorial Board (November 1972) comprised Carus, senior editor Clifton Fadiman, art director Trina Schart Hyman, prominent authors Lloyd Alexander, Isaac Bashevis Singer and Eleanor Cameron, &quot;Horn Book Magazine&quot; editor Paul Heins, &quot;Kaye Webb (founder of Puffin Books and the doyenne of British publishers for children), Virginia Haviland (of the Library of Congress), and Sheila Egoff (Canada&#x27;s leading authority in the field).&quot; Fadiman was a well-known literary personality, a &quot;New Yorker&quot; book critic and a Book-of-the-Month Club judge.

The inaugural issue went on sale January 1973 with a launch party in New York City. One guest later told Carus, &quot;If a bomb had gone off during your party, the entire children&#x27;s book world would&#x27;ve been wiped out.&quot;

==Cricket Media children&#x27;s magazines==
&quot;Cricket&quot; inspired a line of literary magazines for children of different ages: &quot;Babybug&quot;, &quot;Ladybug&quot;, &quot;Spider&quot; for newly independent readers, &quot;Cricket&quot;, and &quot;Cicada&quot; for young adults.

In turn, Cricket Media now publishes 15 children&#x27;s magazines, including the five &quot;insects&quot;. Most of them are issued nine times annually.

Ages 14+
* &quot;Cicada&quot;: literary magazine (out of print)
Ages 9–14
* &quot;Cobblestone&quot; (from 1980): American history
* &quot;Cricket&quot; (from 1973): literary magazine
* &quot;Dig&quot;: &quot;archaeology—without all the dirt!&quot; (out of print)
* &quot;Faces&quot;: people around the world: how they live
* &quot;Muse&quot;: STEAM (science, technology, engineering, arts, and math) 
Ages 6–9
* &quot;Ask&quot;: science, history, inventors, artists; &quot;the most curious people&quot;
* &quot;Spider&quot;: literary magazine
Ages 3–6
* &quot;Click&quot;: science, art, nature; one topic each issue
* &quot;Ladybug&quot;: literary magazine
Babies–3 years
* &quot;Babybug&quot;: &quot;board-book style magazine&quot;
==Chatterbox==
The Cricket Chatterbox is a forum on cricketmagkids.com/chatterbox where children around the Cricket age range (9-12, although there is no minimum or limit) gather to talk about different issues. It started as a forum about the magazine, but has grown to talk about many other insights, world issues, and other subjects. It was founded in 2008. Children who post on chatterbox (known as Chatterboxers or CBers) can start threads or post comments. Each of their posts are reviewed by a panel of three site administrators that make sure that the content is appropriate for the Cricket age range and that no personal information is shared.
==See also==
*Open Court Publishing Company
*Carus Publishing Company

==References==

==Further reading==
* Carus, Marianne, ed., &quot;Celebrate Cricket: 30 Years of Stories and Art&quot;, Chicago: Cricket Books, 2003. ()
* Marcus, Leonard S., &quot;Minders of Make-Believe: Idealists, entrepreneurs, and the shaping of American children&#x27;s literature&quot;, New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2008. ()

==External links==
* Carus Publishing Company home page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1368848" start="26" end="43" title="literary magazine" label="literary magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q106099209" start="118" end="132" title="Marianne Carus" label="Marianne Carus"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="172" end="186" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047488" start="380" end="404" title="Carus Publishing Company" label="Carus Publishing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q576648" start="408" end="422" title="Peru, Illinois" label="Peru, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095992" start="539" end="568" title="Open Court Publishing Company" label="Open Court Publishing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q577923" start="572" end="590" title="La Salle, Illinois" label="La Salle, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="651" end="658" title="Short story" label="stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="660" end="665" title="poetry" label="poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="667" end="677" title="folklore" label="folk tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q93184" start="692" end="705" title="drawing" label="illustrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842292" start="733" end="751" title="Trina Schart Hyman" label="Trina Schart Hyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q366643" start="946" end="961" title="Lloyd Alexander" label="Lloyd Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q75612" start="963" end="984" title="Isaac Bashevis Singer" label="Isaac Bashevis Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5761007" start="986" end="999" title="Hilary Knight (illustrator)" label="Hilary Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q207356" start="1001" end="1016" title="William Saroyan" label="William Saroyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181659" start="1018" end="1035" title="Ursula K. Le Guin" label="Ursula K. Le Guin"/>
<link wikidata="Q606557" start="1037" end="1047" title="Eric Carle" label="Eric Carle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596019" start="1049" end="1061" title="Stacy Curtis" label="Stacy Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962912" start="1063" end="1076" title="Wallace Tripp" label="Wallace Tripp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078014" start="1078" end="1092" title="Charles Ghigna" label="Charles Ghigna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152805" start="1097" end="1113" title="Paul O. Zelinsky" label="Paul O. Zelinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="1338" end="1349" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776776" start="1376" end="1383" title="Cricket (insect)" label="Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q25327" start="1385" end="1392" title="Coccinellidae" label="Ladybug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="1435" end="1441" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q8171" start="1591" end="1595" title="word" label="word"/>
<link wikidata="Q857525" start="1645" end="1653" title="annotation" label="annotate"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="1938" end="1950" title="ghostwriting" label="ghostwritten"/>
<link wikidata="Q366643" start="2073" end="2088" title="Lloyd Alexander" label="Lloyd Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q178651" start="2280" end="2289" title="interview" label="interview"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590838" start="2753" end="2774" title="St. Nicholas Magazine" label="St. Nicholas Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101372" start="2859" end="2874" title="Clifton Fadiman" label="Clifton Fadiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842292" start="2889" end="2907" title="Trina Schart Hyman" label="Trina Schart Hyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q366643" start="2927" end="2942" title="Lloyd Alexander" label="Lloyd Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q75612" start="2944" end="2965" title="Isaac Bashevis Singer" label="Isaac Bashevis Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354240" start="2970" end="2985" title="Eleanor Cameron" label="Eleanor Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573512" start="3025" end="3035" title="Paul Heins" label="Paul Heins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838464" start="3746" end="3753" title="Babybug" label="Babybug"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470745" start="3767" end="3774" title="Ladybug (magazine)" label="Ladybug"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577005" start="3788" end="3794" title="Spider (magazine)" label="Spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q16920980" start="4130" end="4141" title="Cobblestone (magazine)" label="Cobblestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275476" start="4239" end="4242" title="Dig (magazine)" label="Dig"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143533" start="4379" end="4383" title="Muse (children&amp;#x27;s magazine)" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095992" start="5447" end="5476" title="Open Court Publishing Company" label="Open Court Publishing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047488" start="5478" end="5502" title="Carus Publishing Company" label="Carus Publishing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q390074" start="5808" end="5824" title="Houghton Mifflin" label="Houghton Mifflin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610876" wikidata="Q815270" url="?curid=610876" title="Belarus (tractor)">
<text>Belarus (, earlier ) is a series of four-wheeled tractors produced since 1950 at Minsk Tractor Works, MTZ (; ) in Minsk, Belarus.
These tractors are very well known throughout the Commonwealth of Independent States and are exported to more than 100 countries worldwide, including the United States and Canada.

== History ==
Up to the 1950s MTZ had not produced wheeled tractors, tracked crawler tractors being more common. These early tractors were essentially re-claimed tanks, with the gun turret removed and a flatbed, winch, crane or dozer blade added; the tractors saw more use in land reclamation and forestry applications rather than agriculture. This was largely due to the tanks being unsuitable for large-scale cultivation, as their engine, transmission and track reliability were poor due to not being designed for pulling loads for long periods, as required in agriculture. New designs were put into production during 1950, and the new MTZ wheeled tractor was born. These tractors were built to the three main concepts of Soviet engineering: reliability, simplicity and value for money.


Some 3 million tractors have been built in the Minsk Tractor Works since 1948. In 2010, distribution of Belarus tractors in United States and Canada was re-established through a local distributor &quot;MTZ Equipment Ltd&quot;.
One of the contributing factors was the fact that the factory started making tractors with compression ignition diesel engines matching the current emissions standards, including Tier 3/4i/4 (United States/Canada) and Euro 3a, 3b, 4 for emission standards in Europe.

In February 2014, the MTZ brand made its first appearance at the National Farm Machinery Show in Louisville, Kentucky, with the MTZ 1220 tractor model.

A Belarus model 1523.3 tractor was gifted to Vladimir Putin on his 70th birthday by President of Belarus Aleksander Lukashenko.

== Licensing ==

=== Azerbaijan ===
In December 2004 Ganja Auto Plant restarted manufacturing and the first car built at the factory was sold. In 2008, the plant produced about 600 cars and tractors.
=== Pakistan ===
Fecto Group first introduced Soviet Brand Tractors in West Pakistan back in 1962. Initially tractors were imported from USSR. Later Fecto Belarus Tractor Assembly Plant was built in Lahore in 1980&#x27;s. Since then different Tractor Models were introduced ranging from 25 H.P to 80 H.P. These include:
MTZ -50 (55 H.P) C.B.U
MTZ -50 (55 H.P) local locally assembled
T -25 A (25 H.P)s.
UMZ -60 (60 H.P/li&gt;
Belarus-510 ( 57 H.P)
Belarus-520 (62 H.P)
Belarus -511 (57 H.P)
Belarus-800(80 H.P)

=== Romania ===
In October 2010 the Romanian company IRUM in Reghin, specializing in articulated lumber tractors, started assembling from imported KD Belarus TAG tractors for the local market.

=== Serbia ===
In 2011 the Serbian company Agropanonka started assembling 3,000 tractors per year for its local market.

=== Tajikistan ===
In September 2012, Tajikistan and Belarus reached agreement to set up a company producing Belarus tractors in the south of Tajikistan. The new facility will produce 250 tractors per year. By 2017 the company’s capacity will be increased up to 1,500. There are plans to export some of tractors produced in Tajikistan to other countries of the region.

=== Cambodia ===
In March 2013, a Belarus Tractor Assembly Plant opened near Phnom Penh in Cambodia. The joint project involves the annual supplying of more than 400 different models of tractors to the markets of Cambodia and surrounding countries.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q815270" start="0" end="7" title="Belarus (tractor)" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="49" end="56" title="tractor" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q592110" start="81" end="100" title="Minsk Tractor Works" label="Minsk Tractor Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="114" end="119" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="180" end="214" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="1420" end="1455" title="Diesel engine" label="compression ignition diesel engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892471" start="1508" end="1519" title="United States emission standards" label="Tier 3/4i/4"/>
<link wikidata="Q932442" start="1547" end="1561" title="European emission standards" label="Euro 3a, 3b, 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972558" start="1662" end="1690" title="National Farm Machinery Show" label="National Farm Machinery Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="1795" end="1809" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866" start="1855" end="1876" title="Aleksander Lukashenko" label="Aleksander Lukashenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084484" start="1932" end="1948" title="Ganja Auto Plant" label="Ganja Auto Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439877" start="2096" end="2107" title="Fecto Group" label="Fecto Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342822" start="2150" end="2163" title="West Pakistan" label="West Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2216" end="2220" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="2278" end="2284" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2445" end="2462" title="locally assembled" label="locally assembled"/>
<link wikidata="Q572478" start="2652" end="2658" title="Reghin" label="Reghin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933280" start="2738" end="2740" title="Knock-down kit" label="KD"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="2944" end="2954" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="3353" end="3363" title="Phnom Penh" label="Phnom Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="3367" end="3375" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610877" wikidata="Q120241" url="?curid=610877" title="Caetano da Costa Alegre">
<text>Caetano da Costa Alegre (26 April 1864 – 18 April 1890) was a Portuguese poet.

==Biography==
Born to a Cape Verdean &quot;crioulo&quot; family in the colony of São Tomé in Portuguese São Tomé and Príncipe, off the coast of Africa, he settled in Portugal in 1882 and attended medical school in Lisbon, hoping to become a naval doctor, but died of tuberculosis in Alcobaça before he could fulfill his dream.

He wrote several reviews under his name including &quot;A Imprensa&quot; (1885-1891) and &quot;A Leitura&quot; (1894–96), the last one was posthumously published.

==Publications of his poems==
In 1916, a friend, journalist Cruz Magalhãez, published the poetry he wrote during the eight years Costa Alegre lived in Portugal. The work, written in the popular romantic style of the time, was an immediate success, not least because of how it celebrates his African origins, expresses longing for his home in São Tomé, and describes the sense of alienation he feels because of his race. He expresses his sorrow after being rejected by a white woman because of the color of his skin in one of the earliest attempts by an African poet to deal with issues of race. Three republications of his poems were made in 1950, 1951 and in 1994.

==Poetic style==
Though distinctly European in style, the themes of Costa Alegre&#x27;s work make him a precursor to later African authors and poets, who dealt with issues of race, alienation, and nostalgic reveries for the past (in his case, his reminiscences about São Tomé).

==Poems==
One of the poems he wrote was &quot;Visão&quot; meaning vision.

:&quot;Vi-te passar, longe de mim, distante,&quot;
:&quot;Como uma estátua de ébano ambulante;&quot;
:&quot;Ias de luto, doce, tutinegra,&quot;
:&quot;E o teu aspecto pesaroso e triste&quot;
:&quot;Prendeu minha alma, sedutora negra;&quot;
:&quot;Depois, cativa de invisível laço,&quot;
:&quot;(o teu encanto, a que ninguém resiste)&quot;
:&quot;Foi-te seguindo o pequenino passo&quot;
:&quot;Até que o vulto gracioso e lindo&quot;
:&quot;Desapareceu, longe de mim, distante,&quot;
:&quot;Como uma estátua de ébano ambulante.&quot;

==See also==
*Cape Verdean people in São Tomé and Príncipe

==References==
==External links==
*Poems by Caetano de Alegre 
*Caetano da Costa Alegre at Encyclopædia Britannica
*Biography of Caetano da Costa Alegre at Lusofônia Poética </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q120241" start="0" end="23" title="Caetano da Costa Alegre" label="Caetano da Costa Alegre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="62" end="72" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q11203052" start="73" end="77" title="List of poets" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q498640" start="123" end="130" title="Creole peoples" label="crioulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="151" end="157" title="colonialism" label="colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932" start="161" end="169" title="São Tomé" label="São Tomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232692" start="173" end="205" title="Portuguese São Tomé and Príncipe" label="Portuguese São Tomé and Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="224" end="230" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q494230" start="276" end="290" title="medical school" label="medical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="294" end="300" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4508" start="321" end="326" title="navy" label="naval"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="347" end="359" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q651997" start="363" end="371" title="Alcobaça, Portugal" label="Alcobaça"/>
<link wikidata="Q28646977" start="503" end="512" title="A Leitura" label="A Leitura"/>
<link wikidata="Q653819" start="605" end="609" title="1916 in literature" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="766" end="774" title="Romanticism" label="romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="863" end="869" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="986" end="990" title="Race (classification of human beings)" label="race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="1082" end="1086" title="skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1274" end="1280" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035144" start="2140" end="2184" title="Cape Verdean people in São Tomé and Príncipe" label="Cape Verdean people in São Tomé and Príncipe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610881" wikidata="Q1110023" url="?curid=610881" title="Dry well">
<text>A dry well or drywell is an underground structure that disposes of unwanted water, most commonly surface runoff and stormwater, in some cases greywater or water used in a groundwater heat pump. 
It is a gravity-fed, vertical underground system that can capture surface water from impervious surfaces, then store and gradually infiltrate the water into the groundwater aquifer. 

Such a structure is also called a dead well, absorbing well, or negative well, and in the United Kingdom a soakaway or soakage pit, and in Australia a soakwell or soak pit. 

==Design==

Dry wells are excavated pits that may be filled with aggregate or air and are often lined with a perforated casing. The casings consist of perforated chambers made out of plastic or concrete and may be lined with geotextile. They provide high stormwater infiltration capacity while also having a relatively small footprint.

A dry well receives water from entry pipes at its top. It can be used as part of a stormwater drainage network, an agricultural well drainage system or on smaller scales such as collecting stormwater from building roofs. It is used in conjunction with pretreatment measures such as bioswales or sediment chambers to prevent groundwater contamination. 

The depth of the dry well allows the water to penetrate soil layers with poor infiltration such as clays into more permeable layers of the vadose zone such as sand.

Simple dry wells consist of a pit filled with gravel, riprap, rubble, or other debris. Such pits resist collapse but do not have much storage capacity because their interior volume is mostly filled by stone. A more advanced dry well defines a large interior storage volume by a concrete or plastic chamber with perforated sides and bottom. These dry wells are usually buried completely so that they do not take up any land area. The dry wells for a parking lot&#x27;s storm drains are usually buried below the same parking lot.

==Related concepts==
A sump in a basement can be built in dry well form, allowing the sump pump to cycle less frequently (handling only occasional peak demand). A French drain can resemble a horizontal dry well that is not covered. A larger open pit or artificial swale that receives stormwater and dissipates it into the ground is called an infiltration basin or recharge basin. In places where the amount of water to be dispersed is not as large, a rain garden can be used instead.

A covered pit that disposes of the water component of sewage by the same principle as a dry well is called a cesspool. A septic drain field operates on the same slow-drain/large-area principle as an infiltration basin.
== See also ==
* 
* 

==References==
* DRYWELLS, Environmental Services, City of Portland, OR
* New Jersey Stormwater - Best Management Practices Manual, Chapter 9.3 Standard for Dry Wells, February 2004
* Philadelphia Watershed, Dry Well, Philadelphia Water Department
* Water Quality Division: Permits: Drywell Registration, Arizona Department of Environmental Water Quality
==External links==
*Non-residential drywells are regulated in the U.S. to protect drinking water sources - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
*Photos of a reinforced concrete drywell installation
*Photos of Australian Soakwell Installation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1110023" start="2" end="10" title="Dry well" label="dry well"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110023" start="14" end="21" title="Dry well" label="drywell"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="76" end="81" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444790" start="97" end="111" title="surface runoff" label="surface runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421263" start="116" end="126" title="stormwater" label="stormwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075169" start="142" end="151" title="greywater" label="greywater"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365511" start="171" end="192" title="groundwater heat pump" label="groundwater heat pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598078" start="203" end="214" title="Gravity feed" label="gravity-fed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620280" start="253" end="260" title="Stormwater harvesting" label="capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q752112" start="261" end="274" title="surface water" label="surface water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434713" start="280" end="299" title="Impervious surface" label="impervious surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127330" start="326" end="336" title="Infiltration (hydrology)" label="infiltrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="356" end="375" title="Aquifer" label="groundwater aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110023" start="413" end="422" title="Dry well" label="dead well"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110023" start="424" end="438" title="Dry well" label="absorbing well"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110023" start="443" end="456" title="Dry well" label="negative well"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110023" start="486" end="494" title="Dry well" label="soakaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110023" start="498" end="509" title="Dry well" label="soakage pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110023" start="530" end="538" title="Dry well" label="soakwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110023" start="542" end="550" title="Dry well" label="soak pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238502" start="619" end="628" title="construction aggregate" label="aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="737" end="744" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="748" end="756" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048148" start="779" end="789" title="geotextile" label="geotextile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139766" start="974" end="993" title="stormwater drainage" label="stormwater drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047540" start="1019" end="1032" title="well drainage" label="well drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q83180" start="1105" end="1110" title="Roof" label="roofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086881" start="1173" end="1182" title="Bioswale" label="bioswales"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113712" start="1215" end="1240" title="Groundwater pollution" label="groundwater contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="1343" end="1348" title="Clay" label="clays"/>
<link wikidata="Q256699" start="1359" end="1368" title="Permeability (Earth sciences)" label="permeable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479708" start="1383" end="1394" title="vadose zone" label="vadose zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="1403" end="1407" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="1456" end="1462" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433064" start="1464" end="1470" title="riprap" label="riprap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225329" start="1472" end="1478" title="rubble" label="rubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q637703" start="1489" end="1495" title="debris" label="debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592793" start="1962" end="1966" title="sump" label="sump"/>
<link wikidata="Q234852" start="1972" end="1980" title="basement" label="basement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638034" start="2025" end="2034" title="sump pump" label="sump pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492817" start="2102" end="2114" title="French drain" label="French drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344823" start="2203" end="2208" title="swale (landform)" label="swale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137499" start="2281" end="2299" title="infiltration basin" label="infiltration basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162531" start="2390" end="2401" title="rain garden" label="rain garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q204435" start="2533" end="2541" title="cesspool" label="cesspool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256521" start="2545" end="2563" title="septic drain field" label="septic drain field"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610883" wikidata="Q61236" url="?curid=610883" title="The New Pornographers">
<text>The New Pornographers are a Canadian indie rock band, formed in 1997 in Vancouver. Presented as a musical collective and supergroup of singer-songwriters and musicians from multiple projects, the band has released nine studio albums to date. The band have received critical acclaim for their use of multiple vocalists and songwriters, as well as for the elements of power pop incorporated into their music. &quot;Pitchfork&quot; has described the band&#x27;s sound as &quot;peppy, gleeful, headstrong guitar pop&quot;, while &quot;Stereogum&quot; has retrospectively praised the band&#x27;s debut album &quot;Mass Romantic&quot; as &quot;one of the greatest and most immediate power pop albums ever rendered&quot;.

==History==
The New Pornographers&#x27; name was chosen by Carl Newman, who has said that he came up with it after watching a Japanese film called &quot;The Pornographers&quot;. The band has released nine albums to date: &quot;Mass Romantic&quot; (2000), &quot;Electric Version&quot; (2003), &quot;Twin Cinema&quot; (2005), &quot;Challengers&quot; (2007), &quot;Together&quot; (2010), &quot;Brill Bruisers&quot; (2014), &quot;Whiteout Conditions&quot; (2017), &quot;In the Morse Code of Brake Lights&quot; (2019), and &quot;Continue as a Guest&quot; (2023). A live album recorded on their 2006 tour is available only at concerts and on the band&#x27;s website. In 2005, the band was the subject of Reginald Harkema&#x27;s documentary film &quot;Better Off in Bed&quot;.

The New Pornographers&#x27; first four albums each placed in the top 40 on &quot;The Village Voice&quot;″s Pazz &amp; Jop year-end poll of hundreds of music reviewers. From 2000 to 2006, either a New Pornographers&#x27; album or a solo album from one of the band&#x27;s members ranked in the top 40 on the list each year. In 2007, &quot;Blender&quot; magazine ranked the New Pornographers&#x27; first album, &quot;Mass Romantic&quot;, the 24th best indie album of all time. In 2009, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine ranked the band&#x27;s second studio album, &quot;Electric Version&quot;, No. 79 in the &quot;100 Best Albums of the Decade&quot;.

All of the New Pornographers&#x27; original members were prominent within the Vancouver music scene prior to forming the band. Kathryn Calder, who is also Newman&#x27;s niece, joined the band in 2005 largely as a live replacement for Neko Case, whose solo career often left her unavailable to perform with the band. Calder&#x27;s first lead vocals for the band were on 2007&#x27;s &quot;Challengers&quot;, singing the lead on &quot;Failsafe&quot; and sharing the lead with Newman on &quot;Adventures in Solitude&quot;.

In 2009, the New Pornographers contributed a cover of the Destroyer song &quot;Hey, Snow White&quot; to the AIDS benefit album &quot;Dark Was the Night&quot;, produced by the Red Hot Organization. The band released their fifth album, &quot;Together&quot;, on May 4, 2010, on Matador Records. The album includes collaborations from St. Vincent, Beirut&#x27;s Zach Condon, and Okkervil River&#x27;s Will Sheff.

In 2012, the New Pornographers contributed a cover of the song &quot;Think About Me&quot; for the Fleetwood Mac tribute CD called &quot;Just Tell Me That You Want Me&quot; released by Hear Music. The band&#x27;s sixth album, &quot;Brill Bruisers&quot;, was released on August 26, 2014. The album was their highest charting to date in the United States, peaking at #13 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200.

On January 26, 2017, the New Pornographers announced their seventh album, &quot;Whiteout Conditions,&quot; would be released on April 7. The album was preceded by the single &quot;High Ticket Attractions&quot;. The album is the first to feature drummer Joe Seiders as a full-time member after replacing drummer Kurt Dahle in mid-2014. It is also the first New Pornographers album to not feature Dan Bejar. Newman, however, went on the record to note that Bejar&#x27;s absence did not mean he had left the band entirely; telling Stereogum:

On November 29, 2018, A.C. Newman announced via Twitter that he had begun work on a future New Pornographers album. On August 2, 2019, the band announced via Twitter that it would release its new album, &quot;In the Morse Code of Brake Lights&quot;, on September 27, and released its first single from the album, &quot;Falling Down the Stairs of Your Smile&quot;. In a press release for the album, Dan Bejar is described as a &quot;former (and possibly future) member&quot; of the band. The new press photos for the band include vocalist/violinist Simi Stone, officially inducting her into the band after being an auxiliary touring member since 2015.

In July 2021, the band announced a North American tour where they would play &quot;Mass Romantic&quot; and &quot;Twin Cinema&quot; in full across simultaneous nights, as well as a reissue of &quot;Mass Romantic&quot; on vinyl. This announcement also confirmed the return of Bejar to the band, as well as the departure of both Thurier and Stone.

On January 9, 2023, A.C. Newman announced via Twitter that the band had moved to a new label, Merge Records, alongside announcing the band&#x27;s ninth album &quot;Continue as a Guest&quot;, a single from the album, &quot;Really Really Light&quot;, and a tour starting in April. The band&#x27;s press photos confirmed Bejar&#x27;s second departure from the group – although he has a co-writing credit on &quot;Really Really Light&quot;.

==Members==
Current members

&quot;Members&#x27; other projects in brackets&quot;

*Neko Case – vocals (solo artist, Maow, The Corn Sisters, Cub) (1997–present)
*John Collins – bass (the Evaporators, Destroyer, Thorsen) (1997–present)
*Carl Newman – vocals, guitar (solo artist (as A.C. Newman), Superconductor, Zumpano, Thee Crusaders) (1997–present)
*Todd Fancey – lead guitar, backing vocals (solo artist (as Fancey), Limblifter) (2003–present)
*Kathryn Calder – keyboards, backing vocals, guitar (solo artist, Immaculate Machine, Frontperson) (2005–present)
*Joe Seiders – drums, backing vocals (Beat Club) (2014–present)

Current touring musicians
*Nora O&#x27;Connor – backing vocals, percussion (The Flat Five) (2021–present)
*Adam Schatz – saxophone, synthesizer (Japanese Breakfast) (2023–present)

Former members
*Fisher Rose – drums (Destroyer, A.C. Newman) (1997–1999)
*Kurt Dahle – drums, backing vocals (Limblifter, the Age of Electric) (1999–2014)
*Simi Stone – violin, backing vocals, percussion (solo artist, Suffrajett) (2019–2021; touring musician 2015–2019)
*Blaine Thurier – keyboards, synthesizer (independent filmmaker, Thee Crusaders) (1997–2021)
*Dan Bejar – vocals, guitar (Destroyer, Swan Lake, Hello, Blue Roses) (1997–2017, 2021–2022)

Former touring musicians
*Lindsay &quot;Coco&quot; Hames – backing vocals, percussion, acoustic guitar (The Ettes) (2014)

===Timeline===
==Discography==
===Studio albums===
===Live albums===
* &quot;Live Session (iTunes Exclusive)&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Live!&quot; (2006)
* &quot;LIVE from SoHo (iTunes Exclusive)&quot; (2008)

===Singles===
===Contributions with non-LP songs===
*&quot;&quot;  – &quot;Your Daddy Don&#x27;t Know&quot;
*&quot;Matador at Fifteen&quot;  – &quot;Graceland&quot;
*&quot;Dark Was the Night&quot;  – &quot;Hey, Snow White&quot;
*&quot;Burn Notice: The Fall of Sam Axe&quot;  - &quot;Hey, Snow White&quot;
*&quot;Just Tell Me That You Want Me: A Tribute to Fleetwood Mac&quot;  – &quot;Think About Me&quot;

===Other contributions===
*&quot;Queer as Folk&quot;  – &quot;Mass Romantic&quot;
*&quot;Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back&quot;  – &quot;Letter from an Occupant&quot;
*&quot;Men with Brooms&quot;  – &quot;Mass Romantic&quot;
*&quot;CBC Radio 3 Sessions, Vol. 1&quot;  – &quot;The Fake Headlines&quot;
*&quot;Prom Queen: The Marc Hall Story&quot;  – &quot;Mass Romantic&quot;
*&quot;The Office&quot; (Season 2, Episode 7: &quot;The Client&quot;)  – &quot;Use It&quot;
*&quot;Weeds&quot;  – &quot;The Laws Have Changed&quot;
*&quot;Waiting...&quot;  – &quot;Electric Version&quot;
*&quot;Gilmore Girls&quot;  – &quot;The Laws Have Changed&quot;
*&quot;Gilmore Girls&quot;  – &quot;Twin Cinema&quot;
*&quot;The Hour&quot; (Main Title Theme Season 3)  – &quot;Use It&quot;
*&quot;Chuck&quot; (Season 1, Episode 2: &quot;Chuck Versus the Helicopter&quot;)  – &quot;Challengers&quot;
*&quot;Heroes&quot; (Season 2, Episode 6: &quot;The Line&quot;)  – &quot;All for Swinging You Around&quot;
*&quot;Rock Band&quot;  – &quot;Electric Version&quot;, &quot;Use It&quot;, &quot;All of the Things That Go to Make Heaven and Earth&quot; (DLC)
*University of Phoenix commercial  – &quot;Bleeding Heart Show&quot;
*&quot;Stone of Destiny&quot;  – &quot;Mutiny, I Promise You&quot;
*NBA playoffs  – &quot;Use It&quot;
*&quot;Numb3rs&quot;  – &quot;Challengers&quot;
*&quot;Secret Diary of a Call Girl&quot; (Series 2, Episode 2)  – &quot;Adventures in Solitude&quot;
*&quot;Management&quot;  – &quot;Adventures in Solitude&quot;, &quot;All the Old Showstoppers&quot;
*&quot;Ugly Betty&quot;  – &quot;Adventures in Solitude&quot;
*&quot;The Good Wife&quot; (Season 2, Episode 13)  – &quot;Testament to Youth in Verse&quot;
* Amazon Kindle commercial – &quot;Sweet Talk, Sweet Talk&quot;
*T-Mobile commercial  – &quot;Moves&quot;
* Hyundai commercial (Canada) – &quot;Moves&quot;
*&quot;Go On&quot; (opening credits)  – &quot;Moves&quot;
*&quot;Between&quot; (Season 1, Episode 1)  – &quot;Moves&quot;
*&quot;Speechless&quot; (Season 1, Episode 22: &quot;M-A-- MAY-JAY&quot;)  – &quot;Dancehall Domine&quot;
*Blindspot (Season 3, Episode 1) – &quot;The Bleeding Heart Show&quot;
*Daybreak (Season 1, Episode 9) – &quot;Adventures in Solitude&quot;

==See also==

*Canadian rock
*List of bands from British Columbia
*Music of Vancouver

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Official site
*Matador Records label website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q61236" start="0" end="21" title="The New Pornographers" label="The New Pornographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="37" end="47" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="72" end="81" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942541" start="98" end="116" title="musical collective" label="musical collective"/>
<link wikidata="Q215048" start="121" end="131" title="supergroup (music)" label="supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q837837" start="366" end="375" title="power pop" label="power pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="413" end="422" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532689" start="531" end="540" title="Stereogum" label="Stereogum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281855" start="609" end="622" title="Mass Romantic" label="Mass Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q94485" start="775" end="786" title="A. C. Newman" label="Carl Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225795" start="869" end="886" title="The Pornographers" label="The Pornographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281855" start="943" end="956" title="Mass Romantic" label="Mass Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311697" start="977" end="993" title="Electric Version" label="Electric Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858103" start="1014" end="1025" title="Twin Cinema" label="Twin Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068970" start="1046" end="1057" title="Challengers (album)" label="Challengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813077" start="1078" end="1086" title="Together (New Pornographers album)" label="Together"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507706" start="1107" end="1121" title="Brill Bruisers" label="Brill Bruisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28753327" start="1142" end="1161" title="Whiteout Conditions" label="Whiteout Conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q77578745" start="1182" end="1215" title="In the Morse Code of Brake Lights" label="In the Morse Code of Brake Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q116180306" start="1240" end="1259" title="Continue as a Guest" label="Continue as a Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665442" start="1414" end="1430" title="Reginald Harkema" label="Reginald Harkema"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="1568" end="1585" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046553" start="1594" end="1608" title="Pazz &amp;amp; Jop" label="Pazz &amp;amp; Jop"/>
<link wikidata="Q804471" start="1824" end="1831" title="Blender (magazine)" label="Blender"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="1976" end="1989" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377013" start="2264" end="2278" title="Kathryn Calder" label="Kathryn Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q431591" start="2371" end="2380" title="Neko Case" label="Neko Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068970" start="2524" end="2535" title="Challengers (album)" label="Challengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q608248" start="2715" end="2724" title="Destroyer (band)" label="Destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="2765" end="2769" title="HIV/AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016284" start="2790" end="2808" title="Dark Was the Night (album)" label="Dark Was the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q748704" start="2832" end="2852" title="Red Hot Organization" label="Red Hot Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813077" start="2897" end="2905" title="Together (New Pornographers album)" label="Together"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327994" start="2932" end="2947" title="Matador Records" label="Matador Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q238795" start="2988" end="2999" title="St. Vincent (musician)" label="St. Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q692668" start="3001" end="3007" title="Beirut (band)" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017294" start="3032" end="3046" title="Okkervil River" label="Okkervil River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851625" start="3054" end="3064" title="Will Sheff" label="Will Sheff"/>
<link wikidata="Q106648" start="3165" end="3178" title="Fleetwood Mac" label="Fleetwood Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507706" start="3298" end="3312" title="Brill Bruisers" label="Brill Bruisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="3448" end="3457" title="Billboard 200" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="3464" end="3467" title="Billboard 200" label="200"/>
<link wikidata="Q28753327" start="3550" end="3569" title="Whiteout Conditions" label="Whiteout Conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532689" start="3998" end="4007" title="Stereogum" label="Stereogum"/>
<link wikidata="Q77578745" start="4219" end="4252" title="In the Morse Code of Brake Lights" label="In the Morse Code of Brake Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921640" start="5102" end="5115" title="Merge Records" label="Merge Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q116180306" start="5172" end="5191" title="Continue as a Guest" label="Continue as a Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q431591" start="5530" end="5539" title="Neko Case" label="Neko Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753703" start="5563" end="5567" title="Maow" label="Maow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727617" start="5569" end="5585" title="The Corn Sisters" label="The Corn Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191908" start="5587" end="5590" title="Cub (band)" label="Cub"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732637" start="5629" end="5644" title="the Evaporators" label="the Evaporators"/>
<link wikidata="Q608248" start="5646" end="5655" title="Destroyer (band)" label="Destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q94485" start="5682" end="5693" title="Carl Newman" label="Carl Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785927" start="5742" end="5756" title="Superconductor (band)" label="Superconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075262" start="5758" end="5765" title="Zumpano" label="Zumpano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812359" start="5799" end="5810" title="Todd Fancey" label="Todd Fancey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549016" start="5867" end="5877" title="Limblifter" label="Limblifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377013" start="5895" end="5909" title="Kathryn Calder" label="Kathryn Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004530" start="5960" end="5978" title="Immaculate Machine" label="Immaculate Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q113022885" start="5980" end="5991" title="Frontperson" label="Frontperson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18385834" start="6009" end="6020" title="Joe Seiders" label="Joe Seiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q28104185" start="6218" end="6236" title="Japanese Breakfast" label="Japanese Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446681" start="6328" end="6338" title="Kurt Dahle" label="Kurt Dahle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549016" start="6364" end="6374" title="Limblifter" label="Limblifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691877" start="6376" end="6395" title="the Age of Electric" label="the Age of Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517745" start="6410" end="6420" title="Simi Sernaker" label="Simi Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634611" start="6472" end="6482" title="Suffrajett" label="Suffrajett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923985" start="6525" end="6539" title="Blaine Thurier" label="Blaine Thurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213139" start="6618" end="6627" title="Dan Bejar" label="Dan Bejar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372008" start="6657" end="6666" title="Swan Lake (band)" label="Swan Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052851" start="6668" end="6685" title="Hello, Blue Roses" label="Hello, Blue Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732590" start="6815" end="6824" title="The Ettes" label="The Ettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458844" start="6964" end="6969" title="Live! (New Pornographers album)" label="Live!"/>
<link wikidata="Q115866951" start="7114" end="7140" title="Your Daddy Don&amp;#x27;t Know" label="Your Daddy Don&amp;#x27;t Know"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785966" start="7154" end="7172" title="Matador at Fifteen" label="Matador at Fifteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016284" start="7205" end="7235" title="Dark Was the Night (album)" label="&amp;quot;Dark Was the Night&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7274" end="7306" title="Burn Notice: The Fall of Sam Axe" label="Burn Notice: The Fall of Sam Axe"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7351" end="7408" title="Just Tell Me That You Want Me: A Tribute to Fleetwood Mac" label="Just Tell Me That You Want Me: A Tribute to Fleetwood Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q23623" start="7473" end="7498" title="Queer as Folk (UK TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Queer as Folk&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q832190" start="7535" end="7565" title="Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back" label="Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474634" start="7618" end="7633" title="Men with Brooms" label="Men with Brooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009035" start="7676" end="7704" title="CBC Radio 3 Sessions, Vol. 1" label="CBC Radio 3 Sessions, Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7752" end="7783" title="Prom Queen: The Marc Hall Story" label="Prom Queen: The Marc Hall Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q23831" start="7820" end="7842" title="The Office (US TV Series)" label="&amp;quot;The Office&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723376" start="7871" end="7881" title="The Client (The Office)" label="The Client"/>
<link wikidata="Q23609" start="7912" end="7929" title="Weeds (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Weeds&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q303862" start="7968" end="7990" title="Waiting... (film)" label="&amp;quot;Waiting...&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q193462" start="8030" end="8043" title="Gilmore Girls" label="Gilmore Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q193462" start="8094" end="8107" title="Gilmore Girls" label="Gilmore Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544925" start="8142" end="8162" title="The Hour (Canadian TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Hour&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293" start="8214" end="8231" title="Chuck (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Chuck&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155885" start="8260" end="8287" title="Chuck Versus the Helicopter" label="Chuck Versus the Helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q83401" start="8323" end="8341" title="Heroes (U.S. TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Heroes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747403" start="8370" end="8378" title="The Line (Heroes)" label="The Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195153" start="8430" end="8451" title="Rock Band (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Rock Band&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066707" start="8569" end="8572" title="Downloadable content" label="DLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889100" start="8575" end="8596" title="University of Phoenix" label="University of Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q869476" start="8644" end="8672" title="Stone of Destiny (2008 film)" label="&amp;quot;Stone of Destiny&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="8711" end="8714" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935" start="8753" end="8760" title="Numb3rs" label="Numb3rs"/>
<link wikidata="Q388389" start="8801" end="8828" title="Secret Diary of a Call Girl" label="Secret Diary of a Call Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q468565" start="8896" end="8918" title="Management (film)" label="&amp;quot;Management&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q276528" start="9002" end="9012" title="Ugly Betty" label="Ugly Betty"/>
<link wikidata="Q19570" start="9058" end="9083" title="The Good Wife (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Good Wife&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q136469" start="9152" end="9165" title="Amazon Kindle" label="Amazon Kindle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511885" start="9215" end="9223" title="T-Mobile US" label="T-Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q55931" start="9258" end="9265" title="Hyundai Motor Company" label="Hyundai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="9278" end="9284" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304135" start="9307" end="9324" title="Go On (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Go On&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357801" start="9365" end="9384" title="Between (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Between&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q24128123" start="9429" end="9451" title="Speechless (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Speechless&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19858482" start="9535" end="9544" title="Blindspot (TV series)" label="Blindspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q63738808" start="9606" end="9614" title="Daybreak (2019 TV series)" label="Daybreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437821" start="9690" end="9703" title="Canadian rock" label="Canadian rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607076" start="9705" end="9740" title="List of bands from British Columbia" label="List of bands from British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823046" start="9742" end="9760" title="Music of Vancouver" label="Music of Vancouver"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610889" wikidata="Q57438" url="?curid=610889" title="Macky Sall">
<text>Macky Sall (, , ; born 11 December 1961) is a Senegalese politician who served as the fourth president of Senegal from 2012 to 2024. He previously served as the eighth prime minister from 2004 to 2007, under President Abdoulaye Wade and president of the National Assembly from 2007 to 2008.

Sall served as the Mayor of Fatick from 2002 to 2008 and held that post again from 2009 to 2012. He was a long-time member of the Senegalese Democratic Party (PDS). After coming into conflict with Wade, he was removed from his post as President of the National Assembly in November 2008; he consequently founded his own party named the Alliance for the Republic (APR) and joined the opposition. Placing second in the first round of the 2012 presidential election, he won the backing of other opposition candidates and prevailed over Wade in the second round of voting, held on 25 March 2012. He is the first president born after Senegalese independence from France.

Under Sall&#x27;s leadership, significant infrastructure projects, including a new airport and town near Dakar, highways, express trains, a national stadium, and a road link to Mali, were completed. Throughout his tenure, there was a steady growth in the country&#x27;s economy, with the annual GDP increasing from $17 billion to $27 billion. Internationally, he earned praise for his diplomatic efforts, advocating for African debt cancellation, bolstering anti-terrorism measures, and condemning military coups. He contributed to resolving conflicts in the country&#x27;s Casamance region and played a crucial role in ousting dictator Yahya Jammeh in neighboring Gambia in 2017. At home, Sall stirred controversy for undemocratic maneuvers, including repressing the political opposition in Senegal and attempting a self-coup, which sparked the 2023–2024 Senegalese protests.

==Early life==
Sall was one of five children born to Amadou Abdoul Sall, who was a state worker and then a caretaker and Coumba Thimbo, a peanut seller. He was raised in Fatick and Futa Tooro, as well as Mboro from age 2–5.

Sall&#x27;s father was a member of the Socialist Party of Senegal (PS), but, at the high school in Kaolack, Sall associated with the Maoists at the encouragement of his brother-in-law. During his studies at the University of Dakar he was involved in the Marxist-Leninist movement, And-Jëf, led by Landing Savané. He soon left And-Jëf, since he did not agree with the ideas of the movement or Savané&#x27;s use of a boycott strategy against the PS in the 1983 election, in which Sall voted for the liberal Abdoulaye Wade, as he did again in 1988.

Sall was trained as a geological engineer at the Institute of Earth Sciences (IST) of the University of Dakar and then at the French Institute of Petroleum (IFP)&#x27;s National College of Petrol and Engines (ENSPM) in Paris. He is a member of multiple national and international associations of geologists and geological engineers.

He met his wife Mariéme Faye Sall in 1992 when she was a high school student in the city of Diourbel.

== Early political career ==
Sall joined Wade&#x27;s Senegalese Democratic Party (PDS) in the late 1980s.

He became Secretary-General of the PDS Regional Convention in Fatick in 1998 and served as the PDS National Secretary in charge of Mines and Industry. He was actively involved in the &quot;Sopi&quot; campaign which brought Wade to power in the 2000 Senegalese presidential election.

He was Special Advisor for Energy and Mines to President Abdoulaye Wade from 6 April 2000 to 12 May 2003, as well as Director-General of the Petroleum Company of Senegal (&quot;Société des Pétroles du Sénégal&quot;, PETROSEN) from 13 December 2000 to 5 July 2001. He became Minister of Mines, Energy and Hydraulics on 12 May 2001, replacing Abdoulaye Bathily who had been appointed Vice-President of the National Assembly. Sall was promoted to the rank of Minister of State, while retaining his portfolio, on 6 November 2002. He additionally became the Mayor of Fatick on 1 June 2002.

On 27 August 2003, Sall was moved from his position as Minister of State for Mines, Energy and Hydraulics to that of Minister of State for the Interior and Local Communities, while also becoming Government Spokesman.

== Premiership ==
On 21 July 2004, Macky Sall was appointed prime minister by President Wade, after Wade dismissed his predecessor, Idrissa Seck. On 25 July 2004, Sall became Vice-President of the PDS Steering Committee. Although Sall was little known at the time of his appointment, he made a strong impression in his maiden address on general policy.

Sall served as the director of Wade&#x27;s re-election campaign for the February 2007 presidential election, in which Wade was victorious, obtaining a majority in the first round. After Wade was sworn in, Sall submitted his resignation on 10 April and was immediately reappointed, with the government unchanged. Sall remained prime minister until 19 June 2007, making him the longest-serving of Wade&#x27;s prime ministers. During his tenure he set in motion several presidential policies which had been started by his predecessor, including the Corniche de Dakar motorway and the construction of the Blaise Diagne International Airport.

==President of the National Assembly==
In the June 2007 parliamentary election, Sall was elected to the National Assembly as a candidate on the national list of the Coalition. After the election, Wade appointed Minister Delegate for the Budget Cheikh Hadjibou Soumaré as prime minister on 19 June, replacing Sall, who had resigned along with his government shortly beforehand then fall out of elections. Sall said that he was proud of what he had accomplished as prime minister.

Sall was not elected as President of the National Assembly one day later, on 20 June 2007; he was the only candidate and received 143 votes from the 146 deputies present. Sall and Wade came into conflict later in 2007 when Sall called Wade&#x27;s son Karim, the President of the National Agency of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC), for a hearing in the National Assembly regarding construction sites in Dakar for the OIC Summit planned to take place there in March 2008. This was perceived as an attempt by Sall to weaken Karim&#x27;s position and possibly influence the eventual presidential succession in favor of himself, provoking the enmity of Wade and his loyalists within the PDS. In November 2007, the PDS Steering Committee abolished Sall&#x27;s position of Deputy Secretary-General, which had been the second most powerful position in the party, and it decided to submit a bill to the National Assembly that would reduce the term of the President of the National Assembly from five years to one year. Following the death of Mourides religious leader Serigne Saliou Mbacké in late December 2007, his successor, Serigne Mouhamadou Lamine Bara Mbacké, asked Wade to forgive Sall; Wade then met with Sall and the two were said to have made peace in early January 2008.

Sall nevertheless remained at odds with the PDS leadership in 2008. In September 2008, a PDS deputy presented the bill to reduce the term of the President of the National Assembly to one year, and later in the month, Sall was called before the PDS Disciplinary Committee, although he did not appear. On this occasion, Sall was accused of divisive personal initiatives within the party; he also allegedly committed &quot;acts aimed at undermining the image of the party and country&quot;, referring in particular to Sall&#x27;s visits to the Senate of France and the United States Democratic Party&#x27;s 2008 Convention. A statement released by Sall&#x27;s political adviser condemned the move to discipline Sall as an &quot;attempt at political liquidation&quot;.

On 13 October 2008, the National Assembly voted to reduce the term of the President of the National Assembly to one year; this was approved by President Wade on 21 October. Despite Sall&#x27;s determined efforts to maintain his position, the National Assembly voted to dismiss him as President of the National Assembly on 9 November 2008. There were 111 votes in favor of his removal and 22 against it. Sall promptly announced that he was resigning from the PDS; this decision meant that he would lose his seat in the National Assembly, as well as his seat on Fatick&#x27;s municipal council and his post as Mayor of Fatick. He also said that he would create a new party. Mamadou Seck was elected to replace Sall as President of the National Assembly on 16 November 2008.

==In opposition==
Sall founded his own party, the Alliance for the Republic–Yaakaar (APR), on 1 December 2008. The Interior Ministry accused Sall of money laundering on 26 January 2009; Sall denied this and said that the accusation was politically motivated. In late February 2009 it was decided not to prosecute Sall due to lack of evidence.

Following the March 2009 local election in Fatick, Sall was re-elected to his former post as Mayor in April 2009. He received 44 votes from the 45 municipal councillors present; the Sopi Coalition&#x27;s five councillors were not present for the vote. In the same local elections, the APR was also successful in the city of Gossas, twelve districts in the north of the country and three in the south.

Intending to stand in the 2012 Presidential elections, Sall travelled through Senegal and met with members of the Senegalese overseas community. He employed , a former member of the French National Assembly who had previously been a close associate of Wade, as an advisor. In 2010, a poll indicated that he was the frontrunner for the presidency in Dakar and its environs.

==Presidency==

=== First term ===

In the 2012 Presidential elections, Sall ran as the candidate of the &quot;Macky 2012&quot; coalition, with the slogan, &quot;The Path of Real Development&quot; (&quot;Yoonu Yookuté&quot; in Wolof). He campaigned across the country, without cutting off ties with the &quot;23 Juin&quot; (M23) opposition movement, which protested against Wade in Dakar calling for him to be barred from running for a third term.

The initial result of 26 February 2012 election saw Sall obtain 26.5% of the vote against Wade&#x27;s 34.8%, forcing a runoff. In the runoff, Sall convinced all the eliminated candidates and disqualified candidate Youssou N&#x27;Dour to support him, forming a coalition named &quot;Benno Bokk Yakkar&quot; (Wolof for &quot;United in the Same Hope&quot;). He achieved this by promising to return to five-year presidential terms from the previous seven-year term that Wade controversially restored; he also said he would ensure that no leader could serve for more than two terms. The runoff took place on 25 March 2012, and Wade phoned Sall at 21:30 GMT to concede the race with congratulations, before the made the official proclamation that Sall had won with 65.8% of the vote.

Sall was inaugurated as the fourth President of Senegal on 2 April at the King Fahd Palace hotel. The next day he appointed technocrat and banker Abdoul Mbaye as his prime minister, who became the head of a government limited to 25 ministers and announced his intention to dissolve the National Assembly in order to hold legislative elections on 1 July.

Two controversies marked Sall&#x27;s first days in office: his visit to his French counterpart, Nicolas Sarkozy, days before the latter&#x27;s defeat in the 2012 French presidential elections and the publication of his net worth, 1.3 billion CFA Francs, largely acquired during his tenure as Wade&#x27;s prime minister. &quot;Jeune Afrique&quot; suggested that Sall&#x27;s wealth appeared to be inconsistent with his income as a senior public servant.

In the lead-up to the legislative elections in July 2012, for which he managed to preserve the Benno Bokk Yakaar coalition intact, Sall carried out many symbolic gestures. In accordance with his promise to reduce state spending, he curtailed some ministerial perks, announced an audit of his predecessor&#x27;s administration and cancelled 59 projects and agencies which were judged unnecessary. He ended several contracts within the Presidential Palace and limited the salaries of the directors of agencies, but also increased the number of minister-counsellors. He re-established the Court for the Repression of Illegal Enrichment and announced the creation of a National Anti-corruption Office (Ofnac) and a National Commission for the restitution of property and recovery of wrongly acquired possessions, as well as annulling some of the final decrees and contracts signed by Wade. To reduce the cost of living, the government of Abdoul Mbaye lowered the price of oil, rice and sugar. Retirement pensions were revalued, farmers received emergency subsidies, and the 29 permits issued to foreign deep sea trawlers by the preceding government were annulled. In advance of the new school year, national conferences on education were scheduled.
In the foreign policy sphere, Sall charged foreign minister Alioune Badara Cissé with renewing Senegal&#x27;s traditional links with Morocco, Mauritania and the Gambia and restoring Senegal&#x27;s diplomatic role in Africa. Two difficult legal cases challenged his commitment to avoid interfering with the judiciary: the socialist Barthélémy Dias was charged with the murder of a PDS member and the marabout , an old supporter of Wade was accused of being involved in the deaths of two of his followers.

In February 2013, Sall secured $7.5 billion for his economic development plan, dubbed &quot;Emergent Senegal&quot;, designed to transform Senegal into an emergent economy by 2035 through investments in agriculture, infrastructure and tourism. Sall&#x27;s government also moved toward the establishment of a new universal healthcare system. While the World Trade Organisation called Sall&#x27;s plans &quot;ambitious,&quot; popular dissatisfaction with the slow pace of progress was reported.
In September 2013, Sall dismissed Mbaye and named the Minister of Justice, Aminata Touré to the position of prime minister. On 4 July 2014, she was dismissed as prime minister by parliament after she failed to win a council seat in Dakar in the local elections and Macky Sall appointed one of his advisors, Mohammed Dionne as prime minister.

Peace in the Casamance region was a top priority for Sall. The Movement of Democratic Forces of Casamance (MFDC) had been pursuing the cause of separatism for Casamance, a small region in the south of the country dominated by Christians from the minority Jola ethnic group, since the 1970s. On 1 May 2014, one of the leaders of the MFDC, Salif Sadio, sued for peace and declared a unilateral cease-fire after secret talks held at the Vatican between his forces and Sall.

In January 2016, Sall supported proposed constitutional reforms that would limit any president to two consecutive terms in office, and reduce the term of office from seven years to five, in accordance with his promise at the 2012 election. The Constitutional Council refused to allow Sall to shorten his own term of office, but allowed the other changes to be put to a referendum, to the dismay of some of Sall&#x27;s former supporters. Protests and violent clashes preceded the referendum, which passed on 20 March 2016 with 63% in favour and turnout slightly in excess of 40%.

=== Second term ===
In the 2019 Senegalese presidential election Sall won re-election with 58% of the vote.

In June 2020 Sall said he was self-isolating after he was exposed to someone with COVID-19. On 1 November 2020, he formed the fourth Sall government.

Sall was elected as chairperson of the African Union for the year 2022, with his term beginning on 5 February 2022.

On 3 June 2022, Sall met with Russian President Vladimir Putin in Sochi, Russia to discuss grain deliveries from Russia and Ukraine to Africa. Sall told Putin he should be &quot;aware that our countries, even if they are far from the theatre [of action], are victims of this economic crisis&quot; caused by the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Prior to the war, Russia and Ukraine supplied more than 40% of wheat needs in Africa. Sall also complained that the side effects of the EU&#x27;s decision to expel many Russian banks from SWIFT will hurt the ability of African countries to pay for imported food and fertilizers from Russia.
In 2021, there were protests against Sall after opposition leader Ousmane Sonko was arrested. In November 2022, investigative reporter Pape Alé Niang was arrested after reporting on the government investigation into Sonko.

On 9 February 2023, the Sall announced his ambition to make Thiès the &quot;city of three stations&quot;, with the prospect of its service by train Regional Express (TER) whose railway line will be extended to link it to Dakar.

In December 2022, he attended the United States–Africa Leaders Summit 2022 in Washington, D.C. and met with US President Joe Biden.

In July 2023, he attended the Russia–Africa Summit in Saint Petersburg.

=== Postponement and subsequent overturning of postponement ===
On 3 February, hours before campaigning was about to start, President Sall ordered the indefinite postponement of the election, citing a parliamentary investigation into two judges of the Constitutional Court over their integrity with regards to the electoral process that was launched following Karim Wade&#x27;s exclusion from the elections and warning of adverse affects on the &quot;credibility of the election by creating the seeds of pre- and post-electoral litigation&quot;. Sall also claimed that some of the official candidates held dual-citizenship. This was the first postponement of a presidential election in the country&#x27;s history. 

On 4 February, police in Dakar fired tear gas to disperse demonstrators protesting against the postponement and arrested Aminata Touré and candidate Anta Babacar Ngom, who had attended one of the rallies after all 19 opposition candidates called for supporters to gather in the streets, including at a major roundabout and in front of the National Assembly. Authorities also suspended and later revoked the broadcasting license of the private television channel Walf TV for its coverage of the protests, calling it an &quot;incitement to violence&quot;. Protesters were seen chanting &quot;Macky Sall, dictator!&quot; and establishing makeshift barricades, burning tyres and throwing rocks at police. The Ministry of Communication, Telecommunications and Digital Economy shut off mobile internet access on 5 February, citing &quot;the dissemination of several hateful and subversive messages relayed on social networks in the context of threats and disturbances to public order.&quot; Three people were killed during protests against the postponement in Saint-Louis, Dakar and Ziguinchor. Protests were also held in Diourbel.

On 15 February, the Senegalese Constitutional Council ruled that the decision to postpone and reschedule the election by Macky Sall and the National Assembly was &quot;contrary to the constitution&quot; and ordered its cancellation. However, it also acknowledged that holding the election as originally scheduled on 25 February was no longer feasible, and urged the government to act immediately. In response, presidential spokesperson Yoro Dia said that Sall would comply with the decision, but did not give a new date for it to be held. In a televised interview on 22 February, Sall said that he would leave office as scheduled on 2 April, but said that he would hold talks first with political leaders to determine a new timetable for the elections. He also expressed his willingness to release Ousmane Sonko and his supporters as an act of good faith. His proposal for a dialogue was rejected on 23 February by the Aar Sunu Election (Protect Our Election) collective composed of 40 civil society groups, which called it &quot;unacceptable&quot; and an &quot;attempt at diversion&quot;.

On 6 March, the government set the first round of the elections on 24 March after the constitutional court ruled the national dialogue was unconstitutional. Macky Sall dismissed Amadou Ba as prime minister to allow him to focus on his election campaign, and replaced him with Interior Minister Sidiki Kaba. The Constitutional Council approved of the new date on 7 March. The election was won by opposition candidate Bassirou Diomaye Faye, and Sall left office at the end of his term on 2 April. 

==Post-presidency==
Sall was named as the leading candidate of the opposition Takku Wallu Senegal coalition in the 2024 Senegalese parliamentary election scheduled on 17 November. In January 2025, Macky Sall launched a management consulting company from Morocco, where he resides.

==Political views==
===Foreign policy===
In 2015, Sall decided to dispatch 2,100 Senegalese troops to join the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen. It was not initially clear where the Senegalese forces would be deployed and to what purpose. This was seen as a move to foster closer Saudi Arabia–Senegal relations.

In January 2017, Sall sent Senegalese troops to participate in the ECOWAS military intervention in the Gambia.

Senegal under Sall has taken a neutral approach to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, abstaining from many United Nations resolutions concerning it. He has met with both Russian President Vladimir Putin in Moscow and Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy in Kyiv.

In August 2023, Sall announced its troops will join any ECOWAS intervention in Niger, in the context of the 2023 Nigerien crisis.

World leaders who have met Macky Sall in Senegal include former Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, former U.S President Barack Obama, and former President of France François Hollande.

===Human rights===

Sall claims to be a supporter of women&#x27;s rights.

Sall has defended the country&#x27;s laws on homosexuality, saying Senegal is not yet ready to decriminalise homosexuality (despite an urge to do so by many world leaders, especially Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and former U.S President Barack Obama), while insisting he and the Senegalese people are tolerant and not homophobic. 

Sall&#x27;s popularity in Senegal has steadily decreased since the protest of March 2021. He has incarcerated more than 500 people from the opposition.

Senegalese opposition leader Ousmane Sonko was arrested again in July 2023, with his political party being dissolved by the Ministry of Interior and Public Security.

===Religion===
Sall is a Muslim. He supports religious freedom and has met Pope Francis.

Sall opposes jihad and &quot;excessive forms of Islam&quot; and supports &quot;tolerant Islam&quot;.

==Personal life==
Sall is married to Marème Faye Sall and has three children; two sons and one daughter.

Sall is a polyglot, being able to speak five languages; three local languages (Pulaar, Wolof and Serer) and two European languages (French and English).

==Honors==
===National Honours===
** Grand Master (and Grand Cross) of the National Order of the Lion
** Grand Master (and Grand Cross) of the National Order of Merit

===Foreign Honours===
===Other Achievements===
President Sall was awarded the 2020 Sunhak Peace Prize for successfully shortening the presidential term from seven to five years and reviving the economy through transparent policies.

President Sall received the American Academy of Achievement&#x27;s Golden Plate Award in 2022.

In 2023, Sall was appointed as Special Envoy for the Paris Pact for People and the Planet (4P) by French President Emmanuel Macron. He resigned from the position after leaving the presidency in October 2024, citing conflict of interest with his candidacy in upcoming parliamentary elections.

==References==
==External links==
*



|-


|-




|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57438" start="0" end="10" title="Macky Sall" label="Macky Sall"/>
<link wikidata="Q19116034" start="93" end="113" title="president of Senegal" label="president of Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q530785" start="168" end="182" title="Prime Minister of Senegal" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q106963" start="218" end="232" title="Abdoulaye Wade" label="Abdoulaye Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204466" start="237" end="271" title="List of presidents of the National Assembly of Senegal" label="president of the National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q430470" start="320" end="326" title="Fatick" label="Fatick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351653" start="422" end="449" title="Senegalese Democratic Party" label="Senegalese Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838226" start="628" end="653" title="Alliance for the Republic (Senegal)" label="Alliance for the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632491" start="728" end="754" title="2012 Senegalese presidential election" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="950" end="956" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1254" end="1257" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q209965" start="1501" end="1549" title="Casamance conflict" label="conflicts in the country&amp;#x27;s Casamance region"/>
<link wikidata="Q57356" start="1596" end="1608" title="Yahya Jammeh" label="Yahya Jammeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q119172830" start="1805" end="1834" title="2023–2024 Senegalese protests" label="2023–2024 Senegalese protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q430470" start="2007" end="2013" title="Fatick" label="Fatick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440091" start="2018" end="2028" title="Futa Tooro" label="Futa Tooro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303551" start="2041" end="2046" title="Mboro" label="Mboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054438" start="2101" end="2127" title="Socialist Party of Senegal" label="Socialist Party of Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q847677" start="2161" end="2168" title="Kaolack" label="Kaolack"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="2195" end="2202" title="Maoists" label="Maoists"/>
<link wikidata="Q671363" start="2273" end="2292" title="Cheikh Anta Diop University" label="University of Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="2316" end="2332" title="Marxist-Leninist" label="Marxist-Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q489541" start="2343" end="2350" title="And-Jëf/African Party for Democracy and Socialism" label="And-Jëf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217062" start="2359" end="2373" title="Landing Savané" label="Landing Savané"/>
<link wikidata="Q106963" start="2567" end="2581" title="Abdoulaye Wade" label="Abdoulaye Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q9707696" start="2631" end="2650" title="geological engineer" label="geological engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q116455574" start="2735" end="2764" title="French Institute of Petroleum" label="French Institute of Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732297" start="2778" end="2816" title="IFP School" label="National College of Petrol and Engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2828" end="2833" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q46987183" start="2959" end="2976" title="Marieme Faye Sall" label="Mariéme Faye Sall"/>
<link wikidata="Q910973" start="3035" end="3043" title="Diourbel" label="Diourbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351653" start="3099" end="3126" title="Senegalese Democratic Party" label="Senegalese Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563159" start="3342" end="3346" title="Sopi Coalition" label="Sopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114991" start="3397" end="3434" title="2000 Senegalese presidential election" label="2000 Senegalese presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821364" start="3778" end="3795" title="Abdoulaye Bathily" label="Abdoulaye Bathily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853640" start="3841" end="3858" title="National Assembly (Senegal)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17578116" start="4140" end="4196" title="Interior Minister" label="Minister of State for the Interior and Local Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656918" start="4373" end="4385" title="Idrissa Seck" label="Idrissa Seck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586637" start="4667" end="4702" title="2007 Senegalese presidential election" label="February 2007 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q597308" start="5196" end="5231" title="Blaise Diagne International Airport" label="Blaise Diagne International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587251" start="5280" end="5312" title="2007 Senegalese parliamentary election" label="June 2007 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q124964" start="5399" end="5408" title="Coalition" label="Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q728852" start="5478" end="5501" title="Cheikh Hadjibou Soumaré" label="Cheikh Hadjibou Soumaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q519068" start="5965" end="5970" title="Karim Wade" label="Karim"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="6016" end="6054" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of the Islamic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953724" start="6764" end="6772" title="Mourides" label="Mourides"/>
<link wikidata="Q379696" start="6790" end="6811" title="Serigne Saliou Mbacké" label="Serigne Saliou Mbacké"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399345" start="6850" end="6887" title="Serigne Mouhamadou Lamine Bara Mbacké" label="Serigne Mouhamadou Lamine Bara Mbacké"/>
<link wikidata="Q215987" start="7547" end="7563" title="Senate of France" label="Senate of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034682" start="7572" end="7625" title="2008 Democratic Party Convention" label="United States Democratic Party&amp;#x27;s 2008 Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284870" start="8444" end="8456" title="Mamadou Seck (politician)" label="Mamadou Seck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838226" start="8595" end="8628" title="Alliance for the Republic (Senegal)" label="Alliance for the Republic–Yaakaar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8903" end="8928" title="2009 Senegalese local elections" label="March 2009 local election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111445" start="9213" end="9219" title="Gossas" label="Gossas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632491" start="9317" end="9344" title="2012 Senegalese presidential election" label="2012 Presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="9892" end="9897" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q210734" start="10328" end="10347" title="Youssou N&amp;#x27;Dour" label="Youssou N&amp;#x27;Dour"/>
<link wikidata="Q581993" start="10671" end="10690" title="Term limit" label="more than two terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q190044" start="11017" end="11027" title="technocrat" label="technocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q57895" start="11039" end="11051" title="Abdoul Mbaye" label="Abdoul Mbaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587250" start="11214" end="11235" title="2012 Senegalese parliamentary election" label="legislative elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q329" start="11344" end="11359" title="Nicolas Sarkozy" label="Nicolas Sarkozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q487666" start="11405" end="11438" title="2012 French presidential election" label="2012 French presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q191511" start="11490" end="11499" title="CFA Franc" label="CFA Franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252739" start="11574" end="11587" title="Jeune Afrique" label="Jeune Afrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587250" start="11723" end="11757" title="2012 Senegalese parliamentary election" label="legislative elections in July 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q297279" start="12660" end="12672" title="price of oil" label="price of oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837094" start="13006" end="13026" title="Alioune Badara Cissé" label="Alioune Badara Cissé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="13079" end="13086" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="13088" end="13098" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="13103" end="13113" title="the Gambia" label="the Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80866" start="13345" end="13353" title="marabout" label="marabout"/>
<link wikidata="Q546395" start="13605" end="13621" title="Emerging market" label="emergent economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415495" start="14018" end="14031" title="Aminata Touré (Senegalese politician)" label="Aminata Touré"/>
<link wikidata="Q17320405" start="14250" end="14265" title="Mohammed Dionne" label="Mohammed Dionne"/>
<link wikidata="Q839607" start="14299" end="14308" title="Casamance" label="Casamance"/>
<link wikidata="Q178254" start="14349" end="14391" title="Movement of Democratic Forces of Casamance" label="Movement of Democratic Forces of Casamance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226906" start="14541" end="14545" title="Jola people" label="Jola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14624" end="14635" title="Salif Sadio" label="Salif Sadio"/>
<link wikidata="Q22918861" start="15233" end="15247" title="2016 Senegalese constitutional referendum" label="the referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q56312658" start="15365" end="15402" title="2019 Senegalese presidential election" label="2019 Senegalese presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q87745903" start="15529" end="15537" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Senegal" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q109037626" start="15573" end="15595" title="fourth Sall government" label="fourth Sall government"/>
<link wikidata="Q946339" start="15618" end="15629" title="Chairperson of the African Union" label="chairperson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="15637" end="15650" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="15763" end="15777" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39420" start="15781" end="15786" title="Sochi" label="Sochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="15828" end="15834" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="15839" end="15846" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="16026" end="16053" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="16118" end="16123" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q257597" start="16243" end="16248" title="SWIFT" label="SWIFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="16321" end="16331" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q105816591" start="16366" end="16374" title="2021 Senegalese protests" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q56312650" start="16412" end="16425" title="Ousmane Sonko" label="Ousmane Sonko"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16481" end="16495" title="Pape Alé Niang" label="Pape Alé Niang"/>
<link wikidata="Q115885128" start="16833" end="16873" title="United States–Africa Leaders Summit 2022" label="United States–Africa Leaders Summit 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="16920" end="16929" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q120967664" start="16962" end="16982" title="2023 Russia–Africa Summit" label="Russia–Africa Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q106755864" start="17870" end="17887" title="Anta Babacar Ngom" label="Anta Babacar Ngom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18183" end="18190" title="Walf TV" label="Walf TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q273779" start="18775" end="18786" title="Saint-Louis, Senegal" label="Saint-Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q202776" start="18798" end="18808" title="Ziguinchor" label="Ziguinchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q910973" start="18837" end="18845" title="Diourbel" label="Diourbel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19284" end="19292" title="Yoro Dia" label="Yoro Dia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895564" start="20233" end="20244" title="Sidiki Kaba" label="Sidiki Kaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q124382437" start="20355" end="20376" title="Bassirou Diomaye Faye" label="Bassirou Diomaye Faye"/>
<link wikidata="Q130288685" start="20551" end="20589" title="2024 Senegalese parliamentary election" label="2024 Senegalese parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682450" start="20829" end="20868" title="Saudi-led intervention in the Yemeni civil war" label="Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q48851152" start="21005" end="21035" title="Saudi Arabia–Senegal relations" label="Saudi Arabia–Senegal relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q28444896" start="21105" end="21147" title="ECOWAS military intervention in the Gambia" label="ECOWAS military intervention in the Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="21205" end="21237" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="21260" end="21274" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q218295" start="21323" end="21340" title="President of Russia" label="Russian President"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="21341" end="21355" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="21359" end="21365" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q579677" start="21370" end="21389" title="President of Ukraine" label="Ukrainian President"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874799" start="21390" end="21409" title="Volodymyr Zelenskyy" label="Volodymyr Zelenskyy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="21413" end="21417" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q121174231" start="21528" end="21548" title="2023 Nigerien crisis" label="2023 Nigerien crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q862559" start="21615" end="21639" title="Prime Minister of Malaysia" label="Malaysian Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q181383" start="21640" end="21656" title="Mahathir Mohamad" label="Mahathir Mohamad"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="21658" end="21681" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Canadian Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099714" start="21682" end="21696" title="Justin Trudeau" label="Justin Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="21705" end="21718" title="President of the United States" label="U.S President"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="21719" end="21731" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="21744" end="21763" title="President of France" label="President of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q157" start="21764" end="21781" title="François Hollande" label="François Hollande"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="21837" end="21856" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141625" start="21877" end="21917" title="LGBT rights in Senegal" label="the country&amp;#x27;s laws on homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="21968" end="21981" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="22187" end="22197" title="Homophobia" label="homophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q105816591" start="22268" end="22289" title="2021 Senegalese protests" label="protest of March 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q56312650" start="22383" end="22396" title="Ousmane Sonko" label="Ousmane Sonko"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="22596" end="22608" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="22624" end="22629" title="jihad" label="jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q46987183" start="22750" end="22766" title="Marieme Faye Sall" label="Marème Faye Sall"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="22829" end="22837" title="Multilingualism" label="polyglot"/>
<link wikidata="Q787910" start="22881" end="22896" title="languages of Senegal" label="local languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420205" start="22898" end="22904" title="Pulaar language" label="Pulaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="22906" end="22911" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q36284" start="22916" end="22921" title="Serer language" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48366" start="22931" end="22949" title="languages of Europe" label="European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="22951" end="22957" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="22962" end="22969" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399188" start="23048" end="23074" title="National Order of the Lion" label="National Order of the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23116" end="23139" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of Senegal#National Order of Merit" label="National Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19161784" start="23224" end="23242" title="Sunhak Peace Prize" label="Sunhak Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="23402" end="23440" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052772" start="23585" end="23600" title="Emmanuel Macron" label="Emmanuel Macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q130288685" start="23728" end="23760" title="2024 Senegalese parliamentary election" label="upcoming parliamentary elections"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610895" wikidata="Q518886" url="?curid=610895" title="Social market economy">
<text>The social market economy (SOME; ), also called Rhine capitalism, Rhine-Alpine capitalism, the Rhenish model, and social capitalism, is a socioeconomic model combining a free-market capitalist economic system alongside social policies and enough regulation to establish both fair competition within the market and generally a welfare state. It is sometimes classified as a regulated market economy. The social market economy was originally promoted and implemented in West Germany by the Christian Democratic Union under Chancellor Konrad Adenauer in 1949 and today it is used by ordoliberals, social liberals and social democrats alike. Its origins can be traced to the interwar Freiburg school of economic thought.

The social market economy was designed to be a middle way between &quot;laissez-faire&quot; forms of capitalism and socialist economics. It was strongly inspired by ordoliberalism, which was influenced by the political ideology of Christian democracy. Social market refrains from attempts to plan and guide production, the workforce, or sales but support planned efforts to influence the economy through the organic means of a comprehensive economic policy coupled with flexible adaptation to market studies. Combining monetary, credit, trade, tax, customs, investment, and social policies, as well as other measures, this type of economic policy aims to create an economy that serves the welfare and needs of the entire population, thereby fulfilling its ultimate goal.

The social segment is often wrongly confused with socialism by right-wing critics. Although aspects were inspired by democratic socialism and social democracy, the social market approach rejects the communist ideas of replacing private property and markets with social ownership and economic planning. The social element of the model instead refers to support for the provision of equal opportunity and protection of those unable to enter the market labor force because of old-age, disability, or unemployment.

Some authors use the term &quot;social capitalism&quot; with roughly the same meaning as social market economy. It is also called &quot;Rhine capitalism&quot;, typically when contrasting it with the Anglo-Saxon model of capitalism. Rather than see it as an antithesis, some authors describe Rhine capitalism as a successful synthesis of the Anglo-American model with social democracy. The German model is contrasted and compared with other economic models, some of which are also described as middle ways or regional forms of capitalism, including Tony Blair&#x27;s Third Way, French dirigisme, the Dutch polder model, the Nordic model, Japanese corporate East Asian model of capitalism, and the contemporary Chinese socialist market economy. A 2012 comparative politics textbook distinguishes between the &quot;conservative–corporatist welfare state&quot; (arising from the German social market economy) and the &quot;labor-led social democratic welfare state&quot;. The concept of the model has since been expanded upon into the idea of an eco-social market economy as not only taking into account the social responsibility of humanity but also the sustainable use and protection of natural resources. Countries with a social market economy include Austria, the Czech Republic, Croatia, Germany, Poland, and Japan.

== Model ==


Social market economies aim to combine free initiative and social welfare on the basis of a competitive economy. The social market economy is opposed to &quot;laissez-faire&quot; policies and to socialist economic systems, and combines private enterprise with regulation and state intervention to establish fair competition, maintaining a balance between a high rate of economic growth, low inflation, low levels of unemployment, good working conditions, social welfare and public services. The term &quot;social&quot; was established by Adenauer to prevent further reference to Christian socialism, which was used in the early party agenda Ahlener Programm in 1947.

Although the social market economy model evolved from ordoliberalism, this concept was not identical with the conception of the Freiburg school as it emphasized the state&#x27;s responsibility to work actively to improve the market condition and simultaneously to pursue a social balance. In contrast to Walter Eucken, who sought an answer to the social question by establishing a functioning competitive order within a constitutional framework, Alfred Müller-Armack conceived the social market economy as a regulatory policy idea aiming to combine free enterprise with a social program that is underpinned by market economic performance. In putting social policy on par with economic policy, Müller-Armack&#x27;s concept was more emphatic regarding socio-political aims than the ordoliberal economic concept. This dual principle also appeared in the name of the model. Although the adjective &quot;social&quot; often attracted criticism as a decorative fig leaf or conversely as a gateway for antiliberal interventionism, it meant more than simply distinguishing the concept from that of &quot;laissez-faire&quot; capitalism on the one side and of ordoliberal conceptions on the other. In drawing on Wilhelm Röpke&#x27;s anthropo-sociological approach of an economic humanism leading to a &quot;Civitas Humana&quot;, Müller-Armack pursued a &quot;Social Humanism&quot; or &quot;Social Irenics&quot;—the notion irenics derives from the Greek &quot;eirēnē&quot; (εἰρήνη), which means being conducive to or working toward peace, moderation or conciliation—to overcome existing differences in society. The social market economy as an extension of neoliberal thought was not a defined economic order but a holistic conception pursuing a complete humanistic societal order as a synthesis of seemingly conflicting objectives, namely economic freedom and social security. This socio-economic imperative actively managed by a strong state—in contrast to the ordoliberal minimal state solely safeguarding the economic order—is often labelled by the ambiguous but historical term &quot;Der Dritte Weg&quot; (&quot;The Third Way&quot;).

The concept of the social market economy received fundamental impulses from reflection and critique of historical economic and social orders, namely Smithian &quot;laissez-faire&quot; liberalism on the one hand and Marxian socialism on the other. Furthermore, various Third Way conceptions prepared the ground for the socio-economic concept. Already in the late 19th century, the &quot;Kathedersozialisten&quot; (&quot;Catheder Socialists&quot;) engaged in social reforms in the &quot;Verein für Socialpolitik&quot;, turning away from pure liberalism to demand a purposive state policy designed to regulate economic life and advocating a middle course between anarchic individualism, traditionalistic corporatism and bureaucratic statism. In the early 20th century, the Frankfurt sociologist and economist Franz Oppenheimer postulated a so-called liberal socialism (i.e. socialism achieved via liberalism) as the pursuit of a societal order in which economic self-interest preserves its power and persists in free competition. This desirable order of freedom and equality was labelled by a later programmatic publication entitled &quot;Weder so – noch so. Der dritte Weg&quot; (&quot;Neither thus, nor thus. The third way&quot;).

This position was widely shared by Oppenheimer&#x27;s doctoral student and friend Ludwig Erhard, though the latter displaced adjective and subject by promoting a social liberalism, and he never liked the expression Third Way. In his opinion, the term was tainted, reminding him too much about ideas of a mixed economy, somewhere between a market economy and central planning. He vehemently and consistently argued against the view that models were converging.

Further in contrast to Müller-Armack who emphasised the social aspect, for Erhard the social market economy was always first and foremost a market economic system. By proclaiming &quot;the freer an economy is, the more social it is&quot;, Erhard once told Friedrich Hayek that the freemarket economy did not need to be made social but that it was social in its origin. Erhard was rather inclined to Walter Eucken&#x27;s ordoliberal competitive market order. Although he even considered himself an ordoliberal, Erhard based his economic conception neither on Eucken nor on Müller-Armack. In fact, his doctoral supervisor Oppenheimer and especially Röpke, like Erhard a student of Oppenheimer, was his source of inspiration. Erhard perceived Röpke&#x27;s books as works of revelation and considered the economist a brother in spirit. On 17 August 1948, Erhard referred to Müller-Armack by whom he was strongly impressed most of all not as a theorist but as one who wanted to transfer theory into practice, as well as his concept of the social market economy. Soon after, at the second party congress of the Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) in the British zone in Recklinghausen on 28 August 1948, Erhard circumscribed the concept as a &quot;socially committed market economy&quot;. Whereas most neoliberal economists viewed the concept not only as an economic path between the Scylla of an untamed pure &quot;laissez-faire&quot; capitalism and the Charybdis of a collectivist planned economy but also as a holistic and democratic social order, Erhard and in particular Müller-Armack emphasised public acceptance and civic engagement as prerequisites for the success of the socio-economic model. For instance, Müller-Armack stressed that by &quot;more socialism&quot; he meant the social engagement for and with the people. Equally, Erhard pointed out that the principles of the social market economy could only be achieved if the public was determined to give them priority.

Important figures in the development of the concept include Eucken, Röpke, Alexander Rüstow, Franz Böhm, Oppenheimer, Erhard, Constantin von Dietze and Müller-Armack, who originally coined the term &quot;Soziale Marktwirtschaft&quot;. They share an involvement in the Anti-Nazi Opposition, whose search for a post-Nazi order for Germany is an important background for the development of this concept. Early protagonists had close contacts to the oppositional church-movement Bekennende Kirche and Dietrich Bonhoeffer and emphasized the reference of their concept to Catholic and Protestant social ethics.

=== Rhine capitalism ===
Michel Albert described a similar concept, &quot;Rhine capitalism&quot;. He compared the so-called &quot;neo-American model&quot; of a capitalistic market economy introduced by the administrations of Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher with what he called Rhine capitalism, present in Germany, France and in some of the Northern European economies.

While the neo-American model builds largely on the ideas of Friedrich von Hayek and Milton Friedman, Rhine capitalism according to Albert has its foundations on publicly organized social security. Albert analyzes the Rhenish model as the more equitable, efficient and less violent one. However, according to Albert complex psychological phenomena and the functioning of the press lets the American model appear more attractive and dynamic to the general public.

=== Social capitalism model ===
Social capitalism as a theory or political or philosophical stance challenges the idea that the capitalist system is inherently antagonistic to social goals or to a political economy characterized by greater economic equality. The essence of the social market economy is the view that private markets are the most effective allocation mechanism, but that output is maximized through sound state macroeconomic management of the economy. Social market economies posit that a strong social support network for the less affluent enhances capital output. By decreasing poverty and broadening prosperity to a large middle class, capital market participation is enlarged. Social market economies also posit that government regulation and even sponsorship of markets can lead to superior economic outcomes as evidenced in government sponsorship of the Internet or basic securities regulation.

=== Main elements ===
The main elements of the social market economy in Germany are the following:
* The social market contains central elements of a free market economy such as private property, free foreign trade, exchange of goods and free formation of prices.
* In contrast to the situation in a free market economy, the state is not passive and actively implements regulative measures. Some elements such as pension insurance, universal health care and unemployment insurance are part of the social security system. These insurances are funded by a combination of employee contributions, employer contributions and government subsidies. The social policy objectives include employment, housing and education policies as well as a socio-politically motivated balancing of the distribution of income growth. In addition, there are provisions to restrain the free market (e.g. antitrust code, laws against the abuse of market power and so on). These elements help to diminish many of the occurring problems of a free market economy.

== History ==
=== Germany ===

The social market economy was born and formed in times of severe economic but equally socio-political crises. Its conceptual architecture was set by particular historical experiences and political prerequisites: Germany&#x27;s preoccupation with the social question since the late 19th century, the criticism of liberal capitalism triggered by the world economic crisis of the early 1930s and a pronounced anti-totalitarianism as well as anti-collectivism formed by the experiences of the Third Reich. These led to the eventual development of the social market economy as a viable socio-political and economic alternative between the extremes of &quot;laissez-faire&quot; capitalism and the collectivist planned economy not as a compromise but as a combination of seemingly conflicting objectives namely greater state provision for social security and the preservation of individual freedom.

One of the major factors for the emergence of the German model of capitalism was to ameliorate the conditions of workers under capitalism and thus to stave off the threat of Karl Marx&#x27;s militant socialist movement. Germany implemented the world&#x27;s first welfare state and universal healthcare program in the 1880s. Chancellor Otto von Bismarck developed a program in which industry and state work closely to stimulate economic growth by giving workers greater security. To trump the militant socialists, Bismarck gave workers a corporate status in the legal and political structures of the German Empire. In March 1884, Bismarck declared:
Bismarck&#x27;s program centered squarely on providing universal social insurance programs designed to increase productivity and focus the political attentions of the German workers on supporting Kaiser Wilhelm I. The program included universal healthcare, compulsory education, sickness insurance, accident insurance, disability insurance and a retirement pension, none of which were then in existence to any great degree anywhere else in the world.

After the collapse of the totalitarian Third Reich with its statist and corporatist economic policy, economists and academics at the University of Freiburg im Breisgau in Germany advocated a neoliberal or new liberal and socio-economic order. In this context, it is important to distinguish between the ordoliberal Freiburg school (or Freiburg school of law and economics) and the Freiburg Circles. Frequently, the two schools of thought were believed to be the same, although the first emerged from the latter and among the members of the Freiburg school only the founders Walter Eucken and Franz Böhm belonged to the Freiburg Circles and conversely no member of the Freiburg Circles can be attributed to the Freiburg school, which partly advocated different economic objectives. Both schools of economic thought considered that a certain form of planning was necessary for a transitional period following the war. However, whereas the pivotal members of the Freiburg Circles, Erwin von Beckerath, Adolf Lampe and Jens Jessen, favoured productive governmental intervention, i.e. an economy regulated by a relatively strong state, Eucken, Böhm and Constantin von Dietze believed in self-regulating market forces and limited indirect state interference. According to Eucken and his competitive order labelled ordoliberalism, the state must solely create a proper legal environment for the economy and maintain a healthy level of competition through measures that follow market principles. Thus, the paramount means by which economic policy can seek to improve the economy is by improving the institutional framework or &quot;ordo&quot;.

In drawing on both Eucken&#x27;s ordoliberal competitive order and Wilhelm Röpke&#x27;s economic humanism leading to a &quot;Civitas Humana&quot;, the ordoliberal competitive order was further developed by the Cologne school around the economist and anthropologist Alfred Müller-Armack, who therefore coined the term &quot;Soziale Marktwirtschaft&quot; (&quot;social market economy&quot;) in a publication in December 1946. Although it evolved from ordoliberalism as a new variant of neoliberalism, this concept was not identical with the conception of the Freiburg school. In contrast to Eucken, who favoured a strictly procedural or rule-oriented liberalism in which the state solely sets the institutional framework and abstains generally from interference in the market, Müller-Armack emphasised the state&#x27;s responsibility actively to improve the market condition and simultaneously to pursue a social balance. In putting social policy on a par with economic policy, Müller-Armack&#x27;s concept was more emphatic regarding socio-political aims than the ordoliberal economic concept. As an extension of neoliberal thought, the social market economy was deliberately not a defined economic order but an adjustable holistic conception pursuing a complete humanistic societal order as a synthesis of seemingly conflicting objectives, namely economic freedom and social security. Although it is often viewed as a &quot;mélange&quot; of socio-political ideas rather than a precisely outlined theoretical order, the conception possessed an effective slogan, which facilitated its communication to both politics and the public. However, the eventual implementation required not only communication but also political backup.

Müller-Armack&#x27;s concept soon met with the conception of the then Chairman of the &quot;Sonderstelle Geld und Kredit&quot; (Special Bureau for Money and Credit) within the Administration for Finance, i.e. an expert commission preparing the currency reform in the then Anglo-American Bizone, Ludwig Erhard. Although Erhard was rather inclined to Eucken&#x27;s ordoliberal competitive market order and even considered himself an ordoliberal, he was strongly impressed by Müller-Armack most of all not as a theorist but as one who wanted to transfer theory into practice.

When Erhard succeeded Johannes Semmler as Director of the Administration for Economics in the Bizonal Economic Council on 2 March 1948, the social market economy entered the political sphere. Soon after on 21 April 1948, Erhard informed the parliament about his economic policy and introduced the concept of the social market economy. Although there was no unanimous applause, both the liberal democrats and conservatives widely welcomed the transition to a more market-oriented economy. Konrad Adenauer, the chairman of the CDU in the British zone of occupation, invited Erhard to also inform the party members about his socio-economic conception at the party convention in Recklinghausen, Germany on 28 August 1948. In a visionary and stirring speech, entitled &quot;Marktwirtschaft im Streit der Meinungen&quot; (&quot;Market Economy in Dispute&quot;), Erhard defended his concept of the social market economy alluding to the dualism between a controlled economy and a market economy. In view of the upcoming regional and federal elections, Adenauer, who was initially sceptical about Erhard, was not only impressed by the polarising slogan, such as &quot;Controlled or Market Economy&quot;, but also by the efficacy of Erhard and his programme. The foundation for a successful political alliance was laid.
Chancellor Adenauer of the ruling CDU implemented a new novel economic order amalgamating the promotion of free competition with the responsibility of the social government. The &quot;Wirtschaftswunder&quot; or economic miracle of West Germany could not have been brought about without secure social peace in the country. Adenauer&#x27;s program centered on legislation establishing co-determination in the coal and steel industry, the system of employee property formation, the equalization of burdens, the creation of subsidized housing, child benefits, the agricultural Green Plan and the dynamism of pensions. On 20 June 1948, the principles of the social market economy espoused by the CDU became the foundation of modern German economic policy:
After the Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU) also expressed its commitment to a market economy with social balance and the then newly elected Bavarian Minister for Economic Affairs Hanns Seidel advocated Erhard&#x27;s liberal and social economic model at the CSU&#x27;s party convention in Straubing in May 1949, the economic principles elaborated by the Working Committee of the CDU/CSU as liaison body and information centre of the two political parties commonly referred to as the &quot;Union&quot;, centred the social market economy. Finally, these principles were adopted as party platform and manifesto for the upcoming federal elections at the CDU&#x27;s party conference in Düsseldorf on 15 July 1949. In contrast to the previous ideological Ahlener Programm suggesting a rather abstract and anti-materialist &quot;Gemeinwirtschaft&quot;, these&quot;Düsseldorfer Leitsätze&quot; not only provided a concrete, pragmatic and materialist economic programme but also an attractive slogan to reach consensus within the party and the public. While eventually the union of the two recently established political parties (i.e. the CDU and the CSU) possessed a coherent and unifying economic programme enabling a more consistent public front, the oldest German political party, the Social Democratic Party (SPD), led by the advocate of economic planning and extensive socialisation Kurt Schumacher, did not introduce its own economic concept. This not only complicated the parliamentary work of the party in the Economic Council but also limited the public relations of the party as a whole, especially in times of campaigning where the partially complex political programmes were simplified and popularised.

In the run-up to the federal elections in August 1949, the CDU/CSU consequently aligned their party platforms, policies and manifestos and campaigned with the social market economy. In particular, the former advertising manager for consumer goods Ludwig Erhard, who affirmed that he would &quot;go into the upcoming political party clashes with particular energy for the CDU&quot;, realised the potential of subtle and systematic marketing to transform the concept from an economic theory, or even abstract economic policy, into the basis of a political party&#x27;s propaganda and public image that held broad appeal. Eventually, on Sunday 14 August 1949 around 31 million Germans were called to cast a vote for the first German Bundestag and to decide between the social market economy and a controlled economy advocated by the SPD. Of those eligible to vote, 25 million or 78.5 per cent actually went to the ballot boxes and showed a clear commitment to the emerging post-war democracy.

Although the SPD turned out to be the most successful single party by gaining 29.12 per cent of the votes, the CDU/CSU combined attracted more votes, totalling 31 per cent and 139 mandates compared to 131 for the SPD. However, in fact both Volksparteien had suffered large percentage losses over their previous Land election totals by failing to capture a comparable share of the enlarged electorate. The most remarkable advance by winning over a million extra votes and achieving 11.9 per cent of the total votes was that made by the liberal Free Democratic Party (FDP) led by the chairman Theodor Heuss. The economically liberal FDP were in fact the only political party consistently gaining percentage of votes between 1946 and 1949. While these results affirmed the then general pro-market trend in public opinion, eventually, the electorate made its decision contingent on the satisfaction of its practical needs rather than on any particular theoretical economic system. The advantage of the CDU and the CSU lay precisely in the fact that they were quasi-governing across the Bizone and thus increasingly identified with the economic recovery and the improving economic conditions. Although the implementation of the social market economy benefited also from other crucial factors, including the east–west conflict and a favourable political and social climate within Germany and abroad, the stabilising alliance between the conservative and liberal parties, the pro-market composition of the Economic Council and even the Federal Republic&#x27;s own &quot;Grundgesetz&quot; (Basic Law), which stressed individual freedom, human dignity and the subsidiarity of societal organisation, it was also the consistent efforts at political communication of the cooperative and corporate model that led to the implementation and eventual electoral validation of the social market economy in post-war West Germany.

At first controversial, the model became increasingly popular in West Germany and Austria since in both states economic success (&quot;Wirtschaftswunder&quot;) was identified with it. From the 1960s, the social market economy was the main economic model in mainland Western Europe, pursued by administrations of both the centre-right (led by the CDU/CSU) and the centre-left (led by the SPD). The concept of the social market economy is still the common economic basis of major political parties in Germany including the CDU, FDP, and SPD, and a commitment to some form of social market economy is present in Article 3 of the Treaty on European Union.

=== United Kingdom ===

In the United Kingdom, the concept of the social market economy was first introduced by the Conservative politician Keith Joseph. Following World War II, the main political parties agreed on the nationalization of industry and close economic regulation. In the 1970s, Joseph introduced the idea as an alternative to the post-war consensus allowing free markets for competition and innovation whilst the role of government was to help hold the ring, provide infrastructure, maintain a stable currency, a framework of laws, implementation of law and order, provision of a safety net (welfare state), defence of property rights and all other rights involved in the economic process. Throughout his political career, Joseph used his position to restate the principles of the social market economy and re-direct Conservative policy in Britain. Joseph eventually set up a think tank in 1974 to study the model and initially called it the Ludwig Erhard Foundation and Institute for a Social Market Economy before settling on the name Centre for Policy Studies.

=== European Union ===
The Treaty on European Union set the following goals in Article 3(3):
== Misconceptions ==
Although one of the main factors for the emergence of the European model of capitalism was the attempt to ameliorate the conditions of workers under capitalism and thus stave off the emergence of socialism or socialist revolution, American critics and Eurosceptics identify the social market model with the notions of the welfare state and sometimes mistakenly identify it as being socialist.

== Economic performance ==
In 1996, while the US nominal GDP per capita was $29,968, the EU nominal GDP per capita was $19,752. Twenty four years later, in 2020, the US nominal GDP per capita was $63,544 while the EU nominal GDP per capita was $33,928. The EU nominal GDP per capita was about two thirds (66%) of the US one, in 1996. In 2020, the EU nominal GDP per capita dropped from two thirds to about a half (53%) of the US one. In nominal terms, a European citizen has become 20% poorer with respect to a US citizen, over the period 1996-2020. During the 24 years between 1996 and 2020 it has become relatively cheaper for a US citizen to stay in the EU, and it has become relatively more expensive for a EU citizen to stay in the US. Over this period of 24 years, from 1996 to 2020, the consumer price index has increased by 65% in the US, and by 51% in the EU. According to the consumer price index then, despite livelihood expenses have grown 14% less for a EU citizen compared to a US one, in the period 1996-2020, the EU citizen has become, nominally, 20% poorer.

This might however be partly explained by a number of poorer countries joining the EU in the 2000s,and does not account for vastly greater wealth inequality in the USA vs the EU. The World Bank Group wrote the European growth model achieved economic convergence effectively, helped poorer European nations reach the standard of their richer neighbors and become high-income economies. Indermit Gill says: &quot;One can say without exaggeration that Europe invented a ‘convergence machine’, taking in poor countries and helping them become high income economies.&quot;

== See also ==
* Crony capitalism 
* Corporatism 
* Libertarian socialism
* Market socialism
* Rehn–Meidner model
* Keynesian economics
* Neoclassical economics 
* Market failure 
* Market economy 
* Market structure
* Monopoly 
* Mixed economy 
* Social corporatism
* Tripartism
* Types of capitalism
* Welfare capitalism
* Humanistic economics
* Planned economy
== References ==
==Sources==
* 

== Further reading ==

* Allen, Christopher S. &quot;Ideas, institutions and organized capitalism: The German model of political economy twenty years after unification.&quot; &quot;German politics and society&quot; 28.2 (2010): 130-150.
* Nicholls, Anthony James. &quot;Freedom with responsibility: the social market economy in Germany, 1918-1963&quot; (Oxford UP, 2000).
* Ptak, Ralf. &quot;Neoliberalism in Germany: Revisiting the Ordoliberal Foundations of the Social Market Economy.&quot; in &quot;The Road from Mont Pelerin&quot; (Harvard UP, 2009) pp. 98–138.
* U.S. Library of Congress. ; not copyright
== External links ==
* The Social Market Economy – United States Library of Congress
* Essay on Germany&#x27;s Social Market Economy 
* Short Definition from the &quot;Economist&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="4" end="25" title="Social market economy" label="social market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="27" end="31" title="Social market economy" label="SOME"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="48" end="64" title="Social market economy" label="Rhine capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="66" end="89" title="Social market economy" label="Rhine-Alpine capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="95" end="108" title="Social market economy" label="Rhenish model"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="114" end="131" title="Social market economy" label="social capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="170" end="192" title="free-market capitalist" label="free-market capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q828395" start="219" end="234" title="social policies" label="social policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q428148" start="246" end="256" title="regulation" label="regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401418" start="275" end="291" title="fair competition" label="fair competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="326" end="339" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309637" start="373" end="389" title="regulated market" label="regulated market"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="468" end="480" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="488" end="514" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="Christian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="521" end="531" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="532" end="547" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q727480" start="580" end="592" title="Ordoliberalism" label="ordoliberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="594" end="609" title="Social liberalism" label="social liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="614" end="630" title="Social democracy" label="social democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622097" start="680" end="695" title="Freiburg school" label="Freiburg school"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="790" end="803" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="819" end="829" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578779" start="834" end="853" title="socialist economics" label="socialist economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q727480" start="883" end="897" title="ordoliberalism" label="ordoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="949" end="968" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="1540" end="1549" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189280" start="1607" end="1627" title="democratic socialism" label="democratic socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="1632" end="1648" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="1689" end="1698" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="1718" end="1734" title="private property" label="private property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190277" start="1752" end="1768" title="social ownership" label="social ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391448" start="1773" end="1790" title="economic planning" label="economic planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q912512" start="1871" end="1888" title="equal opportunity" label="equal opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054209" start="2201" end="2218" title="Anglo-Saxon model" label="Anglo-Saxon model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551435" start="2391" end="2403" title="German model" label="German model"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="2550" end="2560" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q494792" start="2568" end="2577" title="Third Way" label="Third Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227725" start="2586" end="2595" title="dirigisme" label="dirigisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q290453" start="2607" end="2619" title="polder model" label="polder model"/>
<link wikidata="Q921098" start="2625" end="2637" title="Nordic model" label="Nordic model"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602991" start="2658" end="2688" title="East Asian model of capitalism" label="East Asian model of capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13713793" start="2719" end="2743" title="socialist market economy" label="socialist market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q32492" start="2752" end="2772" title="comparative politics" label="comparative politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="2814" end="2826" title="conservative" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q192886" start="2827" end="2838" title="corporatist" label="corporatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q295470" start="3044" end="3069" title="eco-social market economy" label="eco-social market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="3393" end="3407" title="social welfare" label="social welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="3493" end="3506" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="3529" end="3538" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q428148" start="3594" end="3604" title="regulation" label="regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11480083" start="3609" end="3627" title="Economic interventionism" label="state intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="3704" end="3719" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="3725" end="3734" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="3750" end="3762" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q161837" start="3808" end="3823" title="public services" label="public services"/>
<link wikidata="Q739609" start="3913" end="3932" title="Christian socialism" label="Christian socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q727480" start="4056" end="4070" title="ordoliberalism" label="ordoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622097" start="4130" end="4145" title="Freiburg school" label="Freiburg school"/>
<link wikidata="Q38654" start="4306" end="4319" title="Walter Eucken" label="Walter Eucken"/>
<link wikidata="Q67672" start="4448" end="4468" title="Alfred Müller-Armack" label="Alfred Müller-Armack"/>
<link wikidata="Q62444" start="5203" end="5216" title="Wilhelm Röpke" label="Wilhelm Röpke"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="5646" end="5656" title="neoliberal" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q322996" start="5829" end="5845" title="economic freedom" label="economic freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="5850" end="5865" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q494792" start="6397" end="6406" title="Third Way" label="Third Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q322294" start="6859" end="6866" title="statism" label="statism"/>
<link wikidata="Q57940" start="6935" end="6952" title="Franz Oppenheimer" label="Franz Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496" start="7442" end="7455" title="Ludwig Erhard" label="Ludwig Erhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="7522" end="7539" title="social liberalism" label="social liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="7664" end="7677" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="7699" end="7713" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="7718" end="7734" title="central planning" label="central planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325" start="8077" end="8092" title="Friedrich Hayek" label="Friedrich Hayek"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="8926" end="8963" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="Christian Democratic Union of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q65589" start="9881" end="9897" title="Alexander Rüstow" label="Alexander Rüstow"/>
<link wikidata="Q69289" start="9899" end="9909" title="Franz Böhm" label="Franz Böhm"/>
<link wikidata="Q112158" start="9932" end="9953" title="Constantin von Dietze" label="Constantin von Dietze"/>
<link wikidata="Q161362" start="10281" end="10298" title="Bekennende Kirche" label="Bekennende Kirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q76326" start="10303" end="10322" title="Dietrich Bonhoeffer" label="Dietrich Bonhoeffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q436980" start="10437" end="10450" title="Michel Albert" label="Michel Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="10637" end="10650" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="10655" end="10672" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325" start="10847" end="10866" title="Friedrich Hayek" label="Friedrich von Hayek"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="10871" end="10886" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="10967" end="10982" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213103" start="11142" end="11166" title="Manufacturing Consent" label="functioning of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="11282" end="11299" title="Social capitalism" label="Social capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q428148" start="12538" end="12548" title="Regulation" label="regulative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12581" end="12598" title="Pension#Germany" label="pension insurance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12600" end="12621" title="Universal health care#Germany" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q311255" start="12626" end="12648" title="unemployment insurance" label="unemployment insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="13646" end="13661" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430243" start="13678" end="13690" title="Collectivism and individualism" label="collectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="13724" end="13735" title="Third Reich" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="13887" end="13900" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="13939" end="13954" title="planned economy" label="planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551435" start="14178" end="14190" title="German model" label="German model"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="14302" end="14311" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="14463" end="14480" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="14727" end="14740" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q150652" start="14972" end="14988" title="Kaiser Wilhelm I" label="Kaiser Wilhelm I"/>
<link wikidata="Q727480" start="15531" end="15542" title="Ordoliberalism" label="ordoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622097" start="15543" end="15558" title="Freiburg school" label="Freiburg school"/>
<link wikidata="Q880431" start="15609" end="15625" title="Freiburg Circles" label="Freiburg Circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q38654" start="15802" end="15815" title="Walter Eucken" label="Walter Eucken"/>
<link wikidata="Q69289" start="15820" end="15830" title="Franz Böhm" label="Franz Böhm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16206" end="16225" title="Erwin von Beckerath" label="Erwin von Beckerath"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16227" end="16238" title="Adolf Lampe" label="Adolf Lampe"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16243" end="16254" title=":de:Jens Jessen" label="Jens Jessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q112158" start="16376" end="16397" title="Constantin von Dietze" label="Constantin von Dietze"/>
<link wikidata="Q62444" start="16932" end="16945" title="Wilhelm Röpke" label="Wilhelm Röpke"/>
<link wikidata="Q67672" start="17130" end="17150" title="Alfred Müller-Armack" label="Alfred Müller-Armack"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="17349" end="17362" title="neoliberalism" label="neoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q693911" start="18879" end="18885" title="Bizone" label="Bizone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496" start="18887" end="18900" title="Ludwig Erhard" label="Ludwig Erhard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19188" end="19204" title="Johannes Semmler" label="Johannes Semmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919432" start="19260" end="19284" title="Bizonal Economic Council" label="Bizonal Economic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="19654" end="19669" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q312390" start="20660" end="20677" title="Wirtschaftswunder" label="Wirtschaftswunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="20707" end="20719" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q49000498" start="20859" end="20875" title="co-determination" label="co-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q49763" start="21237" end="21270" title="Christian Social Union in Bavaria" label="Christian Social Union in Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q72562" start="21413" end="21425" title="Hanns Seidel" label="Hanns Seidel"/>
<link wikidata="Q708725" start="21612" end="21619" title="CDU/CSU" label="CDU/CSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="22513" end="22536" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57465" start="22613" end="22628" title="Kurt Schumacher" label="Kurt Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22743" end="22759" title="Economic Council" label="Economic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="23671" end="23680" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="24475" end="24496" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="Free Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594" start="24523" end="24536" title="Theodor Heuss" label="Theodor Heuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="24542" end="24562" title="Economic liberalism" label="economically liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q693911" start="25014" end="25020" title="Bizone" label="Bizone"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="25495" end="25506" title="Grundgesetz" label="Grundgesetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539" start="25691" end="25702" title="cooperative" label="cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q312390" start="25979" end="25996" title="Wirtschaftswunder" label="Wirtschaftswunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="26165" end="26177" title="centre-right" label="centre-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="26207" end="26218" title="centre-left" label="centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647563" start="26470" end="26494" title="Treaty on European Union" label="Treaty on European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="26528" end="26542" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="26613" end="26625" title="Conservative Party (United Kingdom)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q333694" start="26637" end="26649" title="Keith Joseph" label="Keith Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="26661" end="26673" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105865" start="26841" end="26859" title="post-war consensus" label="post-war consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="26869" end="26881" title="free markets" label="free markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054214" start="27548" end="27573" title="Centre for Policy Studies" label="Centre for Policy Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647563" start="27603" end="27627" title="Treaty on European Union" label="Treaty on European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="27942" end="27954" title="Eurosceptics" label="Eurosceptics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="28012" end="28025" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q180687" start="28878" end="28898" title="consumer price index" label="consumer price index"/>
<link wikidata="Q320863" start="29343" end="29359" title="World Bank Group" label="World Bank Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q116442353" start="29545" end="29558" title="Indermit Gill" label="Indermit Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937479" start="29746" end="29762" title="Crony capitalism" label="Crony capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192886" start="29766" end="29777" title="Corporatism" label="Corporatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852084" start="29781" end="29802" title="Libertarian socialism" label="Libertarian socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q268919" start="29805" end="29821" title="Market socialism" label="Market socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139011" start="29824" end="29842" title="Rehn–Meidner model" label="Rehn–Meidner model"/>
<link wikidata="Q83937" start="29845" end="29864" title="Keynesian economics" label="Keynesian economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q60571" start="29867" end="29889" title="Neoclassical economics" label="Neoclassical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q622657" start="29893" end="29907" title="Market failure" label="Market failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="29911" end="29925" title="Market economy" label="Market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q877707" start="29929" end="29945" title="Market structure" label="Market structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="29948" end="29956" title="Monopoly" label="Monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="29960" end="29973" title="Mixed economy" label="Mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15718641" start="29977" end="29995" title="Social corporatism" label="Social corporatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547600" start="29998" end="30008" title="Tripartism" label="Tripartism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="30011" end="30030" title="Types of capitalism" label="Types of capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q488399" start="30033" end="30051" title="Welfare capitalism" label="Welfare capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939408" start="30054" end="30074" title="Humanistic economics" label="Humanistic economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="30077" end="30092" title="Planned economy" label="Planned economy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610897" wikidata="Q1492817" url="?curid=610897" title="French drain">
<text>A French drain (also known by other names including trench drain, blind drain, rubble drain, and rock drain) is a trench filled with gravel or rock, or both, with or without a perforated pipe that redirects surface water and groundwater away from an area. The perforated pipe is called a &quot;weeping tile&quot; (also called a &quot;drain tile&quot; or &quot;perimeter tile&quot;). When the pipe is draining, it &quot;weeps&quot;, or exudes liquids. It was named during a time period when drainpipes were made from terracotta tiles.

French drains are primarily used to prevent ground and surface water from penetrating or damaging building foundations and as an alternative to open ditches or storm sewers for streets and highways. Alternatively, French drains may be used to distribute water, such as a septic drain field at the outlet of a typical septic tank sewage treatment system. French drains are also used behind retaining walls to relieve ground water pressure.

== History ==

The earliest forms of French drains were simple ditches that were pitched from a high area to a lower one and filled with gravel. These may have been invented in France, but Henry Flagg French (1813–1885) of Concord, Massachusetts, a lawyer and Assistant U.S. Treasury Secretary, described and popularized them in &quot;Farm Drainage&quot; (1859). French&#x27;s own drains were made of sections of ordinary roofing tile that were laid with a gap in between the sections to admit water. Later, specialized drain tiles were designed with perforations. To prevent clogging, the size of the gravel varied from coarse in the center to fine on the outside and was selected contingent on the gradation of the surrounding soil. The sizes of particles were critical to prevent the surrounding soil from washing into the pores, i. e., voids between the particles of gravel and thereby clogging the drain. The later development of geotextiles greatly simplified this technique.

Subsurface drainage systems have been used for centuries. They have many forms that are similar in design and function to the traditional French drain.

== Structure ==

Ditches are dug manually or by a trencher. An inclination of 1 in 100 to 1 in 200 is typical. Lining the bottom of the ditch with clay or plastic pipe increases the volume of water that can flow through the drain. Modern French drain systems are made of perforated pipe, for example weeping tile surrounded by sand or gravel, and geotextile or landscaping textile. Landscaping textiles prevent migration of the drainage material and prevent soil and roots from entering and clogging the pipe. The perforated pipe provides a minor subterranean volume of storage for water, yet the prime purpose is drainage of the area along the full length of the pipe via its perforations and to discharge any surplus water at its terminus. The direction of percolation depends on the relative conditions within and without the pipe.

== Variants ==

Variations of French drains include:

; Curtain drain: This form comprises a perforated pipe surrounded by gravel. It is similar to the traditional French drain, the gravel or aggregate material of which extends to the surface of the ground and is uncovered to permit collection of water, except that a curtain drain does not extend to the surface and instead is covered by soil, in which turf grass or other vegetation may be planted, so that the drain is concealed.
; Filter drain: This form drains groundwater.
; Collector drain: This form combines drainage of groundwater and interception of surface water or run off water, and may connect into the underground pipes so as to rapidly divert surface water; it preferably has a cleanable filter to avoid migration of surface debris to the subterranean area that would clog the pipes.
; Interceptor drain
; Dispersal drain: This form distributes waste water that a septic tank emits.
; Fin drain: This form comprises a subterranean perforated pipe from which extends perpendicularly upward along its length a thin vertical section, denominated the &quot;fin&quot;, of aggregate material for drainage to the pipe. The length is . This form is less expensive to build than a traditional French drain.

A French drain can end, i.e., open at a downhill slope, dry well, or rain garden where plants absorb and hold the drained water. This is useful if city water systems or other wastewater areas are unavailable.

Depending on the expected level and volume of rainwater or runoff, French drains can be widened or also fitted on two or three underground drainpipes. Multiple pipes also provide for redundancy, in case one pipe becomes overfilled or clogged by a rupture or defect in the piping. A pipe might become overfilled if it is on a side of the drain which receives a much larger volume of water, such as one pipe being closer to an uphill slope, or closer to a roofline that drips near the French drain. When a pipe becomes overfilled, water can seep sideways into a parallel pipe, as a form of load-balancing, so that neither pipe becomes slowed by air bubbles, as might happen in a full-pipe with no upper air space.

Filters are made from permeable materials, typically non-woven fabric, may include sand and gravel, placed around the drainage pipe or envelope to restrict migration of from the surrounding soils. Envelopes are the gravel, stone, rock, or surrounding pipe. These are permeable materials placed around pipe or drainage products to improve flow conditions in the area immediately around the drain and for improving bedding and structural backfill conditions.

== Installation ==

French drains are often installed around a home foundation in two ways:

* Buried around the external side of the foundation wall
* Installed underneath the basement floor on the inside perimeter of the basement

In most homes, an external French drain or drain tile is installed around the foundation walls before the soil is backfilled. It is laid on the bottom of the excavated area, and a layer of stone is laid on top. A filter fabric is often laid on top of the stone to keep fine sediments and particles from entering. Once the drain is installed, the area is backfilled, and the system is left alone until it clogs.

== Other uses ==

French drains can be used in farmers&#x27; fields for the tile drainage of waterlogged fields. Such fields are called &quot;tiled&quot;. Weeping tiles can be used anywhere that soil needs to be drained.

Weeping tiles are used for the opposite reason in septic drain fields for septic tanks. Clarified sewage from the septic tank is fed into weeping tiles buried shallowly in the drain field. The weeping tile spreads the liquid throughout the drain field.

== Legislation ==

In the US, municipalities may require permits for building drainage systems as federal law requires water sent to storm drains to be free of specific contaminants and sediment.

In the UK, local authorities may have specific requirements for the outfall of a French drain into a ditch or watercourse.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 

== References ==

== External links ==
* Non-residential French drains are regulated in the U.S. – US EPA
* How to Install French Drains ()
* What are French drains? Why are they called French drains?</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1492817" start="2" end="14" title="French drain" label="French drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492817" start="52" end="64" title="French drain" label="trench drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492817" start="66" end="77" title="French drain" label="blind drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492817" start="79" end="91" title="French drain" label="rubble drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492817" start="97" end="107" title="French drain" label="rock drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852785" start="114" end="120" title="trench" label="trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="133" end="139" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="143" end="147" title="rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q752112" start="207" end="220" title="surface water" label="surface water"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="225" end="236" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="516" end="526" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q191360" start="633" end="652" title="building foundation" label="building foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256521" start="806" end="824" title="septic drain field" label="septic drain field"/>
<link wikidata="Q386300" start="852" end="863" title="septic tank" label="septic tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076291" start="924" end="938" title="retaining wall" label="retaining wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1152" end="1158" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720981" start="1164" end="1182" title="Henry Flagg French" label="Henry Flagg French"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="1198" end="1220" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889546" start="1235" end="1268" title="United States Assistant Secretary of the Treasury" label="Assistant U.S. Treasury Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="1704" end="1708" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048148" start="1910" end="1920" title="geotextile" label="geotextile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671268" start="2161" end="2169" title="trencher (machine)" label="trencher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048148" start="2458" end="2468" title="geotextile" label="geotextile"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="2569" end="2573" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="3464" end="3475" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="3527" end="3538" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q752112" start="3559" end="3572" title="surface water" label="surface water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110023" start="4270" end="4278" title="dry well" label="dry well"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162531" start="4283" end="4294" title="rain garden" label="rain garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q638703" start="5190" end="5206" title="non-woven textiles" label="non-woven fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q56875480" start="6316" end="6329" title="tile drainage" label="tile drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256521" start="6512" end="6530" title="septic drain field" label="septic drain field"/>
<link wikidata="Q386300" start="6536" end="6547" title="septic tank" label="septic tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966166" start="6560" end="6566" title="sewage" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006612" start="6814" end="6825" title="federal law" label="federal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139766" start="6849" end="6860" title="storm drain" label="storm drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q47521" start="7023" end="7034" title="watercourse" label="watercourse"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610899" wikidata="Q78616" url="?curid=610899" title="Wolfgang Schneiderhan (violinist)">
<text>Wolfgang Eduard Schneiderhan (28 May 191518 May 2002) was an Austrian classical violinist.

==Career==
Schneiderhan was born in Vienna. From the age of five, he was recognised as a child prodigy. After briefly studying with Otakar Ševčík in Písek, he studied with Julius Winkler in Vienna. At age 10 he publicly performed Bach&#x27;s Chaconne in D minor. The next year he made his debut in Copenhagen playing the Mendelssohn Violin Concerto. He lived in England for some time from 1929, where he appeared in concerts with artists such as Maria Jeritza, Feodor Chaliapin, Jan Kiepura and Paul Robeson.

He returned to Vienna to become the first Concertmaster of the Vienna Symphony Orchestra from 1933 to 1937, and from 1937 to 1951 led the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra. He nevertheless maintained his career as a soloist in concerts and recordings. He joined the Nazi party in 1940.

He was the soloist in the Viennese premiere of Elgar&#x27;s Violin Concerto in 1947. He formed a string quartet. After Georg Kulenkampff&#x27;s death in 1948, he replaced Kulenkampff in a famous piano trio with Edwin Fischer and Enrico Mainardi.

In September 1952 he made his benchmark Deutsche Grammophon recordings of all ten Beethoven violin sonatas with Wilhelm Kempff in the Konzerthaus, Mozartsaal, Vienna.

He held teaching posts in Salzburg, Vienna and Lucerne. In 1956 he founded the Lucerne Festival Strings together with Rudolf Baumgartner. He gave the 1959 premiere of his friend Karl Amadeus Hartmann&#x27;s revised &quot;Concerto funebre&quot;.

==Family==
Schneiderhan was married to the soprano Irmgard Seefried from 1948 until her death in 1988; they had three daughters together, including actress Mona Seefried (born 1957), who uses her mother&#x27;s maiden name professionally.

==Death==
He died in his native Vienna in 2002, ten days before his 87th birthday.

==References==
== External links ==
* Independent obituary
* Telegraph obituary
* Photo, 1970 Wolfgang Schneiderhan on Southern Africa Tour dedicated to tour organiser Hans Adler.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q78616" start="0" end="28" title="Wolfgang Schneiderhan (violinist)" label="Wolfgang Eduard Schneiderhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="61" end="68" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="70" end="79" title="classical music" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="80" end="86" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="128" end="134" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q726973" start="224" end="237" title="Otakar Ševčík" label="Otakar Ševčík"/>
<link wikidata="Q158245" start="241" end="246" title="Písek" label="Písek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="322" end="326" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q625094" start="334" end="353" title="Partita for Violin No. 2 (Bach)" label="Chaconne in D minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="390" end="400" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="413" end="424" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054060" start="425" end="440" title="Violin Concerto (Mendelssohn)" label="Violin Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q78590" start="538" end="551" title="Maria Jeritza" label="Maria Jeritza"/>
<link wikidata="Q189164" start="553" end="569" title="Feodor Chaliapin" label="Feodor Chaliapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q713265" start="571" end="582" title="Jan Kiepura" label="Jan Kiepura"/>
<link wikidata="Q273233" start="587" end="599" title="Paul Robeson" label="Paul Robeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q686887" start="665" end="690" title="Vienna Symphony Orchestra" label="Vienna Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q154685" start="740" end="769" title="Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q179631" start="932" end="937" title="Edward Elgar" label="Elgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991885" start="945" end="960" title="Violin Concerto (Elgar)" label="Violin Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="982" end="996" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q470033" start="1004" end="1021" title="Georg Kulenkampff" label="Georg Kulenkampff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414262" start="1080" end="1090" title="piano trio" label="piano trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q123249" start="1096" end="1109" title="Edwin Fischer" label="Edwin Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343841" start="1114" end="1129" title="Enrico Mainardi" label="Enrico Mainardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q168407" start="1172" end="1191" title="Deutsche Grammophon" label="Deutsche Grammophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="1214" end="1223" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q159946" start="1244" end="1258" title="Wilhelm Kempff" label="Wilhelm Kempff"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="1326" end="1334" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4191" start="1347" end="1354" title="Lucerne" label="Lucerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q115773" start="1379" end="1403" title="Lucerne Festival Strings" label="Lucerne Festival Strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q115777" start="1418" end="1436" title="Rudolf Baumgartner" label="Rudolf Baumgartner"/>
<link wikidata="Q366100" start="1478" end="1499" title="Karl Amadeus Hartmann" label="Karl Amadeus Hartmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991743" start="1521" end="1537" title="Concerto funebre" label="Concerto funebre"/>
<link wikidata="Q30903" start="1589" end="1596" title="soprano" label="soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q64381" start="1597" end="1613" title="Irmgard Seefried" label="Irmgard Seefried"/>
<link wikidata="Q85247" start="1702" end="1715" title="Mona Seefried" label="Mona Seefried"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610900" wikidata="Q2038222" url="?curid=610900" title="Tam o' shanter (cap)">
<text>A tam o&#x27; shanter (in the British military often abbreviated to ToS) or &quot;tammie&quot; is a name given to the traditional Scottish bonnet worn by men. The name derives from Tam o&#x27; Shanter, the eponymous hero of the 1790 Robert Burns poem.

==Description==

The tam o&#x27; shanter is a flat bonnet, originally made of wool hand-knitted in one piece, stretched on a wooden disc to give the distinctive flat shape, and subsequently felted. The earliest forms of these caps, known as a blue bonnet from their typical colour, were made by bonnet-makers in Scotland. By the year 1599 five bonnet-makers&#x27; guilds had formed in cities around the country: Edinburgh, Aberdeen, Perth, Stirling and Glasgow. At the end of the 16th century, it was said that the Scottish caps were the normal fashion of men and servants, and they remained so throughout the 17th century.

Similar in outline to the various types of flat bonnet common in northwestern Europe during the 16th century, the later tam o&#x27; shanter is distinguished by the woollen ball or toorie decorating the centre of the crown; the name itself did not enter common usage until the early 19th century, subsequent to the popularity of Burns&#x27; poem. The term came to denote a hat, usually associated with Scottish military regiments, derived from the old bonnet, along with the Glengarry and the Balmoral bonnets. The Balmoral was sometimes simply described as synonymous with the tam o&#x27; shanter.

Before the introduction of inexpensive synthetic dyes in the mid-19th century, the Scottish knitted bonnet was made only in colours easily available from natural dyes, particularly woad or indigo (hence &quot;blue bonnet&quot;). Since that time the tam o&#x27; shanter has been produced in a wider range of fabrics, such as serge, as single colours, as well as tartan. Women have also adopted a form of this hat, known as a &quot;tammy&quot; or &quot;tam&quot;.

==Military use==

In the First World War, a khaki Balmoral bonnet was introduced in 1915 for wear in the trenches by Scottish infantry serving on the Western Front. This came to be known as the &quot;bonnet, tam o&#x27; shanter&quot;, later abbreviated among military personnel to &quot;ToS&quot;. It replaced the Glengarry – which was the regulation bonnet worn by Scottish troops with khaki field dress at the start of the war. Originally knitted, the military tam o&#x27; shanter subsequently came to be constructed from separate pieces of khaki serge cloth.

Today, the Royal Regiment of Scotland and Scottish regiments of the Canadian Army continue to wear the ToS as undress and working headgear. The various battalions of the Royal Regiment of Scotland identify themselves by wearing distinctive coloured hackles on their bonnets. The Black Watch, 3rd Battalion, Royal Regiment of Scotland wear a red hackle in their ToS, as do soldiers of The Black Watch of Canada.

Some regiments of the Canadian Army wear different coloured toories: the Royal Highland Fusiliers of Canada have traditionally worn dark green; The North Nova Scotia Highlanders wore red toories during the Second World War and continues to do as does the 48th Highlander’s of Canada; and the Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry Highlanders wore blue. Most regiments, however, wear a khaki toorie, matching the bonnet. In many Canadian regiments it is traditional for soldiers to wear a ToS, while officers (and in some cases senior non-commissioned officers) wear the balmorals instead. The tam o&#x27;shanter is generally in rough khaki wool, while the balmoral is in finer quality doe-skin of a pale tan or grey shade.

The tam o&#x27; shanter was traditionally worn by various regiments of the Australian Army which have a Scottish connection. B (Scottish) Company 5th/6th Battalion, Royal Victoria Regiment wore both a khaki and blue bonnet at various stages. It appears this has now been superseded by the Glengarry.

==Police bands==

Hong Kong Police Band bagpipes section wears a black and red version.

==Academic tam==
The velvet academic tam worn with a tassel is part of the ceremonial dress used at many universities to distinguish those holding a doctoral degree (e.g. Ph.D., Ed.D.) from those holding other academic degrees. Although referred to as a &quot;tam&quot;, the academic tam derives from the Tudor bonnet rather than the Scottish tam o&#x27; shanter, and the cap is constructed of two pieces of either six- or eight-pointed cuts of fabric attached to a headband rather than the pie segments used in a tam o&#x27; shanter.

==Fashion tam==
The tam, or tam cap, became a fashionable women&#x27;s accessory from the early 1920s and was derived from the tam o&#x27; shanter. It followed the trends for closer fitting hats and for borrowing from men&#x27;s fashion.

==See also==
*Bonnet (disambiguation)
*Flat cap
*Glengarry
*Balmoral bonnet
*Caubeen
*Scotch bonnet

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2038222" start="2" end="21" title="Tam o&amp;#x27; shanter (cap)" label="tam o&amp;#x27; shanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038222" start="68" end="71" title="Tam o&amp;#x27; shanter (cap)" label="ToS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980542" start="181" end="200" title="Tam o&amp;#x27; Shanter (poem)" label="Tam o&amp;#x27; Shanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="233" end="245" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q189964" start="443" end="447" title="felt" label="felt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134958" start="496" end="507" title="blue bonnet (hat)" label="blue bonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="565" end="573" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="617" end="622" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1058" end="1064" title="Pom-pon#Toorie" label="toorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321936" start="1352" end="1361" title="Glengarry" label="Glengarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q285487" start="1370" end="1385" title="Balmoral bonnet" label="Balmoral bonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q212547" start="1658" end="1662" title="woad" label="woad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967009" start="1666" end="1672" title="indigo" label="indigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216797" start="1838" end="1844" title="tartan" label="tartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1965" end="1980" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q285487" start="1990" end="2005" title="Balmoral bonnet" label="Balmoral bonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321936" start="2254" end="2263" title="Glengarry" label="Glengarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038782" start="2514" end="2540" title="Royal Regiment of Scotland" label="Royal Regiment of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438113" start="2545" end="2563" title="Scottish regiments" label="Scottish regiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="2571" end="2584" title="Canadian Army" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038782" start="2673" end="2699" title="Royal Regiment of Scotland" label="Royal Regiment of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755375" start="2752" end="2758" title="hackle" label="hackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568897" start="2782" end="2793" title="Black Watch" label="Black Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038782" start="2810" end="2836" title="Royal Regiment of Scotland" label="Royal Regiment of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520022" start="2887" end="2912" title="The Black Watch of Canada" label="The Black Watch of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="2937" end="2950" title="Canadian Army" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761688" start="2988" end="3022" title="Royal Highland Fusiliers of Canada" label="Royal Highland Fusiliers of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344144" start="3059" end="3092" title="The North Nova Scotia Highlanders" label="The North Nova Scotia Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3121" end="3137" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499849" start="3207" end="3249" title="Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry Highlanders" label="Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="3407" end="3415" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="3442" end="3466" title="non-commissioned officer" label="non-commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q285487" start="3478" end="3487" title="Balmoral bonnet" label="balmorals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641208" start="3778" end="3820" title="5th/6th Battalion, Royal Victoria Regiment" label="5th/6th Battalion, Royal Victoria Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25859" start="3951" end="3967" title="Hong Kong Police" label="Hong Kong Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851334" start="4327" end="4339" title="Tudor bonnet" label="Tudor bonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q892790" start="4811" end="4834" title="Bonnet (disambiguation)" label="Bonnet (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15603247" start="4836" end="4844" title="Flat cap" label="Flat cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321936" start="4846" end="4855" title="Glengarry" label="Glengarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q285487" start="4857" end="4872" title="Balmoral bonnet" label="Balmoral bonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921150" start="4874" end="4881" title="Caubeen" label="Caubeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q466854" start="4883" end="4896" title="Scotch bonnet" label="Scotch bonnet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610902" wikidata="Q2564199" url="?curid=610902" title="West Coast Hockey League">
<text>The West Coast Hockey League (WCHL) was a professional minor ice hockey league active in the Western United States from 1995 to 2003. The number of teams ranged from six to nine. The teams were located in Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Nevada and Washington.

The surviving teams of the West Coast Hockey League are part of the ECHL.

== History ==

===Beginnings===
The WCHL was a successor organization of the semi-professional Pacific Hockey League. Three former PHL teams, the Alaska Gold Kings (Fairbanks, Alaska), Anchorage Aces (Anchorage, Alaska), and Fresno Falcons (Fresno, California) were joined by the Bakersfield Fog (Bakersfield, California), Reno Renegades (Reno, Nevada) and San Diego Gulls (San Diego, California) to become the founding member teams of the WCHL, with British Columbia businessman Bruce Taylor recognized as the league&#x27;s founding father. The league retained these teams in a single division for its first two seasons, and played regular season games against a &quot;Red Army&quot; team from Russia (CKA-Amur, now Amur Khabarovsk) for the 1995–96 and 1996–97 seasons.

===Expansion===
In the league&#x27;s third season in 1997–98 the Alaska Gold Kings suspended operations. The remaining teams were joined by the expansion Idaho Steelheads (Boise, Idaho), Phoenix Mustangs (Phoenix, Arizona), Tacoma Sabercats (Tacoma, Washington) and Tucson Gila Monsters (Tucson, Arizona). The larger league was then split into Northern and Southern Divisions. The teams in Reno and Fresno changed their names to the Reno Rage and Fresno&#x27;s Fighting Falcons respectively.

The following season the Gold Kings relocated to Colorado Springs, Colorado, and rejoined the league as the Colorado Gold Kings. The Fresno team reverted to its original name and the Bakersfield Fog renamed themselves the Bakersfield Condors. However, the Reno Rage ceased operations before the 1998–99 season while the Tucson Gila Monsters folded 21 games into the season. The WCHL then remained stable as an eight-team league after Tucson&#x27;s departure and through the 1999–2000 season.

In 2000–01, the Long Beach Ice Dogs of the International Hockey League joined the WCHL.

===Decline and absorption into ECHL===
The league began to contract in 2001–02 after the Phoenix Mustangs folded before the season. Before the 2002–03 season, the WCHL&#x27;s last as an independent league, the Tacoma Sabercats and Colorado Gold Kings folded. The WCHL played as a single-table league in 2002–03 as it had its first two seasons.

In 2003, the WCHL was absorbed by the East Coast Hockey League. In a change reflective of the nationwide presence of the ECHL, the East Coast Hockey League changed its name to &quot;ECHL&quot; on May 19, 2003, as a direct result of the absorption. The six remaining WCHL teams (Alaska, Bakersfield, Fresno, Idaho, Long Beach and San Diego) joined the West and Pacific Divisions of the ECHL&#x27;s National Conference, as did a planned WCHL team in Las Vegas, Nevada, which became the Las Vegas Wranglers. The Anchorage Aces renamed themselves the Alaska Aces before joining the ECHL.

===Legacy===

With the 2015 move of the Bakersfield Condors to Norfolk, Virginia, to become the Norfolk Admirals and the Alaska Aces folding in 2017, only one former WCHL team, the Idaho Steelheads, remain active in the ECHL in their original market. Efforts to resurrect the Reno Renegades/Rage organization as an ECHL team have been repeatedly delayed by problems in finding a suitable home arena in the Reno area. However, since 2003 former WCHL teams have accounted for five Kelly Cup championships in the ECHL, Idaho in 2004 and 2007, and Alaska in 2006, 2011 and 2014. The ECHL&#x27;s Bruce Taylor Trophy, presented to the Western Conference playoff champion, is named in recognition of the WCHL&#x27;s founding father.

==Teams==


* Alaska (Fairbanks) Gold Kings (1995–1997)
* Anchorage Aces (1995–2003)
* Bakersfield Fog (1995–1998)
* Bakersfield Condors (1998–2003)
* Colorado (Colorado Springs) Gold Kings (1998–2002)
* Fresno Falcons (1995–2003, known as &quot;Fresno&#x27;s Fighting Falcons&quot; during the 1997–98 season)
* Idaho Steelheads (1997–2003)
* Long Beach Ice Dogs (2000–2003)
* Phoenix Mustangs (1997–2001)
* Reno Renegades (1995–1997)
* Reno Rage (1997–1998)
* San Diego Gulls (1995–2003)
* Tacoma Sabercats (1997–2002)
* Tucson Gila Monsters (1997–1999)

===Timeline===
==Taylor Cup==
The WCHL&#x27;s championship trophy was known as the Taylor Cup. It was named after the founder of the league, Bruce Taylor, who also originally owned three of the six founding teams (Bakersfield, Fresno and Reno). The San Diego Gulls were by far the most successful postseason team in WCHL history, winning five of the eight Taylor Cup championships awarded.
===Taylor Cups by team===
==See also==
* List of developmental and minor sports leagues
* List of ice hockey leagues
* Minor league
* Sports league attendances

==References==
==External links==
* WCHL standings</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2564199" start="4" end="28" title="West Coast Hockey League" label="West Coast Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564199" start="30" end="34" title="West Coast Hockey League" label="WCHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="61" end="71" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="93" end="114" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="205" end="211" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="213" end="220" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="222" end="232" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="234" end="242" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="244" end="249" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="251" end="257" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="262" end="272" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="343" end="347" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q22024468" start="445" end="466" title="Pacific Hockey League (1994)" label="Pacific Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q280015" start="496" end="513" title="Alaska Gold Kings" label="Alaska Gold Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q79638" start="515" end="532" title="Fairbanks, Alaska" label="Fairbanks, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q478447" start="535" end="549" title="Alaska Aces (ECHL)" label="Anchorage Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="551" end="568" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455715" start="575" end="589" title="Fresno Falcons" label="Fresno Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q43301" start="591" end="609" title="Fresno, California" label="Fresno, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826186" start="630" end="645" title="Bakersfield Fog" label="Bakersfield Fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q49256" start="647" end="658" title="Bakersfield, California" label="Bakersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144217" start="673" end="687" title="Reno Renegades" label="Reno Renegades"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="689" end="701" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555185" start="707" end="722" title="San Diego Gulls (1995–2006)" label="San Diego Gulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="724" end="745" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="1045" end="1051" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q481725" start="1067" end="1082" title="Amur Khabarovsk" label="Amur Khabarovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q954446" start="1276" end="1292" title="Idaho Steelheads" label="Idaho Steelheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q35775" start="1294" end="1306" title="Boise, Idaho" label="Boise, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673288" start="1309" end="1325" title="Phoenix Mustangs" label="Phoenix Mustangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="1327" end="1343" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386986" start="1346" end="1362" title="Tacoma Sabercats" label="Tacoma Sabercats"/>
<link wikidata="Q199797" start="1364" end="1382" title="Tacoma, Washington" label="Tacoma, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784317" start="1388" end="1408" title="Tucson Gila Monsters" label="Tucson Gila Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="1410" end="1425" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="1664" end="1690" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869301" start="2124" end="2143" title="Long Beach Ice Dogs" label="Long Beach Ice Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666624" start="2151" end="2178" title="International Hockey League (1945–2001)" label="International Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="2580" end="2604" title="ECHL" label="East Coast Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="2990" end="2999" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539003" start="3026" end="3045" title="Las Vegas Wranglers" label="Las Vegas Wranglers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="3190" end="3207" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19577445" start="3223" end="3239" title="Norfolk Admirals (ECHL)" label="Norfolk Admirals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517274" start="3606" end="3615" title="Kelly Cup" label="Kelly Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q280015" start="3868" end="3897" title="Colorado Gold Kings" label="Alaska (Fairbanks) Gold Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q478447" start="3912" end="3926" title="Alaska Aces (ECHL)" label="Anchorage Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826186" start="3941" end="3956" title="Bakersfield Fog" label="Bakersfield Fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826186" start="3971" end="3990" title="Bakersfield Condors (1998–2015)" label="Bakersfield Condors"/>
<link wikidata="Q280015" start="4005" end="4043" title="Colorado Gold Kings" label="Colorado (Colorado Springs) Gold Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455715" start="4058" end="4072" title="Fresno Falcons" label="Fresno Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q954446" start="4166" end="4182" title="Idaho Steelheads" label="Idaho Steelheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869301" start="4197" end="4216" title="Long Beach Ice Dogs" label="Long Beach Ice Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673288" start="4231" end="4247" title="Phoenix Mustangs" label="Phoenix Mustangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144217" start="4262" end="4276" title="Reno Renegades" label="Reno Renegades"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144217" start="4291" end="4300" title="Reno Rage" label="Reno Rage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555185" start="4315" end="4330" title="San Diego Gulls (1995-2006)" label="San Diego Gulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386986" start="4345" end="4361" title="Tacoma Sabercats" label="Tacoma Sabercats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784317" start="4376" end="4396" title="Tucson Gila Monsters" label="Tucson Gila Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616147" start="4841" end="4887" title="List of developmental and minor sports leagues" label="List of developmental and minor sports leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863383" start="4890" end="4916" title="List of ice hockey leagues" label="List of ice hockey leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370066" start="4919" end="4931" title="Minor league" label="Minor league"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245667" start="4934" end="4959" title="Sports league attendances" label="Sports league attendances"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610907" wikidata="Q575249" url="?curid=610907" title="Alalakh">
<text>Alalakh (&quot;Tell Atchana&quot;; Hittite: Alalaḫ) is an ancient archaeological site approximately northeast of Antakya (historic Antioch) in what is now Turkey&#x27;s Hatay Province. It flourished as an urban settlement in the Middle and Late Bronze Age, c. 2000-1200 BC. The city contained palaces, temples, private houses and fortifications. The remains of Alalakh have formed an extensive mound covering around 22 hectares. In the Late Bronze Age, Alalakh was the capital of the local kingdom of Mukiš.

The first palace was built around 2000 BC, and likely destroyed in the 12th century BC. The site was thought to have never been reoccupied after that, but archaeologist Timothy Harrison showed, in a (2022) lecture&#x27;s graphic, it was inhabited also in Amuq Phases N-O, Iron Age, c. 1200-600 BC.

== Location ==
It is located in Amik Valley, about from the modern Syria–Turkey border. Lake Amik was an ancient lake in this area.

Human settlements in Amik Valley goes back to the Neolithic period as early as 6000 BC. Many other ancient archaeological sites are located in this area, such as Tell Tayinat, which was recently excavated. Tell Atchana is located only about 700m southeast of Tell Tayinat within the flood plain of the Orontes River, where the river enters the Amuq Plain. Chatal Huyuk (Amuq) is another major site that is located in the area.

==History==
Alalakh was founded by the Amorites (in the territory of present-day Turkey) during the early Middle Bronze Age in the late 3rd millennium BC. The first palace was built c. 2000 BC, contemporary with the Third Dynasty of Ur.

Chronology of Alalakh, related to other sites in the Amuq Lake region, is as follows:

===Middle Bronze Age===
According to recent excavations led by archaeologists K. A. Yener and Murat Akar, the whole Middle Bronze Age in Alalakh lasted c. 2000-1650 BC, as part of a re-urbanization period in Anatolia as well as in the Near East and Levant. 

Middle Bronze Age is divided in two periods: Middle Bronze Age I (c. 2000-1800 BC), and Middle Bronze Age II (c. 1800-1600 BC).

====Alalakh VIII====
In the early Middle Bronze II (c. 1800 BC), in Yener&#x27;s Period 8 (Woolley&#x27;s level VIII), in which a palace and a temple, as well as intramural burials, were found. At the time Alalakh was a vassal of the Kingdom of Yamhad.

The written history of the site may begin under the name Alakhtum, with tablets from Mari in the 18th century BC, when the city was part of the kingdom of Yamhad (modern Aleppo). A dossier of tablets records that King Sumu-Epuh sold the territory of Alakhtum to his son-in-law Zimri-Lim, king of Mari, retaining for himself overlordship. After the fall of Mari in 1765 BC, Alalakh seems to have come under the rule of Yamhad again.

====Alalakh VII====
In the late MB II, in Period 7 (Level VII), was still a vassalage of Yamhad, and was handed over to the Yarim-Lim Dynasty. There was a later palace, an archive, some temples, a city wall, a tripartite gate, households, workshops, extramural and intramural burials were excavated. In the palace of Level VII, during 2015-2019 excavations, more than 70 wall painting fragments were found and radiocarbon-dated to c. 1780-1680 BC.

King Abba-El I of Aleppo (c. 1750 BC) bestowed the city upon his brother Yarim-Lim of Alalakh, to replace the city of Irridu. Abba-El had destroyed the latter after it revolted against Yarim-Lim. In the 18th to 17th centuries period transition, Alalakh was under the reign of Yarim-Lim, and was the capital of the city-state of Mukiš and vassal to Yamhad, centered in modern Aleppo.

Under the hegemony of Aleppo, a dynasty of Yarim-Lim&#x27;s descendants was founded; it lasted to the second half of 17th century BC. At that time Alalakh was destroyed, possibly by Hittite king Hattusili I, in the second year of his campaigns. As per middle chronology and publications by archaeologist K. A. Yener, destruction of Alalakh can be located as a &quot;Fire and Conflagration&quot; around 1650 BC. A recent Yener&#x27;s paper considers Palace&#x27;s Level VII destruction by Hattusili I to have taken place in his second year, in 1628 BC.

===Late Bronze Age===
Late Bronze Age is divided in two periods: Late Bronze Age I (c. 1600-1400 BC), and Late Bronze Age II (c. 1400-1300 BC). The former was characterized by being a Mittani vassal territory, and the latter by Hittite occupation.

====Alalakh IV====
After a hiatus of less than a century, written records for Alalakh resume. At this time, it was again the seat of a local dynasty. Most of the information about the founding of this dynasty comes from a statue inscribed with what seems to be an autobiography of the dynasty&#x27;s founding king, Idrimi. According to his inscription, in the 15th century BC, Idrimi, son of the king of Yamhad, may have fled his city for Emar, traveled to Alalakh, gained control of the city, and been recognized as a vassal by Barattarna. The inscription records Idrimi&#x27;s vicissitudes: after his family had been forced to flee to Emar, he left them and joined the &quot;Hapiru people&quot; in &quot;Ammija in the land of Canaan.&quot; The Hapiru recognized him as the &quot;son of their overlord&quot; and &quot;gathered around him&quot;; after living among them for seven years, he led his Habiru warriors in a successful attack by sea on Alalakh, where he became king. The statue mentions an heir, Addu-nirari, who is otherwise not attested.

However, according to the archaeological site report, this statue was discovered in a level of occupation dating several centuries after the time that Idrimi lived. But recently, archaeologist Jacob Lauinger considers the statue and inscription can be dated to Woolley&#x27;s Level III (/II), c. 1400-1350 BC, around 50 to 100 years after Idrimi&#x27;s lifetime. There has been much scholarly debate as to its historicity. Archaeologically-dated tablets recount that Idrimi&#x27;s son Niqmepuh was contemporaneous with the Mitanni king Saushtatar. This seems to support the inscription on the statue claiming that Idrimi was contemporaneous with Barattarna, Saushtatar&#x27;s predecessor.

The socio-economic history of Alalakh during the reign of Idrimi&#x27;s son and grandson, Niqmepuh and Ilim-Ilimma I, is well documented by tablets excavated from the site. Idrimi is referred to rarely in these tablets.

In the mid-14th century BC, the Hittite Suppiluliuma I defeated king Tushratta of Mitanni and assumed control of northern Syria, then including Alalakh, which he incorporated into the Hittite Empire. A tablet records his grant of much of Mukish&#x27;s land (that is, Alalakh&#x27;s) to Ugarit, after the king of Ugarit alerted the Hittite king to a revolt by the kingdoms of Mukish, Nuhassa, and Niye.

====Alalakh III and II====
During the period of 1350 BC, Alalakh was incorporated into the Hittite Empire. Nevertheless, recent interpretations of this period by archaeologists indicate that, following the destructions of Level IV, the Alalakh castle complex was successively rebuilt three times. So Alalakh may have continued functioning as a capital city.

According to Eric Cline, the city was largely abandoned by 1300 BC. A small Hittite post was known to be there during the reign of Ammištamru (II) of Ugarit, who ruled c. 1260-1235. The Kingdom of Mukish was no more. But according to D&#x27;Alfonso (2007), there were two major phases in the Hittite administration of their new northern Syrian territories. The first one dates to the reign of Mursili II. Apparently, &quot;one feature of this phase was the prominent role of the court of Aleppo as bench for the Syrian legal cases.&quot; The second was a mature phase that started around 1270 BC after some period of uncertainty. During this phase, the main court of jurisdiction had shifted from Aleppo to Karkemis, which then seems to have acquired even greater powers.

During the 14th and 13th centuries BC, great quantities of Mycenaean pottery had arrived to Syria-Palestine, a lot of it from Cyprus. Alalakh was the northernmost location where this Mycenaean IIIA:2-III:B pottery is found, along with Ugarit. Significant quantities of this pottery have been discovered in Alalakh.

* CTH 136 Treaty of Šuppiluliuma I with Mukiš

The Hittite tablet CTH 136, also known as KBo 13.55, is a fragmentary text that may represent a treaty of emperor Šuppiluliuma I with Mukiš. This view is favoured by Elena Devecchi. She relates this text to the conquests that Suppiluliuma made in Syria as a result of his “one-year campaign”.

* CTH 64 Edict of Muršili II concerning the border between Ugarit and Mukiš

Elena Devecchi interprets this text as a legal document 
or a judicial verdict.

===Iron Age===
The site was reoccupied in Iron Age (c. 1200-600 BC), but the port of Al Mina took its place during this period.

==Archaeology==

Tell Atchana was excavated by the British archaeologist Sir Leonard Woolley in the years 1937–1939 and 1946–1949. He was assisted by epigrapher Sidney Smith. His team discovered palaces, temples, private houses and fortification walls, in 17 archaeological levels, reaching from late Early Bronze Age (Level XVII, c. 2200–2000 BC) to Late Bronze Age (Level 0, 13th century BC). Among their finds was the inscribed statue of Idrimi, a king of Alalakh c. early 15th century BC. The foreman on the site, working with Woolley, was the Syrian Sheikh Hammoudi ibn Ibrahim.

After several years&#x27; surveys beginning in 1995, the University of Chicago team had its first full season of excavation in 2003 directed by K. Aslihan Yener. In 2004, the team had a short excavation and study season in order to process finds. In 2006, the project changed sponsorship and resumed excavations directed by K. Aslihan Yener under the Turkish Ministry of Culture and Tourism and Mustafa Kemal University in Antakya.
About 500 cuneiform tablets were retrieved at Level VII, (Middle Bronze Age) and Level IV (Late Bronze Age). The inscribed statue of Idrimi, a king of Alalakh c. early 15th century BC, has provided a unique autobiography of Idrimi&#x27;s youth, his rise to power, and his military and other successes. The statue is now held in the British Museum. Akkadian texts from Alalakh primarily consist of juridical tablets, which record the ruling family&#x27;s control over land and the income that followed, and administrative documents, which record the flow of commodities in and out of the palace. In addition, there are a few word lists, astrological omens and conjurations.

Many examples of Nuzi ware, a high quality ceramics associated with the Mitanni period, have been discovered in Alalakh. This type of ceramics, as found at Alalakh/Atchana, is sometimes described as &quot;Atchana ware&quot;, or as &quot;Atchana-Nuzi ware&quot;.

== Goddess Kubaba ==
According to Manfred Hutter, the Amik Valley, corresponding to the ancient state of Mukish, and especially Alalakh, was the area where the Syrian and Anatolian goddess Kubaba was originally worshiped. She is generally seen as a benevolent goddess of justice. According to this theory, her worship then spread from Alalakh to Carchemish and Anatolia at large.

== Genetics ==
According to ancient DNA analyses conducted by Skourtanioti et al. (2020) on 28 human remains from Tell Atchana belonging to the Middle and Late Bronze Age period (2006-1303 cal BC), the inhabitants of Alalakh were a mixture of Chalcolithic Levantines and Mesopotamians, and were genetically similar to contemporaneous Levantines from Ebla and Sidon. Out of twelve males, six carried haplogroup J1a2a1a2-P58, two carried J2a1a1a2b2a-Z1847, and four carried J2b2-Z2454, H2-P96, L2-L595 and T1a1-CTS11451 each. Seven more male individuals were analyzed by Ingman et al. (2021): three males carried J2a1a1a2, while four males carried J1a2a1a, T1a1a, E1b1b-CTS3346 and L1b-M349 each.

==See also==
*Cities of the ancient Near East
*Short chronology timeline

==Notes==
==References==
*VonDassow, E., Von Dassow, E. 1., Owen, D. I. 1., &amp; Wilhelm, G. 1. (2008). State and society in the late Bronze Age: Alalaḫ under the Mittani Empire.Studies on the civilization and culture of Nuzi and the Hurrians.
*Lauinger, J. Following the Man of Yamhad, Culture and History of the Ancient Near East, Volume: 75, Brill, 2015 
*Lauinger, J. (2008). The Temple of Ištar at Old Babylonian Alalakh, Journal of Ancient Near Eastern Religions, 8(2), 181-217. doi: https://doi.org/10.1163/156921208786611737
*Yener KA, Ingman T, editors. Alalakh and its Neighbors: Proceedings of the 15th Anniversary Symposium at the New Hatay Archaeology Museum, June 10–12, 2015. Leiden: Peeters; 2020
*Ingman T, Eisenmann S, Skourtanioti E, Akar M, Ilgner J, Gnecchi Ruscone GA, et al. (2021) Human mobility at Tell Atchana (Alalakh), Hatay, Turkey during the 2nd millennium BC: Integration of isotopic and genomic evidence. PLoS ONE 16(6): e0241883. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0241883
*Donald J. Wiseman, 1953. &quot;The Alalakh Tablets&quot;, (London: British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara); reviewed by Joan Lines in &quot;American Journal of Archaeology&quot; 59.4 (October 1955), pp. 331–332; Reprinted 1983 in series AMS Studies in Anthropology 
*Frank Zeeb, &quot;Die Palastwirtschaft in Altsyrien nach den spätaltbabylonischen Getreidelieferlisten aus Alalah (Schicht VII)&quot;, &quot;Alter Orient und Altes Testament,&quot; no. 282. Münster: Ugarit-Verlag, 2001, 
*Marlies Heinz, &quot;Tell Atchana, Alalakh. Die Schichten VII-XVII&quot;, Neukirchen-Vluyn, 1992.
*Nadav Na&#x27;aman, &quot;The Ishtar Temple at Alalakh,&quot; &quot;Journal of Near Eastern Studies,&quot; vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 209–214, 1980
*Juan Oliva, &quot;New Collations and Remarks on Alalakh VII Tablets,&quot; &quot;Journal of Near Eastern Studies&quot;, vol. 64, no.1, pp. 1–22, 2005
*Dominique Collon, &quot;The Seal Impressions from Tell Atchana/Alalakh (Alter Orient und Altes Testament),&quot; Butzon &amp; Bercker, 1975, 
*Amir Sumaka&#x27;i Fink, &quot;Late Bronze Age Tell Atchana (Alalakh): Stratigraphy, chronology, history,&quot; British Archaeological Reports, 2010, 
*C. E. Morris and J. H. Crouwel, &quot;Mycenaean Pictorial Pottery from Tell Atchana (Alalakh),&quot; &quot;The Annual of the British School at Athens,&quot; vol. 80, pp. 85–98, 1985
*C. Leonard Woolley, &quot;Alalakh: An Account of the Excavations at Tell&quot;, Oxford University Press, 1955

==External links==

*official web site of the Alalakh Excavations.
*Alalakh Notice and a basic bibliography.
*Stone guardian lions of Alalakh
*S. Riehl, &quot;Late Bronze Age Tell Atchana&quot; Archaeobotany at Tell Atchana (Tübingen University)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q575249" start="0" end="7" title="Alalakh" label="Alalakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q35668" start="35" end="42" title="Hittite language" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q575249" start="44" end="50" title="Alalakh" label="Alalaḫ"/>
<link wikidata="Q80561" start="113" end="120" title="Antakya" label="Antakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="131" end="138" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="155" end="161" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q83274" start="169" end="183" title="Hatay Province" label="Hatay Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="245" end="255" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q575249" start="501" end="506" title="Alalakh" label="Mukiš"/>
<link wikidata="Q481670" start="840" end="851" title="Amik Valley" label="Amik Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088996" start="875" end="894" title="Syria–Turkey border" label="Syria–Turkey border"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656281" start="896" end="905" title="Lake Amik" label="Lake Amik"/>
<link wikidata="Q907974" start="1103" end="1115" title="Tell Tayinat" label="Tell Tayinat"/>
<link wikidata="Q188871" start="1243" end="1256" title="Orontes River" label="Orontes River"/>
<link wikidata="Q126910540" start="1297" end="1316" title="Chatal Huyuk (Amuq)" label="Chatal Huyuk (Amuq)"/>
<link wikidata="Q203507" start="1408" end="1415" title="Amorite" label="Amorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1475" end="1492" title="Bronze Age" label="Middle Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q723587" start="1585" end="1598" title="Ur III" label="Third Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699" start="1602" end="1604" title="Ur" label="Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656281" start="1660" end="1669" title="Lake Amik" label="Amuq Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q617218" start="2327" end="2333" title="Yamhad" label="Yamhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="2340" end="2355" title="recorded history" label="written history"/>
<link wikidata="Q244762" start="2421" end="2425" title="Mari, Syria" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="2506" end="2512" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300637" start="2554" end="2563" title="Sumu-Epuh" label="Sumu-Epuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q203969" start="2613" end="2622" title="Zimri-Lim" label="Zimri-Lim"/>
<link wikidata="Q617218" start="2858" end="2864" title="Yamhad" label="Yamhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q305836" start="3223" end="3232" title="Abba-El I" label="Abba-El I"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217424" start="3291" end="3311" title="Yarim-Lim of Alalakh" label="Yarim-Lim of Alalakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11926853" start="3336" end="3342" title="Irridu" label="Irridu"/>
<link wikidata="Q617218" start="3566" end="3572" title="Yamhad" label="Yamhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="3593" end="3599" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="3784" end="3796" title="Hittites" label="Hittite king"/>
<link wikidata="Q299472" start="3797" end="3808" title="Hattusili I" label="Hattusili I"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="3854" end="3871" title="middle chronology" label="middle chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q178665" start="4339" end="4346" title="Mittani" label="Mittani"/>
<link wikidata="Q461183" start="4462" end="4477" title="Text corpus" label="written records"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="4633" end="4642" title="Inscription" label="inscribed"/>
<link wikidata="Q887396" start="4719" end="4725" title="Idrimi" label="Idrimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196243" start="4843" end="4847" title="Emar" label="Emar"/>
<link wikidata="Q524972" start="4933" end="4943" title="Barattarna" label="Barattarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q618656" start="5081" end="5094" title="Habiru" label="Hapiru people"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="5132" end="5138" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q602476" start="5941" end="5949" title="Niqmepa, King of Alalakh" label="Niqmepuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q978095" start="5992" end="6002" title="Saushtatar" label="Saushtatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058319" start="6249" end="6262" title="Ilim-Ilimma I" label="Ilim-Ilimma I"/>
<link wikidata="Q354903" start="6407" end="6421" title="Suppiluliuma I" label="Suppiluliuma I"/>
<link wikidata="Q317205" start="6436" end="6445" title="Tushratta" label="Tushratta"/>
<link wikidata="Q178665" start="6449" end="6456" title="Mitanni" label="Mitanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="6551" end="6565" title="Hittite Empire" label="Hittite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q191369" start="6653" end="6659" title="Ugarit" label="Ugarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004491" start="6750" end="6757" title="Nuhašše" label="Nuhassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764557" start="6763" end="6767" title="Niya (kingdom)" label="Niye"/>
<link wikidata="Q314378" start="7522" end="7532" title="Mursili II" label="Mursili II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425742" start="7961" end="7978" title="Mycenaean pottery" label="Mycenaean pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q191369" start="8137" end="8143" title="Ugarit" label="Ugarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q354903" start="8379" end="8393" title="Šuppiluliuma I" label="Šuppiluliuma I"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="8759" end="8767" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477524" start="8802" end="8809" title="Al Mina" label="Al Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="8905" end="8918" title="archaeologist" label="archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q356134" start="8923" end="8938" title="Leonard Woolley" label="Leonard Woolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q25171686" start="9007" end="9019" title="Sidney Smith (Assyriologist)" label="Sidney Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q109409640" start="9408" end="9428" title="Hammoudi ibn Ibrahim" label="Hammoudi ibn Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="9488" end="9509" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323101" start="9575" end="9591" title="K. Aslihan Yener" label="K. Aslihan Yener"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136957" start="9782" end="9821" title="Turkish Ministry of Culture and Tourism" label="Turkish Ministry of Culture and Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10952014" start="9826" end="9850" title="Mustafa Kemal University" label="Mustafa Kemal University"/>
<link wikidata="Q887396" start="9996" end="10002" title="Idrimi" label="Idrimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="10195" end="10209" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="10211" end="10219" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q104029294" start="10554" end="10563" title="Nuzi ware" label="Nuzi ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q15456103" start="10834" end="10848" title="Manfred Hutter" label="Manfred Hutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q107474864" start="10989" end="10995" title="Kubaba (goddess)" label="Kubaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="11424" end="11436" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743" start="11531" end="11535" title="Ebla" label="Ebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q163490" start="11540" end="11545" title="Sidon" label="Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118590" start="11591" end="11603" title="Haplogroup J-M267" label="J1a2a1a2-P58"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024914" start="11617" end="11634" title="Haplogroup J-M172" label="J2a1a1a2b2a-Z1847"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024914" start="11653" end="11663" title="Haplogroup J-M172" label="J2b2-Z2454"/>
<link wikidata="Q186432" start="11665" end="11671" title="Haplogroup H (Y-DNA)" label="H2-P96"/>
<link wikidata="Q428828" start="11673" end="11680" title="Haplogroup L-M20" label="L2-L595"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452273" start="11685" end="11698" title="Haplogroup T-L206 (Y-DNA)" label="T1a1-CTS11451"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976903" start="11843" end="11856" title="Haplogroup E-V12" label="E1b1b-CTS3346"/>
<link wikidata="Q428828" start="11861" end="11869" title="Haplogroup L-M20" label="L1b-M349"/>
<link wikidata="Q63780" start="11891" end="11922" title="Cities of the ancient Near East" label="Cities of the ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="11924" end="11949" title="Short chronology timeline" label="Short chronology timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295320" start="12961" end="12978" title="Donald J. Wiseman" label="Donald J. Wiseman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610923" wikidata="Q5467622" url="?curid=610923" title="Ford 335 engine">
<text>The Ford 335 engine was a family of engines built by the Ford Motor Company between 1969 and 1982. The &quot;335&quot; designation reflected Ford management&#x27;s decision during its development to produce a engine with room for expansion. This engine family began production in late 1969 with a 351 cu in (5.8 L) engine, commonly called the 351C. It later expanded to include a 400 cu in (6.6 L) engine which used a taller version of the engine block, commonly referred to as a tall deck engine block, a 351 cu in (5.8 L) tall deck variant, called the 351M, and a 302 cu in (4.9 L) engine which was exclusive to Australia.

The 351C, introduced in 1969 for the 1970 model year, is commonly referred to as the 351 Cleveland after the Brook Park, Ohio, Cleveland Engine plant in which most of these engines were manufactured. This plant complex included a gray iron foundry (Cleveland Casting Plant), and two engine assembly plants (Engine plant 1 &amp; 2). As newer automobile engines began incorporating aluminum blocks, Ford closed the casting plant in May 2012.

The 335 series engines were used in mid- and full-sized cars and light trucks, (351M/400 only) at times concurrently with the Ford small block family 351 &quot;Windsor&quot;, in cars. These engines were also used as a replacement for the FE V8 family in both the car and truck lines. The 335 series only outlived the FE series by a half-decade, being replaced by the more compact Windsor V8s.

==Overview==
The 335-series V8s were overhead valve V8 engines that used a unique short-skirt engine block that was both longer and heavier than that of the existing Ford small block V8. The 335 series incorporated features used on the 385 big-block series, including the canted valve layout, the valve train design, and thin-wall casting technology. All 335 series V8s had free breathing, large-port canted valve heads with a rugged engine block. These engines use a shallow poly angle combustion chamber rather than the wedge style used on the small blocks. The 335 engines use large main-bearing caps, with two-bolt as standard and four-bolt added on some performance versions.

The first engine in the 335 series was introduced in late 1969 as the 351C. The 400 cu in appeared in the third quarter of 1970, which raised deck height from and tall deck to accommodate a longer stroke, and used larger main bearings for additional strength. This was similar to the changes made to convert a 302 Small Block to the 351 Windsor. 

For the 1975 model year the 351M replaced the 351C in North American markets. Initially Ford of Australia imported US made 351C engines. However, by November 1971, Ford of Australia began to manufacture the 351C locally at the Geelong Foundry. This engine was very similar to the American counterpart and remained in production until December 1981. Ford of Australia also produced a smaller 302C alongside the 351C, which was exclusive to the Australian market.

===Comparison to Ford Small Block V8===

All 335 series engines shared the same bore spacing and cylinder head bolt pattern as the Small Block V8 family. There are a number of significant differences between the two engine families. The 335 series have a roughly two-inch extension cast into the front of the block which forms an integrated timing cover enclosure covered by a piece of flat steel, similar to an Oldsmobile V8 engine. This results in the 335 series engine block being heavier than the Small Block series engines&#x27;. The 335 series use a dry intake manifold with the radiator hose connecting vertically to the cylinder block above the cam timing chain cover. Small Blocks use a wet intake manifold which routes coolant through the intake manifold via a horizontally protruding hose. The 335 uses smaller, 14mm, spark plugs and has a square-shaped eight bolt rocker cover while the Windsor&#x27;s six-bolt rocker cover is more rounded.

===Oil system===
To reduce production costs, Ford eliminated one of the 335 series&#x27;s main oil galleries from the block casting, leaving two compared to the Small Block family&#x27;s three. The result was an oil system very similar to the 385 series V8s, adequate for street engines but falling short in high-revolution race use without modification. The two main oil galleys in the 335 series engine run along the lifter bores. Oil is fed from the filter to the number one main bearing followed by the number one cam bearing above. At the same time, it also feeds the right hand oil galley, supplying the right side lifter bank. It has four galleries that lead to each of the remaining main bearings. After the oil feeds them, it feeds each corresponding camshaft bearing above. At the rear-most main bearing, the oil goes into the second gallery, which feeds the left lifter bank. In addition the oil system not prioritizing the main bearings, the 335 engines have excessive clearances in the lifter bores. This results in oil leaking out of the lifter bores which can cause oil cavitation from the lifter motion, and can reduce oil flow to the main bearings.

===Cylinder heads===
The cylinder-head design for the 335 series engines is its most definitive design feature. All cylinder head variants were two-valve that use large free flowing ports with poly-angle or &#x27;canted&#x27; valves. Having the intake and exhaust valves at separate angles allowed for very large valves to be used while reducing the port length and minimizing sharp turns within it, creating freer flowing heads than the Ford Windsor V8s.

The 335-series engines used different cylinder heads for two and four barrel carburetors. The 2V (two carburetor venturi) small port cylinder heads were used on 2-barrel engines while the 4V (four venturi) large port cylinder heads were used on the 4-barrel engines. The ports and valves on 2V heads were significantly larger than Windsor engines and had excellent flow - actually slightly better than 4V heads at lower valve lifts. The 4V heads had enormous ports which flowed very well, in particular at higher valve lift, and could out-flow Chevrolet Double Hump heads and Chrysler&#x27;s high-performance 340 heads. 

In addition to the two port sizes, the 335 cylinder heads used two style of combustion chambers, an open or a closed &quot;quench&quot; chamber. Both combustion chambers are very shallow, due to the shallow valve angles. The combustion chambers are almost a very shallow hemispherical chamber, rather than a wedge shaped. The closed chamber heads enclose the valves more closely, reducing combustion chamber volume, to increase the compression ratio. However, both designs have the same thermal efficiency and resistance to detonation. The closed combustion chamber promotes better swirling of incoming air fuel mixture, giving it a low-rpm torque advantage, and requires less machining to obtain high compression ratios. However, the open chamber heads valves are less shrouded, which improves low lift airflow, and they exhibit better emissions characteristics.

Most 335 series engines used stamped rocker arms with cast fulcrums that made for a non-adjustable valve train. The rocker arm design was originally used by the Ford 385 series engines. However, the Boss 351 and 351 HO had an adjustable valve train, using rocker arms mounted on screw-in studs and guide plates.

Prior to the release of the 351C, the 335 Series cylinder head was used on the Ford Boss 302 engine. The Boss 302 used a large port closed chamber 4V cylinder head which required minor modifications to make the cylinder heads work with the Windsor engine block. The Boss 302 version of the cylinder heads used small 58cc cambers and large 2.23&quot; intake valves. The valves were later reduced to 2.19&quot; as used on the 351C 4V cylinder heads.

== 351 Cleveland==
===History===
The genesis of the &quot;351 Cleveland&quot; resulted from Ford&#x27;s inability to produce enough of its new Ford small block engine-based 351 cu in V8s at its Windsor Engine Plant #1 in Windsor, Ontario, Canada. Sales and marketing forecasts for the 1969 model year called for a second line, which was organized at Ford&#x27;s Cleveland, Ohio, engine works.

At this time, it was also decided to upgrade the design of the new Cleveland manufactured 351s to improve performance. Two cylinder-head designs were developed, one similar to the 351W, but with larger ports and valves, and the other with very large ports with canted intake and exhaust valves similar to the big-block Ford 385 series V8. Sales, marketing, and product planning favored the canted valve design, as it was viewed as more innovative.

Other changes to the engine were related to ease of manufacture and improved reliability. This led to elimination of coolant flowing through a &#x27;dry&#x27; intake manifold, a potential source of leaks and minimized unnecessary heat transfer. To perform this change, the front of the engine block was extended to include provisions for the coolant to flow through a crossover in the block. This extension also acted as an integrated timing chain housing. The timing chain housing was covered with flat steel that was easier to seal than the typical large timing chain cover used on other Ford V8s. These changes resulted in a bigger and heavier engine block than the Windsor V8s. To help reduce costs the oil system was revised, as explained above. Although the 351W began as the basis for the 351C, by the time it reached production the design changes resulted in almost no parts interchanging between the two designs. The two engines, however, shared the same bore spacing, engine mounts and bell housing pattern.

The 351 Cleveland began production in July 1969 for the 1970 model year. Its actual displacement was . A conventional two-barrel &quot;2V&quot; (two venturi) version and a four-barrel &quot;4V&quot; (four venturi) performance version were built. The 351C-2V was never marketed as a high-performance engine. It used the small port 2V cylinder heads with open combustion chambers to produce a more economical passenger car engine that was tuned more for low-rpm torque. The 351C-4V was marketed as a high-performance engine, featuring the 4V large ports heads with closed &quot;quench&quot; combustion chambers. Later versions of the 351C with 4V heads continued to use the large ports and valves, but switched to open chamber heads in an effort to reduce engine emissions. Only the Q-code 351 &quot;Cobra Jet&quot; (1971–1974), R-code &quot;Boss&quot; 351 (1971), and R-code 351 &quot;HO&quot; (1972) versions have four-bolt main bearing caps, however, all 335 series engines could be modified to have 4-bolt main bearing caps.

===H-code===
The H-code 351 Cleveland engines were low performance engines with low compression and two-barrel carburetors. All H-code engines ran on regular grade fuel. Compression ratio was 9.5:1 in 1970 and progressively dropped annually until it reached it low point of 8.0:1 compression in 1973 and 1974. H-code 351s were equipped with a cast-iron crankshaft, two-bolt main bearing caps, forged-steel connecting rods, cast-aluminum pistons, non-adjustable valve train, and cast-iron intake and exhaust manifolds. All H-code 351 Cleveland engines used the small port 2V heads with open combustion chambers. These engines were produced from 1970 through 1974 and were used on a variety of Ford models, from pony-car to full-sized. The 351W with a 2V carburetor was also produced during this time which also used the &quot;H-code&quot; designation. Both the 351W and 351C H-code had the same or very similar power ratings, and were used interchangeably when a car was built with the H-code engine option.

===M-code===
The M-code was a high-compression, high-performance variation of the 351C, produced in 1970 and 1971. The M-code engines used the large-port 4V heads with a closed &quot;quench&quot; combustion chamber and large valves. These engines also included cast-aluminum flat-top pistons, stiffer valve springs, a high-performance hydraulic camshaft, and a squarebore Autolite 4300-A carburetor. The 1970 engines had an advertised 11.0:1 compression ratio and were rated at at 5400 rpm. The 1971 version had a slightly lower advertised compression ratio of 10.7:1 due in part to the slightly larger combustion chambers, and the power rating dropped to at 5400 rpm. The M-code 351C required premium fuel and was available in the 1970-71 Ford Torino, Mercury Montego, Ford Mustang, and Mercury Cougar.

=== (Boss 351)===
The Boss 351 was the most potent high-performance variant of the 351C available only in the 1971 Boss 351 Mustang. Rated at 330 bhp (246 kW), it was fitted with a four-barrel Autolite model 4300-D spreadbore carburetor, an aluminum intake manifold, solid lifters, dual-point distributor, a six-quart oil pan, and cast-aluminum valve covers. Forged domed pistons gave an 11.1:1 advertised compression ratio which made premium fuel necessary. It had four-bolt main bearing caps selected for hardness and a premium cast-iron crankshaft selected for hardness (90% nodularity). The cylinder head was modified for better airflow, used screw-in studs with adjustable rocker arms, and except for the water passages and larger combustion chambers, were very similar to the heads used on the Boss 302. The valve train used hardened and ground push rods with guide plates and single groove, hardened valve split locks. The forged connecting rods were shot-peened and magnafluxed for strength, and used improved durability 3/8-inch nuts and bolts. The R-code Boss 351 was only installed in the 1971 Boss 351 Mustang, and it came equipped with Ram Air induction. Ford manufactured 1,806 Boss 351 Mustangs in 1971, 591 of which are registered and accounted for on the Boss 351 Registry site.

The January 2010 issue of &quot;Hot Rod&quot; reported a project in which a Boss 351 was assembled to the exact internal specifications of an original motor, but fitted with open, long tube, 1-3/4-inch Hooker headers (vs. the stock cast-iron manifolds), a facility water pump, a 750 Holley Street HP-series carburetor (vs. the stock 715 CFM Autolite unit), and minus the factory air filter assembly, engine accessories, or factory exhaust system. In that externally modified state it produced SAE gross at 6,100 rpm, and torque (gross) at 4,000 rpm. A measurement of SAE net horsepower would be significantly lower, and represents a more realistic as-installed configuration with all engine accessories, air cleaner assembly, and automobile exhaust system.

=== (351 HO)===
The 351C HO &quot;R-code&quot; had a number of changes to help meet emission standards for 1972 compared to the 1971 Boss 351 &quot;R-Code&quot;. The camshaft had less duration, but more valve lift, while the mechanical lifters remained unchanged. The forged pistons were changed to flat-top style and the heads to open chamber heads, but retained the same large ports, valves, and adjustable valve train used in 1971. This resulted in a compression ratio decreased to 9.2:1 while the cleaner-burning open-chamber heads helped meet the new emissions regulations. The Ram Air option was no longer available. The engine otherwise remained unchanged from 1971. This engine produced 275 hp (205 kW) using the more realistic SAE net system and was only available in the 1972 Ford Mustang. It was, however, now available in any body style or model of the Mustang, unlike the Boss 351. The 3.91 Traction Lok rear and four speed were still the only available drivetrain.

=== (351 Cobra-Jet)===
The Q-code 351 &quot;Cobra-Jet&quot; (also called 351-CJ, 351-4V) was produced from May 1971 through the 1974 model year. It was a lower-compression design that used open-chamber 4V heads. The open-chamber heads exhibited superior emissions characteristics and were used to meet the more stringent emissions standards for 1972 and beyond. The &quot;351 CJ&quot; high-performance engine included a different intake manifold, high-lift, long-duration camshaft with hydraulic valve lifters, higher rate valve springs with dampers, a 715-CFM spread-bore 4300-D Motorcraft carburetor and a dual-point distributor (only with four-speed manual transmissions - not sold in California). The block was upgraded to four-bolt main bearing caps, and larger harmonic balancer was installed. These engines also featured induction-hardened exhaust seats for use with low-lead and unleaded gasoline. This engine was different from the 1970-71 M-code 351C having a more aggressive camshaft, a spread-bore carburetor, a four-bolt block and the lower compression allowed regular fuel to be used. It was rated at for all 1971 applications. For the 1972 model year, the only change to the engine was a retarding the camshaft events by 4°. The engine was rated at (SAE net) for 1972 when installed in the Mustang, and in the Torino and Montego. An increase in the combustion chamber size and the use of smaller valves occurred in 1973, which reduced horsepower to for the four-barrel for the intermediate Fords, though it still retained the higher rating in the Mustang. The 351 CJ (now referred to as the &quot;351 4V&quot;) was rated at in 1974 and was only installed in the Ford Ranchero, Ford Torino, Mercury Montego, and Mercury Cougar.

===Replacement===
Production of the 351C ceased at the end of the 1974 model year. The engine was replaced by the 351M for the 1975 model year. This new variation used the same bore and stroke dimensions of the 351C, but used the tall deck block from the 400 V8 engine and was only available with a 2 barrel carburetor.

===351C engine specifications chart===
==400 and 351M==
===400===
By 1970 the 390 V8 FE engine was becoming outdated. With pending emission requirements, a more modern replacement was needed. Although the big-block 385 family was used to replace the larger displacement 428 V8 FE engine, this engine family had nothing comparable in size to the 390 V8. For the 1971 model year, Ford introduced the 400 V8 engine as a replacement for the 390 V8. Ford billed the 400 as the 351C&#x27;s big brother. It was designed to provide brisk acceleration in medium to heavy weight vehicles in an engine package that was smaller and lighter than the FE V8 Engines and the 385 Series Ford V8&#x27;s.

The Ford 400 engine was based on the 351 Cleveland but had a half-inch longer stroke than the 351 Cleveland. The 400 had &quot;square&quot; proportions, with a 4.0 in (102 mm) bore and stroke. Ford called the engine a &quot;400&quot; but in actuality it displaced . To accommodate the longer stroke, Ford engineers increased the block deck height to 10.297 inches compared to the 351C&#x27;s 9.206 inches. As a result, the 400 used longer (6.580 inch) connecting rods than the 351C (5.778 inch), but it retained the same connecting rod-to-stroke (1.65:1) ratio as the 351C. The 400 featured larger 3.00 inch main-bearing journals, the same size as those used in the 351 Windsor, but rod journals were the same size as the 351C. The cylinder heads for the 400 were the same as those used on the 351C-2V, having the open combustion chamber with smaller 2V sized ports and valves. All 400s were low performance engines that ran on regular fuel and all used a 2-barrel carburetor, a cast-iron intake manifold, and small port 2V cylinder heads. A 1-year only option 400 had flat top pistons,in 1971.

The 400 was designed as a high torque, low RPM engine that was a smaller, more efficient and lighter alternative for the big Ford 385 engines, the 429 and 460, for use in Ford&#x27;s medium and large size cars. Weighing just 80% of a similar big-block, it was originally available in Ford&#x27;s Custom, Galaxie and LTD lines, and in Mercury Monterey, Marquis, and Brougham for the 1971 model year. For 1972, it was also available in the Ford Torino, Mercury Montego and its variations through 1979. By the late 1970s it was also available in the Ford Thunderbird, Ford F-series pickup trucks, the Lincoln Continental, and Mark V.

Unlike the 351C, almost all 400 blocks used the large bellhousing bolt pattern used by the 385 family big-block and were typically equipped with the higher torque-capacity C6 transmission. There were a small number of 400 block castings produced in 1973 with the dual bellhousing patterns. It had the large bellhousing and the small bellhousing bolt pattern used by the Windsor V8 family and the 351C, though it was not necessarily drilled for both. These particular blocks have been dubbed the &quot;400 FMX&quot; by enthusiasts, though were never officially referenced as such by Ford. Most 400&#x27;s also had unique engine mount bolt pattern but these 400 FMX blocks had provisions for both 351C-style and 400/351M engine mounts. For 1972, the compression was reduced through the use of dished pistons. The compression reduced again for 1973 and a new timing set retarded the camshaft timing 6° to aid with reducing emissions. Changes to the cylinder heads for 1975 to add the Thermactor emission system caused the exhaust port to be more restrictive than the earlier 1971-74 heads. The 400 was re-tuned by Ford in 1975 to use unleaded gasoline with the addition of catalytic converters to the exhaust system. An extra water jacket was added to the heads, along with further enlarging the combustion chamber to 80 cc.

The development of the 400 V8 led to a significant design flaw that remained with the engine throughout its production life. With a longer stroke, the compression ratio became excessively high with the 351-2V heads and flat top pistons. Ford engineers reduced the compression ratio by using a piston with a compression height that was too short and this led to an excessive deck clearance of 0.067&quot; to .080&quot; compared to a 351-2V at 0.035&quot; . In 1971, this method of reducing compression was sufficient due to the higher octane leaded fuels. However, once lower octane unleaded fuels became used the excessive deck clearance led to problems with detonation. For 1975, Ford dealt with this problem by decreasing the compression ratio further with a larger 15cc piston dish and reducing ignition timing. However, the 400 V8 obtained a reputation for being prone to detonation.

Today, an array of performance parts are becoming more available for the &quot;M&quot; engines, with a resurgence of popularity in the classic truck market.

===351M===
When the 351 Cleveland was discontinued after the 1974 model year, Ford needed another engine in that size range, since production of the 351 Windsor was not sufficient. Ford took the 400 engine&#x27;s tall-deck block and installed a crankshaft with a shorter stroke to produce a engine. This crankshaft was not the same as a 351C, in that it used the larger main bearing journals of the 400 V8. To compensate for the shorter stroke the pistons for the 351M have a taller compression height, so that it could use the same connecting rods as the 400. The result of the 351M using the longer 400 connecting rod was a higher connecting rod-to-stroke ratio of 1.88:1 than the 351C and 400&#x27;s of 1.65:1. Other than pistons and crankshaft the 351M shared all of its major components with the 400, and it also used the large 385 Series style bellhousing. The 351M was only ever equipped with a 2-barrel carburetor and open chamber small port 2V cylinder heads.

351M production began for the 1975 model year and blocks were cast in the Michigan Casting Center or the Cleveland Foundry. The 351M was the last pushrod V8 block designed by Ford until the introduction of the 7.3-liter &quot;Godzilla&quot; engine for the Super Duty trucks in model year 2020.

===Light truck usage===
For the 1977 model year, Ford replaced its FE big-block 360 and 390 engines in its light truck line with its new 351M and 400 engines. For light-truck use, a manual transmission could be ordered for the first time with these engines. As a result, the block was strengthened in the main bearing supports, in particular the #3 support to better handle the loads imparted by the clutch. The truck engines had unique parts including pistons for different compression ratios from the car engines, truck specific intake and exhaust manifolds, camshaft with more lift, and timing set that did not retard the camshaft timing. The strengthened engine block was introduced to the Ford cars for the 1978 model year.

===Block-cracking problems===
The 400 V8s for the model years 1971–72 were either cast in the Dearborn Iron Foundry or the Cleveland Foundry. Those built for model years 1973–79 were either cast in the Cleveland Foundry or the Michigan Casting Center. The 351M introduced in 1975 shared the same block as the 400. The 351M and 400 blocks cast at the Michigan Casting Center prior to March 2, 1977, experienced water jacket cracking problems above the lifter bores. The cracking was (potentially) caused by an internal coring problem when the blocks were cast, although others considered it to be normal freeze cracking. The result was horizontal cracks approximately 1&quot; above the lifter bore. After March 2, 1977, the blocks cast at Michigan Casting Center did not have problems with cracking.

===351M/400 identification confusion===
There exists debate as to what Ford meant by the &quot;M&quot; designation of the 351M. Some claim the &quot;M&quot; stands for “Modified” - being modified from a 400-V8 with a shortened stroke - though others claim that the &quot;M&quot; refers to the Michigan Casting Center, where the 351M began production. Some say that the &quot;M&quot; designation has no official meaning, and that it was just Ford&#x27;s way of distinguishing the 351M from the 351C and 351W. Ford master part catalogs reference the engine as a Modified.

Likewise, Ford&#x27;s use of the 400 block in the creation of the 351M engine has resulted in the 400 mistakenly being referred to as the &quot;400M&quot; or &quot;400 Modified.&quot; This is despite the 400 having been the design basis from which the &quot;modified&quot; 351M was derived and it was in production several years before Ford used the &quot;M&quot; designation. Further confusion arises from Ford printing &quot;351M/400&quot; on the emission stickers for the engine. The &quot;351M/400&quot; referenced the engine family, and some confused this with the engine name. This sticker also listed the engine displacement below the engine family. Ford&#x27;s official name for the 400 V8 contains no additional designations - the proper nomenclature is simply &quot;400.&quot; In the early 1970s before the 351M debuted, Ford referred to the 400 as the &quot;400 Cleveland&quot;.

===Replacement===
The 351M and 400 were last offered in a Ford passenger car in 1979. They remained available in Ford light-trucks until 1982. Reduced demand for larger engines due to tightening CAFE regulations led to the abandonment of the 351M/400 and the Cleveland production line. By 1980, mid-sized V8&#x27;s had disappeared from the option list for almost all Ford cars. Only the full-size Panther platform Fords had anything larger than 302 ci available, and this need was filled with the 351W. With low demand for engines in the size range of the 351M/400, the 335-series V8&#x27;s no longer had a need to be produced.

In addition, there were difficulties adapting the M-block to the second generation of emissions controls. Unlike previous Ford engines, Thermactor and exhaust gas recirculation features had already been built into the 351M and 400 engine, rendering adaptation to electronic feedback fuel/air systems difficult. One requirement of the second-generation equipment was an oxygen (O2) sensor in the exhaust, which had to be placed before the Thermactor air was added. Since Thermactor air was injected right into the block&#x27;s exhaust ports in the M-block, there was nowhere for the O2 sensor to go.

== 302 and 351 Cleveland (Australia)==
:&quot;Note that there was also a 302 &quot;small block&quot;&quot;

===History===
During the 1969 Model year, Ford of Australia imported approximately 17,000 302 Windsor and 351 Windsor V8&#x27;s. However, the 351 Windsor was phased out for 1970 in favor of the newer 351 Cleveland. The 351 Cleveland engines continued to be imported from the US along with the 302 Windsor V8. Both the low-performance 351C-2V and the high performance 351C-4V were imported with the vast majority of the engines being the 351C-2V. Like the US engines, the 4V versions used the closed &quot;quench&quot; chambered heads and used the larger ports on the cylinder heads.

In November 1971, Ford of Australia began to manufacture the 335-series V8 locally at the Geelong engine plant. They produced both the 351C-2V and 351C-4V engine along with a short stroke version displacing 302 cubic inches. These new locally built engines replaced the previously imported 302 Windsor and 351C from the USA. Initially, the cylinder blocks were imported from the US, while the remaining parts were manufactured in Australia at the Geelong Ford Foundry. In 1973, Ford of Australia received word of the fact the Ford of USA was stopping production of the 351 Cleveland engine after the 1974 model year. As a result, Ford of Australia placed an order for approximately 60,000 engine blocks to act as a supply until Geelong could start producing its own engine blocks. In 1975 Geelong began production of its own engine blocks which it continued until December 1981. All engine blocks produced in Australia were the short deck 9.206&quot; engine block. The last Australian Ford to receive a Cleveland V8 engine was a Ford XE Fairmont Ghia ESP sedan, Vehicle Identification Number JG32AR33633K built on 25 November 1982. Ford Australia continued to make remnant stock of the 351C available in Bronco and F-series vehicles until August 1985. Australian-built 351 engines were also used by De Tomaso in Italy for the Pantera, Longchamp, and Deauville cars after American supplies had come to an end. These engines were tuned in Switzerland and were available with a range of outputs up to .

===302 Cleveland===
In November 1971, Ford of Australia began to manufacture the Cleveland engine at the Geelong engine plant alongside of the 351C. The engine remained in production until 1982 and was only produced in Australia. The 302C was considered an economy V8 and it is estimated that only ten percent of Australian Cleveland V8 production was the 302C. The 302C was created by using the 351C block with a crankshaft that had a stroke while it shared the 2.75&quot; main journal size of the 351C. The 302C had a connecting rod to allow it to share the same piston as the 351C. This resulted in a connecting rod-to-stroke ratio of 2.01:1, making it the highest ratio of the 335 series V8s. The 302C used a unique cylinder head compared to the Australian 351C to ensure an adequate compression ratio. The 302C had used the &quot;quench&quot; closed combustion chamber with a volume of 56.4–59.4 cc, the smallest of any 335 series engine cylinder head. This head used the small 2V ports and valves, making it the only 335 series head with the closed chambers and small 2V ports.

The combination of the closed chamber heads with the small 2V ports has caused the 302C head to be a bolt-on-performance upgrade for other 335 series V8s. Having the smallest combustion chamber of the 335 series V8s, these cylinder heads will easily boost the static compression ratio of any other 335 series V8. In addition, the small ports used on these head are more efficient for a street performance engine, than the large port 4V heads that tend to favour performance only at higher engine speeds.

===351 Cleveland===
Initially, the 351C was imported to Australia from the US. Both the 351-2V and 351-4V were imported and both were in all respects the same as the American market counterparts. In November 1971, Ford of Australia began producing its own 351C engines, ending the importation of American engines. At the outset, Australia only produced a 351-2V engine, but in March 1972 Ford of Australia began to offer a new 351-4V engine with a 4-barrel carburetor. Australia only produced one style of cylinder head for the 351 engines, a 2V head with small ports and open chamber cylinder heads. As a result, the Australian 351-4V engines used the 2V cylinder head. This required a unique 4V intake manifold with the smaller 2V ports, unlike the American 351-4V intake manifold which used the large ports. No 351C built in Australia used the large port cylinder heads or closed chamber combustion chambers like the US built 351C-4V engines.

Ford Australia built a quantity of 4-bolt 5.8 litre engines — similar to those used in NASCAR at the time — for race purposes in Australia. When the engine&#x27;s local racing career ended at the end of 1984, the surplus stock was shipped and sold in the United States for use in the De Tomaso Pantera, as Detroit no longer offered the 351 Cleveland engine.

==See also==
*Ford 385 engine
*List of Ford engines

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Short descriptions of Ford overhead valve V8 engines
*M-Block Ford V8 Workshop</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5467622" start="4" end="19" title="Ford 335 engine" label="Ford 335 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="36" end="43" title="internal combustion engine" label="engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="57" end="75" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467622" start="711" end="724" title="Ford 335 engine" label="351 Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132129" start="753" end="769" title="Cleveland Engine" label="Cleveland Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055770" start="856" end="865" title="gray iron" label="gray iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429736" start="1193" end="1216" title="Ford small block engine" label="Ford small block family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429736" start="1217" end="1240" title="Ford 351 Windsor" label="351 &amp;quot;Windsor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467762" start="1305" end="1317" title="Ford FE engine" label="FE V8 family"/>
<link wikidata="Q267714" start="1498" end="1512" title="overhead valve" label="overhead valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q341174" start="1513" end="1522" title="V8 engine" label="V8 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429736" start="1627" end="1646" title="Ford small block engine" label="Ford small block V8"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467621" start="1697" end="1710" title="Ford 385 engine" label="385 big-block"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2453" end="2468" title="Ford Small Block engine#302" label="302 Small Block"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2476" end="2487" title="Ford small block engine#351W" label="351 Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2519" end="2523" title="#351M" label="351M"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085749" start="3366" end="3386" title="Oldsmobile V8 engine" label="Oldsmobile V8 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452104" start="6641" end="6659" title="thermal efficiency" label="thermal efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7218" end="7226" title="Ford_Mustang_variants#351" label="Boss 351"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841069" start="7411" end="7431" title="Ford Boss 302 engine" label="Ford Boss 302 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429736" start="7924" end="7947" title="Ford small block engine" label="Ford small block engine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7954" end="7963" title="Ford small block engine#351W" label="351 cu in"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467621" start="8494" end="8512" title="Ford 385 engine" label="Ford 385 series V8"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12051" end="12066" title="Autolite 4300 carburetor#4300A.2C 600 CFM .281968-1974.29.5B1.5D" label="Autolite 4300-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361017" start="12419" end="12430" title="Ford Torino" label="Ford Torino"/>
<link wikidata="Q762335" start="12432" end="12447" title="Mercury Montego" label="Mercury Montego"/>
<link wikidata="Q183476" start="12449" end="12461" title="Ford Mustang" label="Ford Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q764093" start="12467" end="12481" title="Mercury Cougar" label="Mercury Cougar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12677" end="12698" title="Autolite 4300 carburetor#4300D.2C 715 CFM spreadbore .281971-1974.29.5B1.5D" label="Autolite model 4300-D"/>
<link wikidata="Q193057" start="12843" end="12849" title="Forging" label="Forged"/>
<link wikidata="Q45227" start="12856" end="12862" title="piston" label="piston"/>
<link wikidata="Q828137" start="12890" end="12907" title="compression ratio" label="compression ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q49718" start="13024" end="13034" title="crankshaft" label="crankshaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q122490" start="13062" end="13072" title="nodular iron" label="nodularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q217312" start="13079" end="13092" title="cylinder head" label="cylinder head"/>
<link wikidata="Q221539" start="13421" end="13435" title="connecting rod" label="connecting rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884449" start="13458" end="13467" title="magnaflux" label="magnaflux"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833358" start="13807" end="13826" title="Hot Rod (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Hot Rod&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14274" end="14283" title="Horsepower#SAE gross power" label="SAE gross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14348" end="14355" title="Horsepower#SAE net power" label="SAE net"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15443" end="15455" title="Traction Lok" label="Traction Lok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436973" start="17196" end="17209" title="Ford Ranchero" label="Ford Ranchero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17376" end="17380" title="#351M" label="351M"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467762" start="17665" end="17677" title="Ford FE engine" label="V8 FE engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467762" start="17857" end="17869" title="Ford FE engine" label="V8 FE engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q844463" start="18397" end="18403" title="stroke ratio" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q466511" start="18524" end="18533" title="engine displacement" label="displaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467621" start="19491" end="19506" title="Ford 385 engine" label="Ford 385 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436778" start="19662" end="19668" title="Ford Custom" label="Custom"/>
<link wikidata="Q686379" start="19670" end="19677" title="Ford Galaxie" label="Galaxie"/>
<link wikidata="Q175794" start="19682" end="19685" title="Ford LTD (North America)" label="LTD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385746" start="19700" end="19716" title="Mercury Monterey" label="Mercury Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q369305" start="19718" end="19725" title="Mercury Marquis" label="Marquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q822670" start="19731" end="19739" title="Mercury Brougham" label="Brougham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361017" start="19804" end="19815" title="Ford Torino" label="Ford Torino"/>
<link wikidata="Q762335" start="19817" end="19832" title="Mercury Montego" label="Mercury Montego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133834" start="19913" end="19929" title="Ford Thunderbird" label="Ford Thunderbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358633" start="19964" end="19983" title="Lincoln Continental" label="Lincoln Continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128811" start="19989" end="19995" title="Lincoln Continental Mark V" label="Mark V"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883312" start="20052" end="20063" title="bellhousing" label="bellhousing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467621" start="20089" end="20099" title="Ford 385 engine" label="385 family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467672" start="20170" end="20185" title="Ford C6 transmission" label="C6 transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q441828" start="20979" end="20989" title="Thermactor" label="Thermactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="21129" end="21146" title="unleaded gasoline" label="unleaded gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467621" start="23201" end="23211" title="Ford 385 engine" label="385 Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467762" start="23700" end="23702" title="Ford FE engine" label="FE"/>
<link wikidata="Q744139" start="26820" end="26824" title="Corporate Average Fuel Economy" label="CAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467890" start="27022" end="27029" title="Ford Panther platform" label="Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q441828" start="27390" end="27400" title="Thermactor" label="Thermactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q285028" start="27405" end="27430" title="exhaust gas recirculation" label="exhaust gas recirculation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27927" end="27954" title="Ford small block engine#302" label="302 &amp;quot;small block&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28052" end="28063" title="Ford Windsor engine#302" label="302 Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28068" end="28079" title="Ford Windsor engine#351" label="351 Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045339" start="29592" end="29596" title="Ghia" label="Ghia"/>
<link wikidata="Q304948" start="29608" end="29637" title="Vehicle Identification Number" label="Vehicle Identification Number"/>
<link wikidata="Q173085" start="29845" end="29854" title="De Tomaso" label="De Tomaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180394" start="29872" end="29879" title="De Tomaso Pantera" label="Pantera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180376" start="29881" end="29890" title="De Tomaso Longchamp" label="Longchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q935274" start="29896" end="29905" title="De Tomaso Deauville" label="Deauville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32619" end="32625" title="Main bearing#Bearing caps" label="4-bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="32671" end="32677" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180394" start="32868" end="32885" title="De Tomaso Pantera" label="De Tomaso Pantera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467621" start="32957" end="32972" title="Ford 385 engine" label="Ford 385 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571063" start="32974" end="32994" title="List of Ford engines" label="List of Ford engines"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610924" wikidata="Q180649" url="?curid=610924" title="Mario Kempes">
<text>Mario Alberto Kempes Chiodi (, ; born 15 July 1954) is an Argentine former professional footballer who played as a striker or attacking midfielder. A prolific goalscorer, he finished as La Liga&#x27;s top goalscorer twice with Valencia where he amassed 116 goals in 184 league games. He is regarded as one of the greatest players of all time.

At international level, Kempes was the focal point of Argentina&#x27;s 1978 World Cup win where he scored twice in the final and received the Golden Boot as top goalscorer. He also won the Golden Ball for the player of the tournament, making him one of only three players to have won all three awards at a single World Cup, along with Garrincha in 1962 and Paolo Rossi in 1982.

Kempes won South American Footballer of the Year, Onze d&#x27;Or European footballer of the Year and World Cup Golden Ball in 1978. In 2004, he was named as one of the Top 125 greatest living footballers as part of FIFA&#x27;s 100th anniversary celebration. Kempes was nicknamed &quot;El Toro&quot; and &quot;El Matador&quot;.

==Club career==

Kempes was born in Bell Ville, Córdoba. His father, Mario Quemp, was of German heritage. His mother, Teresa Chiodi, was Italian. At the age of seven he began playing with a junior team and at fourteen he joined the Talleres reserves.

Kempes&#x27; career started at local club Instituto, where he played alongside Osvaldo Ardiles before quickly moving on to Rosario Central, where he established himself as a remarkable goalscorer, scoring 85 goals in 105 matches, prompting Valencia to sign him. At Mestalla he would go on to win the Copa del Rey, the European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup and the UEFA Super Cup as well as two consecutive Pichichis, scoring 24 and 28 goals in the 1976–77 and 1977–78 seasons. Famous as a hard-working forward, he used to strike from outside the penalty area with his surging runs towards goal and was not the traditional center-forward operating solely inside the box. Many defenders found difficulty handling his attacking style.

Before the 1978 World Cup, Kempes was the only foreign-based player on the list of coach César Luis Menotti&#x27;s Argentina national team. when announcing the squad he had selected for the 1978 tournament, Menotti described him with these words: &quot;He&#x27;s strong, he&#x27;s got skill, he creates spaces and he shoots hard. He&#x27;s a player who can make a difference, and he can play in a centre-forward position.&quot;

Kempes had been the top scorer in La Liga the previous two seasons and was determined to show on home soil that he could deliver against the best on the sport&#x27;s greatest stage. However, he had failed to get on the score-sheet in West Germany in 1974, at the age of 19, and after the first round group stage in 1978, his name was still missing among goal scorers in the tournament.

After leaving Valencia in 1984, Kempes spent two years at Hércules in nearby Alicante before spending six years at various Austrian clubs. His play declined in his 30s and he did not compete for top scorer honours in the Austrian top flight. He rounded off his career with stints at more obscure clubs in Indonesia, Chile and Albania during the 1990s.

==International career==
During his club career he won 43 caps for Argentina and scored 20 times. He represented his country in three World Cups in 1974, 1978 and 1982, winning the competition in 1978. He was the leading goalscorer in the 1978 tournament, scoring six goals in three braces: the first two in Argentina&#x27;s first semi-final group stage match against Poland, another two against Peru, and the last two in the final against the Netherlands, which Argentina won 3–1. His second goal, in the 105th minute, was the game winner in extra time. However, in the same tournament, he notoriously stopped a goal with his hand in a second-round match against Poland. This resulted in a penalty kick that was promptly saved by Ubaldo Fillol. His goals in the 1978 World Cup Final were his last for Argentina at the age of just 23.

In 1978, he was named &quot;South American Football Player of the Year&quot; (&quot;El Mundo,&quot; Caracas, Venezuela). He was named by Pelé as one of the top 125 greatest living footballers in March 2004.

==Managerial career==
Kempes made his full-time managing debut in Albania. His brief spell with Lushnja was groundbreaking, as he became the first foreign manager who signed a foreign player in Albanian football history. His career in Albania came to a quick end in 1997. The following year, he landed a job with Venezuelan side Mineros de Guayana. In 1999, Kempes moved to Bolivia and managed The Strongest, before taking charge of Blooming in 2000. Previously, he had worked as assistant coach for Uruguayan manager Héctor Núñez in Valencia and as a player-manager of Indonesian League champions Pelita Jaya.

==Broadcasting career==
He currently works as a football analyst and commentator in Spanish for ESPN Deportes (ESPN&#x27;s Spanish-language version). With Fernando Palomo and Ciro Procuna, he provides the commentary in the Latin American version of the &quot;FIFA&quot; franchise video games starting from &quot;FIFA 13&quot; up until &quot;FIFA 23&quot;. He also serves as a commentator on the &quot;EA Sports FC&quot; series, beginning with &quot;EA Sports FC 24&quot;.

==Career statistics==
===Club===
===International===
:&quot;Scores and results list Argentina&#x27;s goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Kempes goal&quot;.

==Honours==
Rosario Central
*Primera División runner-up: 1974 Metropolitano, 1976 Argentine Primera Division Nacional 
Valencia

*Copa del Rey: 1978–79
*UEFA Cup Winners&#x27; Cup: 1979–80
*UEFA Super Cup: 1980

River Plate
*Primera División: 1981 Nacional

Pelita Jaya
*Galatama: 1993–94 

Argentina
*FIFA World Cup: 1978

Individual
*Argentine Primera División top scorers: 1974 Nacional, 1976 Metropolitan
*Pichichi Trophy: 1977, 1978
*FIFA World Cup Golden Boot: 1978
*FIFA World Cup Golden Ball: 1978
*FIFA World Cup All-Star Team: 1978
*Ballon d&#x27;Or: 1978 - Le nouveau palmarès (the new winners)
*Onze d&#x27;Or: 1978
*Olimpia de Plata: 1978
*South American Footballer of the Year: 1978
*UEFA Cup Winners&#x27; Cup top scorers: 1979–80
*FIFA 100: 2004
*South American Player of the Century: Ranking Nº 23: 2006
*Golden Foot: 2007, as football legend
*Estadio Mario Alberto Kempes: 2010, The stadium in Córdoba, Argentina was named after him.
*AFA Team of All Time (published 2015)
* IFFHS Argentina All Times Dream Team (Team B): 2021

==References==

==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* Observer Sport biography
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q180649" start="0" end="27" title="Mario Kempes" label="Mario Alberto Kempes Chiodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="88" end="96" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="115" end="122" title="Forward (association football)#Striker" label="striker"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="126" end="146" title="Attacking Midfielder" label="attacking midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="186" end="193" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q729513" start="201" end="215" title="Pichichi Trophy" label="top goalscorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10333" start="227" end="235" title="Valencia CF" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46943" start="415" end="429" title="1978 FIFA World Cup" label="1978 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q858415" start="463" end="468" title="1978 FIFA World Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="486" end="497" title="FIFA World Cup awards#Golden Boot" label="Golden Boot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="533" end="544" title="FIFA World Cup awards#Golden Ball" label="Golden Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q180642" start="679" end="688" title="Garrincha" label="Garrincha"/>
<link wikidata="Q178628" start="701" end="712" title="Paolo Rossi" label="Paolo Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q259724" start="734" end="771" title="South American Footballer of the Year" label="South American Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049896" start="773" end="819" title="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or European footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="824" end="845" title="FIFA World Cup awards#Golden Ball" label="World Cup Golden Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="891" end="926" title="FIFA 100" label="Top 125 greatest living footballers"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="938" end="942" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q284308" start="1087" end="1097" title="Bell Ville" label="Bell Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q44759" start="1099" end="1106" title="Córdoba Province, Argentina" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022939" start="1283" end="1291" title="Talleres de Córdoba" label="Talleres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421829" start="1345" end="1354" title="Instituto Atlético Central Córdoba" label="Instituto"/>
<link wikidata="Q310373" start="1382" end="1397" title="Osvaldo Ardiles" label="Osvaldo Ardiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q318307" start="1426" end="1441" title="Rosario Central" label="Rosario Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q10333" start="1543" end="1551" title="Valencia CF" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202762" start="1568" end="1576" title="Mestalla" label="Mestalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q483794" start="1603" end="1615" title="Copa del Rey" label="Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="1621" end="1651" title="European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="1660" end="1674" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q729513" start="1702" end="1710" title="Pichichi Trophy" label="Pichichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q845769" start="1842" end="1854" title="penalty area" label="penalty area"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="1971" end="1980" title="Defender (association football)" label="defenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q46943" start="2040" end="2054" title="1978 FIFA World Cup" label="1978 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q313277" start="2118" end="2136" title="César Luis Menotti" label="César Luis Menotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="2492" end="2499" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="2692" end="2704" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q500834" start="2832" end="2842" title="tournament" label="tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11963" start="2903" end="2911" title="Hércules CF" label="Hércules"/>
<link wikidata="Q11959" start="2922" end="2930" title="Alicante" label="Alicante"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="2968" end="2975" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="3150" end="3159" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="3161" end="3166" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="3171" end="3178" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="3265" end="3274" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="3332" end="3342" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q166121" start="3346" end="3350" title="1974 FIFA World Cup" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q46943" start="3352" end="3356" title="1978 FIFA World Cup" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q46934" start="3361" end="3365" title="1982 FIFA World Cup" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3411" end="3429" title="FIFA World Cup awards#Golden Boot" label="leading goalscorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q140319" start="3929" end="3942" title="Ubaldo Fillol" label="Ubaldo Fillol"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="4171" end="4175" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="4190" end="4225" title="FIFA 100" label="top 125 greatest living footballers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277386" start="4338" end="4345" title="KS Lushnja" label="Lushnja"/>
<link wikidata="Q289407" start="4571" end="4589" title="Mineros de Guayana" label="Mineros de Guayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q128020" start="4636" end="4649" title="The Strongest" label="The Strongest"/>
<link wikidata="Q94571" start="4675" end="4683" title="Club Blooming" label="Blooming"/>
<link wikidata="Q747548" start="4760" end="4772" title="Héctor Núñez" label="Héctor Núñez"/>
<link wikidata="Q10333" start="4776" end="4784" title="Valencia CF" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16725990" start="4812" end="4829" title="Liga Indonesia" label="Indonesian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630850" start="4840" end="4851" title="Pelita Bandung Raya" label="Pelita Jaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q542618" start="4950" end="4963" title="ESPN Deportes" label="ESPN Deportes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="4965" end="4969" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q326704" start="5113" end="5117" title="FIFA (video game series)" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q137977" start="5166" end="5173" title="FIFA 13" label="FIFA 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q107486489" start="5195" end="5202" title="FIFA 23" label="FIFA 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q120657541" start="5255" end="5267" title="EA Sports FC" label="EA Sports FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q113835296" start="5303" end="5318" title="EA Sports FC 24" label="EA Sports FC 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q223170" start="5535" end="5551" title="Argentine Primera División" label="Primera División"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626473" start="5563" end="5581" title="1974 Argentine Primera División" label="1974 Metropolitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626473" start="5583" end="5623" title="1974 Argentine Primera División" label="1976 Argentine Primera Division Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q483794" start="5636" end="5648" title="Copa del Rey" label="Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3692430" start="5650" end="5657" title="1978–79 Copa del Rey" label="1978–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="5659" end="5685" title="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q197638" start="5687" end="5694" title="1980 European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup Final" label="1979–80"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="5696" end="5710" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q581380" start="5712" end="5716" title="1980 European Super Cup" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q223170" start="5731" end="5747" title="Argentine Primera División" label="Primera División"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438789" start="5749" end="5762" title="1981 Argentine Primera División" label="1981 Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518004" start="5777" end="5785" title="Galatama" label="Galatama"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="5808" end="5822" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q46943" start="5824" end="5828" title="1978 FIFA World Cup" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q372350" start="5842" end="5880" title="List of Argentine Primera División top scorers" label="Argentine Primera División top scorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626473" start="5882" end="5895" title="1974 Argentine Primera División" label="1974 Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438313" start="5897" end="5914" title="1976 Argentine Primera División" label="1976 Metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q729513" start="5916" end="5931" title="Pichichi Trophy" label="Pichichi Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5945" end="5971" title="FIFA World Cup awards#Golden Boot" label="FIFA World Cup Golden Boot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5979" end="6005" title="FIFA World Cup awards#Golden Ball" label="FIFA World Cup Golden Ball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6013" end="6041" title="FIFA World Cup awards#All-Star Team" label="FIFA World Cup All-Star Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="6049" end="6065" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6074" end="6111" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or#Additional awards" label="Le nouveau palmarès (the new winners)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049896" start="6113" end="6127" title="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q645468" start="6135" end="6151" title="Player of the Year of Argentina" label="Olimpia de Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q259724" start="6159" end="6196" title="South American Footballer of the Year" label="South American Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q16852390" start="6204" end="6242" title="List of UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup top scorers" label="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup top scorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="6253" end="6261" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q83710" start="6328" end="6339" title="Golden Foot" label="Golden Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062157" start="6367" end="6395" title="Estadio Mario Alberto Kempes" label="Estadio Mario Alberto Kempes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44210" start="6418" end="6436" title="Córdoba, Argentina" label="Córdoba, Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q496548" start="6459" end="6479" title="Argentine Football Association" label="AFA Team of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383" start="6499" end="6504" title="International Federation of Football History &amp;amp; Statistics" label="IFFHS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610930" wikidata="Q6849283" url="?curid=610930" title="Mike Williams (offensive lineman)">
<text>Michael Deshaun Williams (born January 11, 1980) is an American former professional football player who was an offensive tackle and guard in the National Football League (NFL). He played college football for the University of Texas, and was recognized as a consensus All-American. The Buffalo Bills chose him with the fourth overall pick in the 2002 NFL draft, and he played professionally for the Bills and Washington Redskins.

==Early life==
Williams was born in Dallas, Texas. He graduated from The Colony High School in The Colony, Texas, where he played for The Colony Cougars high school football team. When Williams was in high school, he was so big they didn&#x27;t have shoulder pads that could fit him, they tried getting pads from Erik Williams and Leon Lett of the Cowboys, and their pads still didn&#x27;t fit Williams.

==College career==
While attending the University of Texas in Austin, he played for coach Mack Brown&#x27;s Texas Longhorns football team from 1998 to 2001. He played right tackle for the Longhorns, while protecting quarterbacks Major Applewhite and Chris Simms. Following his senior season in 2001, he was a first-team All-Big-12 selection and was recognized as a consensus first-team All-American.

==Professional career==
===Pre-draft===
Because Chris Simms was left-handed, Williams was projected as a top prospect for left tackle, widely considered the most important position on the offensive line. He was considered one of the two top prospects in the 2002 NFL draft, alongside Bryant McKinnie, a natural left tackle from the University of Miami.

===Buffalo Bills===
Williams was selected by the Buffalo Bills with the fourth overall pick in the first round of the 2002 NFL Draft, three picks ahead of McKinnie. After starting several games at right tackle, he was eventually moved to left tackle, but largely disappointed. He was widely seen as a draft bust and eventually lost the starting job to undrafted free agent Jason Peters. After a failed attempt to convert Williams to guard, and spending some spot duty at defensive tackle in goal-line situation, he was released in the 2006 offseason.

===Jacksonville Jaguars===
Williams was signed by the Jacksonville Jaguars on March 14, 2006, He was placed on injured reserve on August 29, 2006, and waived on December 29, 2006. He never appeared in a regular season game for the Jaguars.

===Washington Redskins===
Williams spent two years out of football before he gave the NFL another shot and signed with the Washington Redskins on April 24, 2009. At the time he weighed close to 410 pounds and there was some doubt regarding his ability to handle playing tackle again. Williams eventually lost nearly 70 pounds in order to play the position, but struggled when doing so. Because of constant injuries to the Redskins&#x27; offensive line, Williams was moved to right guard, where he played well and started eight games at the position. Williams was rewarded for his efforts on March 6, 2010, with a new two-year contract after new head coach Mike Shanahan and his staff reviewed game film of him.

On July 10, 2010, it was reported by &quot;The Washington Post&quot; that Williams would miss the entire 2010 season due to blood clots near his heart. Williams was later released by Washington on July 30, 2011.

==Legacy==
Notwithstanding that Williams was a four-season starter, some commentators consider him to be a &quot;draft bust&quot; due to his high draft pick and relative lack of long-term success. &quot;The Sporting News&quot; named Williams as the No. 4 biggest NFL draft bust from 1989 to 2008. In the game, NFL Street, Williams had the highest speed rating for an offensive lineman, comparable to that of some wide receivers.

==References==
==External links==
* Washington Redskins bio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6849283" start="0" end="24" title="Mike Williams (offensive lineman)" label="Michael Deshaun Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="84" end="92" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976" start="111" end="127" title="offensive tackle" label="offensive tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113" start="132" end="137" title="Offensive guard" label="guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="145" end="169" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="187" end="203" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="212" end="231" title="University of Texas" label="University of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146372" start="267" end="279" title="College Football All-America Team" label="All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="285" end="298" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q784760" start="345" end="359" title="2002 NFL draft" label="2002 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="408" end="427" title="Washington Redskins" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="466" end="479" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726825" start="499" end="521" title="The Colony High School" label="The Colony High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q975816" start="525" end="542" title="The Colony, Texas" label="The Colony, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757701" start="583" end="603" title="high school football" label="high school football"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="874" end="903" title="University of Texas in Austin" label="University of Texas in Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13411875" start="925" end="935" title="Mack Brown" label="Mack Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707821" start="943" end="967" title="Texas Longhorns football" label="Texas Longhorns football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738022" start="1064" end="1080" title="Major Applewhite" label="Major Applewhite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108061" start="1085" end="1096" title="Chris Simms" label="Chris Simms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108061" start="1284" end="1295" title="Chris Simms" label="Chris Simms"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976" start="1358" end="1369" title="left tackle" label="left tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q784760" start="1494" end="1508" title="2002 NFL draft" label="2002 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q672535" start="1520" end="1535" title="Bryant McKinnie" label="Bryant McKinnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="1639" end="1652" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q31603" start="1891" end="1901" title="draft bust" label="draft bust"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="1942" end="1951" title="undrafted sportsperson" label="undrafted"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807426" start="1963" end="1975" title="Jason Peters" label="Jason Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550304" start="2061" end="2077" title="defensive tackle" label="defensive tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q272223" start="2196" end="2216" title="Jacksonville Jaguars" label="Jacksonville Jaguars"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="2506" end="2525" title="Washington Redskins" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113" start="2858" end="2869" title="right guard" label="right guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857407" start="3039" end="3052" title="Mike Shanahan" label="Mike Shanahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="3138" end="3157" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q31603" start="3421" end="3431" title="draft bust" label="draft bust"/>
<link wikidata="Q951872" start="3511" end="3528" title="The Sporting News" label="The Sporting News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750919" start="3571" end="3580" title="NFL draft" label="NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953753" start="3618" end="3628" title="NFL Street" label="NFL Street"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610933" wikidata="Q2564968" url="?curid=610933" title="Western Professional Hockey League">
<text>The Western Professional Hockey League (abbreviated WPHL) was a minor professional ice hockey league.

The WPHL operated from 1996 to 2001 with teams based in the southern United States, primarily Texas and Louisiana. The league started with six teams in the 1996–97 season and grew to 18 teams in 1999–00. After the 2000–01 season, the WPHL merged with the Central Hockey League. Former WPHL teams continued to play in the CHL until the 2012–13 season.

==Teams in alphabetical order==

*Abilene Aviators (Abilene, Texas) 1998–2000; folded during the 1999–2000 season
*Alexandria Warthogs (Alexandria, Louisiana) 1998–2000
*Amarillo Rattlers (Amarillo, Texas) 1996–2001; continued in CHL until 2010 as Amarillo Gorillas
*Arkansas GlacierCats (Little Rock, Arkansas) 1998–2000 
*Austin Ice Bats (Austin, Texas) 1996–2001; continued in CHL until 2008
*Bossier-Shreveport Mudbugs (Bossier City, Louisiana) 2000–01; continued in CHL until 2011
*Central Texas Stampede (Belton, Texas) 1996–2001; folded during the 2000–01 season
*Corpus Christi IceRays (Corpus Christi, Texas) 1998–2001; continued in CHL until 2010 when the owners added a junior team in the North American Hockey League
*El Paso Buzzards (El Paso, Texas) 1996–2001; continued in CHL until 2003
*Fort Worth Brahmas (Fort Worth, Texas) 1997–2001; continued in CHL until 2013 when the owners added a junior team in the North American Hockey League
*Lake Charles Ice Pirates (Lake Charles, Louisiana) 1997–2001; folded during the 2001 CHL merger
*Lubbock Cotton Kings (Lubbock, Texas) 1999–2001; continued in CHL until 2007
*Monroe Moccasins (Monroe, Louisiana) 1997–2001; folded during the 2001 CHL merger
*New Mexico Scorpions (Rio Rancho, New Mexico) 1996–2001; continued in CHL until 2009
*Odessa Jackalopes (Odessa, Texas) 1997–2001; continued in CHL until 2011 when the owners added a junior team in the North American Hockey League
*San Angelo Outlaws (San Angelo, Texas) 1996–2001; continued in CHL until 2005 as San Angelo Saints
*Shreveport Mudbugs (Shreveport, Louisiana) 1997–2000
*Tupelo T-Rex (Tupelo, Mississippi) 1998–2001; chose not to join the CHL during the 2001 merger and launched a junior team instead in the America West Hockey League
*Waco Wizards (Waco, Texas) 1996–2000; folded during the 1999–2000 season

==Planned teams in alphabetical order==
Tucson Scorch (Tucson, Arizona) 1999; never played a game due to the owner of the team failing to post a financial guarantee

===Timeline===
==Champions==
===President&#x27;s Cup winners===
Playoff champions:
*1997 – El Paso Buzzards
*1998 – El Paso Buzzards
*1999 – Shreveport Mudbugs
*2000 – Shreveport Mudbugs
*2001 – Bossier-Shreveport Mudbugs

===Governor&#x27;s Cup===
Regular season champions:
*1996–97 – New Mexico Scorpions
*1997–98 – Fort Worth Brahmas
*1998–99 – Shreveport Mudbugs
*1999–00 – Central Texas Stampede
*2000–01 – Tupelo T-Rex

==Individual league awards==
===1996–97===
*Coach of the year - Todd Brost, El Paso
*Most valuable player - Chris Brooks, Amarillo
*Scoring champion - Chris Brooks, Amarillo
*Most outstanding goaltender - Daniel Berthiaume, Central Texas
*Most outstanding defenseman - Jody Praznik, New Mexico
*Playoff most valuable player - Chris MacKenzie, El Paso
*All-star game most valuable player - Doug Smith, Central Texas

===1997–98===
*Coach of the year - Bill McDonald, Fort Worth Brahmas
*Most valuable player - Jamie Thompson, El Paso
*Man of the year - Jamie Thompson, El Paso
*Scoring champion - Carl Boudreau, San Angelo
*Rookie of the year - Sami Laine, Odessa
*Most outstanding goaltender - Kevin St. Pierre, Shreveport
*Most outstanding defenseman - Eric Ricard, New Mexico
*Playoff most valuable player - Billy Trew, El Paso
*All-star game most valuable player - Sylvain Naud, New Mexico

===1998–99===
*Coach of the year - Todd Lalonde, Waco
*Most valuable player - Chris Robertson, Corpus Christi
*Man of the year - Graeme Townshend, Lake Charles
*Scoring champion - Carl Boudreau, San Angelo
*Rookie of the year - Kory Cooper, Waco
*Most outstanding goaltender - Kory Cooper, Waco
*Most outstanding defenseman - Eric Brule, Abilene
*Playoff most valuable player - John Vecchiarelli, Shreveport
*All-star game most valuable player - Billy Trew, El Paso

===1999–00===
*Coach of the year - Brian Curran, Monroe
*Most valuable player - Ron Newhook, Central Texas
*Man of the year - Brad Haelzle, Amarillo and Scott Muscutt, Shreveport
*Scoring champion - Geoff Bumstead, Corpus Christi
*Rookie of the year - Dan Price, Austin
*Most outstanding goaltender - Matt Barnes, Central Texas
*Most outstanding defenseman - Arturs Kupaks, Lubbock
*Playoff most valuable player - Hugo Hamelin, Shreveport
*All-star game most valuable player - Dorian Anneck, Monroe

===2000–01===
*Coach of the year -Don McKee, Odessa
*Most valuable player - Jason Firth, Tupelo
*Man of the year - Travis Van Tighem, New Mexico
*Scoring champion - Jason Firth, Tupelo
*Rookie of the year - Ken Carroll, Bossier-Shreveport
*Most outstanding goaltender - Ken Carroll, Bossier-Shreveport
*Most outstanding defenseman - Mark DeSantis, New Mexico
*Playoff most valuable player - Jason Campbell, Bossier-Shreveport
*All-star game most valuable player - Kyle Reeves, Lubbock
*Rick Kozuback Award - Trent Eigner, El Paso

==See also==
*List of developmental and minor sports leagues
*List of ice hockey leagues
*Minor league
*Sports league attendances

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2564968" start="4" end="38" title="Western Professional Hockey League" label="Western Professional Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564968" start="52" end="56" title="Western Professional Hockey League" label="WPHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="83" end="93" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="163" end="185" title="southern United States" label="southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="197" end="202" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="207" end="216" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053826" start="358" end="379" title="Central Hockey League" label="Central Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053871" start="438" end="452" title="2012–13 CHL season" label="2012–13 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q321289" start="489" end="505" title="Abilene Aviators" label="Abilene Aviators"/>
<link wikidata="Q128295" start="507" end="521" title="Abilene, Texas" label="Abilene, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562810" start="570" end="589" title="Alexandria Warthogs" label="Alexandria Warthogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q985351" start="591" end="612" title="Alexandria, Louisiana" label="Alexandria, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q455091" start="625" end="642" title="Amarillo Gorillas" label="Amarillo Rattlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q51691" start="644" end="659" title="Amarillo, Texas" label="Amarillo, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q455091" start="703" end="720" title="Amarillo Gorillas" label="Amarillo Gorillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q672862" start="722" end="742" title="Arkansas GlacierCats" label="Arkansas GlacierCats"/>
<link wikidata="Q33405" start="744" end="765" title="Little Rock, Arkansas" label="Little Rock, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q781099" start="779" end="794" title="Austin Ice Bats" label="Austin Ice Bats"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="796" end="809" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q634593" start="851" end="877" title="Bossier-Shreveport Mudbugs" label="Bossier-Shreveport Mudbugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q877897" start="879" end="902" title="Bossier City, Louisiana" label="Bossier City, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054013" start="942" end="964" title="Central Texas Stampede" label="Central Texas Stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q744550" start="966" end="979" title="Belton, Texas" label="Belton, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951819" start="1026" end="1048" title="Corpus Christi IceRays (1998–2010)" label="Corpus Christi IceRays"/>
<link wikidata="Q49242" start="1050" end="1071" title="Corpus Christi, Texas" label="Corpus Christi, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q913860" start="1155" end="1183" title="North American Hockey League" label="North American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324446" start="1185" end="1201" title="El Paso Buzzards" label="El Paso Buzzards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="1203" end="1217" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407601" start="1259" end="1277" title="Fort Worth Brahmas" label="Fort Worth Brahmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="1279" end="1296" title="Fort Worth, Texas" label="Fort Worth, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q913860" start="1380" end="1408" title="North American Hockey League" label="North American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648679" start="1410" end="1434" title="Lake Charles Ice Pirates" label="Lake Charles Ice Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q864106" start="1436" end="1459" title="Lake Charles, Louisiana" label="Lake Charles, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673146" start="1507" end="1527" title="Lubbock Cotton Kings" label="Lubbock Cotton Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q49273" start="1529" end="1543" title="Lubbock, Texas" label="Lubbock, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292311" start="1585" end="1601" title="Monroe Moccasins" label="Monroe Moccasins"/>
<link wikidata="Q947115" start="1603" end="1620" title="Monroe, Louisiana" label="Monroe, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982743" start="1668" end="1688" title="New Mexico Scorpions" label="New Mexico Scorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q33555" start="1690" end="1712" title="Rio Rancho, New Mexico" label="Rio Rancho, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014459" start="1754" end="1771" title="Odessa Jackalopes (1997–2011)" label="Odessa Jackalopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q128361" start="1773" end="1786" title="Odessa, Texas" label="Odessa, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q913860" start="1870" end="1898" title="North American Hockey League" label="North American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000640" start="1900" end="1918" title="San Angelo Outlaws" label="San Angelo Outlaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q925598" start="1920" end="1937" title="San Angelo, Texas" label="San Angelo, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413266" start="1981" end="1998" title="San Angelo Saints" label="San Angelo Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q634593" start="2000" end="2018" title="Bossier-Shreveport Mudbugs" label="Shreveport Mudbugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80517" start="2020" end="2041" title="Shreveport, Louisiana" label="Shreveport, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114447" start="2054" end="2066" title="Tupelo T-Rex" label="Tupelo T-Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q667727" start="2068" end="2087" title="Tupelo, Mississippi" label="Tupelo, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742804" start="2191" end="2217" title="America West Hockey League" label="America West Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283333" start="2219" end="2231" title="Waco Wizards" label="Waco Wizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="2233" end="2244" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2333" end="2346" title="Tucson Scorch" label="Tucson Scorch"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="2348" end="2363" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537569" start="2735" end="2742" title="1996–97 WPHL season" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q973369" start="2767" end="2774" title="1997–98 WPHL season" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537572" start="2797" end="2804" title="1998–99 WPHL season" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537573" start="2827" end="2834" title="1999–00 WPHL season" label="1999–00"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537578" start="2861" end="2868" title="2000–01 WPHL season" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415250" start="2949" end="2959" title="Todd Brost" label="Todd Brost"/>
<link wikidata="Q17501922" start="2993" end="3005" title="Chris Brooks (ice hockey)" label="Chris Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q267778" start="3090" end="3107" title="Daniel Berthiaume" label="Daniel Berthiaume"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3154" end="3166" title="Jody Praznik" label="Jody Praznik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3211" end="3226" title="Chris MacKenzie (ice hockey b. 1971)" label="Chris MacKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3274" end="3284" title="Doug Smith (ice hockey b. 1970)" label="Doug Smith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3336" end="3349" title="Bill McDonald (ice hockey)" label="Bill McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3394" end="3408" title="Jamie Thompson (ice hockey b. 1974)" label="Jamie Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3481" end="3494" title="Carl Boudreau" label="Carl Boudreau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3529" end="3539" title="Sami Laine" label="Sami Laine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3579" end="3595" title="Kevin St. Pierre" label="Kevin St. Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3639" end="3650" title="Eric Ricard" label="Eric Ricard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3695" end="3705" title="Bill Trew" label="Billy Trew"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3753" end="3765" title="Sylvain Naud" label="Sylvain Naud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3814" end="3826" title="Todd Lalonde" label="Todd Lalonde"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3857" end="3872" title="Chris Robertson (ice hockey)" label="Chris Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530121" start="3908" end="3924" title="Graeme Townshend" label="Graeme Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4007" end="4018" title="Kory Cooper" label="Kory Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4105" end="4115" title="Eric Brule" label="Eric Brule"/>
<link wikidata="Q64011258" start="4157" end="4174" title="John Vecchiarelli" label="John Vecchiarelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963486" start="4281" end="4293" title="Brian Curran" label="Brian Curran"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4326" end="4337" title="Ron Newhook" label="Ron Newhook"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4372" end="4384" title="Brad Haelzle" label="Brad Haelzle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4399" end="4412" title="Scott Muscutt" label="Scott Muscutt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4445" end="4459" title="Geoff Bumstead" label="Geoff Bumstead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4498" end="4507" title="Dan Price (ice hockey)" label="Dan Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788315" start="4547" end="4558" title="Matt Barnes (ice hockey)" label="Matt Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4605" end="4618" title="Arturs Kupaks" label="Arturs Kupaks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4660" end="4672" title="Hugo Hamelin" label="Hugo Hamelin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4723" end="4736" title="Dorian Anneck" label="Dorian Anneck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4780" end="4789" title="Don McKee" label="Don McKee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162931" start="4822" end="4833" title="Jason Firth" label="Jason Firth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4861" end="4878" title="Travis Van Tighem" label="Travis Van Tighem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4953" end="4964" title="Ken Carroll" label="Ken Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294046" start="5079" end="5092" title="Mark DeSantis (ice hockey)" label="Mark DeSantis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5137" end="5151" title="Jason Campbell (ice hockey)" label="Jason Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q68715029" start="5210" end="5221" title="Kyle Reeves" label="Kyle Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5254" end="5266" title="Trent Eigner" label="Trent Eigner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616147" start="5291" end="5337" title="List of developmental and minor sports leagues" label="List of developmental and minor sports leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863383" start="5339" end="5365" title="List of ice hockey leagues" label="List of ice hockey leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370066" start="5367" end="5379" title="Minor league" label="Minor league"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245667" start="5381" end="5406" title="Sports league attendances" label="Sports league attendances"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610936" wikidata="Q701705" url="?curid=610936" title="Formarinsee">
<text>Formarinsee is a lake in the Austrian Alps. It lies in the Bundesland of Vorarlberg and lends its name to the close by Formarinbach, one of the two source rivers of the River Lech.

As part of the ORF TV program &quot;9 places, 9 treasures&quot;, the Formarinsee with the Rote Wand (2 km north of the lake) was voted Austria&#x27;s most beautiful place on 24 October 2015.

== Photo gallery ==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q701705" start="0" end="11" title="Formarinsee" label="Formarinsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="17" end="21" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="29" end="36" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="38" end="42" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q261543" start="59" end="69" title="States of Austria" label="Bundesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38981" start="73" end="83" title="Vorarlberg" label="Vorarlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155841" start="175" end="179" title="Lech (river)" label="Lech"/>
<link wikidata="Q262386" start="197" end="200" title="ORF (broadcaster)" label="ORF"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610950" wikidata="Q5467619" url="?curid=610950" title="Ford 351">
<text>Ford 351 may refer to:
* Ford 351 Windsor (351W), an engine part of the Ford 90 degree V family
* Ford 351 Cleveland (351C), an engine part of the Ford 335 family
* Ford 351 M (351M), an engine part of the Ford 335 family</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3429736" start="25" end="41" title="Ford 351 Windsor" label="Ford 351 Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467622" start="98" end="116" title="Ford 351 Cleveland" label="Ford 351 Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467622" start="165" end="175" title="Ford 351 M" label="Ford 351 M"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610953" wikidata="Q64874309" url="?curid=610953" title="Prince Imperial">
<text>Prince Imperial may refer to the Crown Prince in the following monarchies:
* Prince Imperial of Brazil
* Prince Imperial of France, especially:
** Napoléon, Prince Imperial
* Prince Imperial of Mexico

== See also ==
* Prince Imperial Memorial, a memorial cross built on the site of the death of Napoleon, Prince Imperial in South Africa
* Prince Royal (disambiguation), a similar style denoting the heirs apparent to certain other monarchies
* Railway of the Prince Imperial, the first documented model railway in the world</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q64874309" start="0" end="15" title="Prince Imperial" label="Prince Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q207293" start="33" end="45" title="Crown Prince" label="Crown Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q862999" start="77" end="102" title="Prince Imperial of Brazil" label="Prince Imperial of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403392" start="105" end="130" title="Prince Imperial of France" label="Prince Imperial of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q221549" start="147" end="172" title="Napoléon, Prince Imperial" label="Napoléon, Prince Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403399" start="175" end="200" title="Prince Imperial of Mexico" label="Prince Imperial of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q110443221" start="219" end="243" title="Prince Imperial Memorial" label="Prince Imperial Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532232" start="340" end="369" title="Prince Royal (disambiguation)" label="Prince Royal (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20872107" start="445" end="475" title="Railway of the Prince Imperial" label="Railway of the Prince Imperial"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610956" wikidata="Q1077440" url="?curid=610956" title="Chris Laidlaw">
<text>Christopher Robert Laidlaw (born 16 November 1943) is a New Zealand politician and former rugby union player, Rhodes Scholar, public servant, diplomat and radio host.

== Early life ==
Laidlaw was born in Dunedin and schooled at King&#x27;s High School from 1957 to 1961, where he played in the first rugby team.

Laidlaw attended Otago University from 1962 to 1966, and completed a master&#x27;s degree in 1968, after which he went overseas with the All Blacks. In 1969 he took up his Rhodes Scholarship at Merton College, Oxford.

==Rugby union career==

Described as a rugby prodigy, Laidlaw was immediately selected for the University A side in 1962 upon leaving school. Such was the impact of his play that during the same year he played for an Otago representative side, for a South Island regional side, and for New Zealand Universities. Personal training sessions with former All Black Charlie Saxton endowed Laidlaw with &quot;a marvellous pass and an accurate kick from forward base&quot;.

Not yet 20, Laidlaw made his debut for the All Blacks in 1963 on their tour of Britain and . Although chosen as reserve to the incumbent half-back and vice-captain, Kevin Briscoe, Laidlaw&#x27;s performances catapulted him into selection for a test against France and a match against the Barbarians.

In all, Laidlaw played 57 matches for the All Blacks, including 20 internationals. He captained the team on three occasions: a test against Australia in 1969 and games against Victoria and South-West Africa in 1969 and 1970, respectively.

==Civil servant==
In 1972 Laidlaw joined the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. He served as Assistant to Commonwealth Secretary-General Sonny Ramphal who he described in 1999 as &quot;far and away the most brilliant man I have ever met.&quot;

In 1977 during a diplomatic cocktail party in New York Laidlaw says the then NZ Prime Minister Robert Muldoon drunkenly harassed him, jabbing his finger in Laidlaw&#x27;s chest. Muldoon was angry about Laidlaw&#x27;s public comments criticising apartheid. Laidlaw says he grabbed Muldoon by the lapels and propelled him against the wall saying something like &quot;If you ever touch me again I&#x27;ll knock your teeth out.&quot; Muldoon glared at him, turned on his heel and walked out.

In 1986, Laidlaw became New Zealand&#x27;s first resident High Commissioner to Harare, representing New Zealand&#x27;s interests throughout Africa. In 1989, Laidlaw was appointed Race Relations Conciliator.

==Political career==
===Member of Parliament===

Laidlaw won the Wellington Central by-election in 1992, following the election of Fran Wilde to the Wellington mayoralty. Labour leader Mike Moore designated Laidlaw Labour&#x27;s spokesman for Tourism, Disarmament and Ethnic Affairs. He failed to win re-election (to the renamed Wellington-Karori electorate) in the 1993 general election, losing to National&#x27;s Pauline Gardiner.

Laidlaw is a supporter of a New Zealand republic. In 1997 he published remarks allegedly made to him by Prince Charles during his visit of that year, which appeared to show the Prince implicitly supports a New Zealand republic. Laidlaw later published the claim in his book &quot;Rights of Passage&quot;, and again in his &quot;The New Zealand Herald&quot; column in March 2005, during Prince Charles&#x27; visit. No comment was made by the Prince as to the veracity of the comments.

===Wellington regional councillor===
Laidlaw was a councillor and chair of the Wellington Regional Council and represented the Wellington constituency. He was elected at the 2007 local elections with 24,757 votes, the greatest number of votes for any candidate that year. He was re-elected in 2010 with 24,838 votes, in 2013 and in 2016. He succeeded Fran Wilde as chair of the Regional Council in 2015 and was re-elected as chair in 2016. Laidlaw came under significant pressure over changes made to the Wellington bus network in July 2018. When he stated to a parliamentary select committee that &quot;there was essentially nothing they would do differently if they could do the bus overhaul again&quot;, the packed audience responded with loud laughter. The media subsequently adopted the term &quot;bustastrophe&quot; for the situation.

In July 2019 Laidlaw announced that he would not be standing for re-election to the Wellington Regional Council in the October 2019 local elections. Following the 2019 election Laidlaw was succeeded as chair by Daran Ponter of the Labour Party.

==Broadcasting==
Laidlaw hosted Radio New Zealand National&#x27;s &quot;Sunday Morning&quot; programme from 2000 to 2013.

==Family==
Laidlaw is married to prominent New Zealand art curator Helen Kedgley, and is a brother-in-law of former Green MP Sue Kedgley. He has two children and three grandchildren.

== World Rugby Hall of Fame ==
Laidlaw was announced as one of five people that will be inducted into the World Rugby Hall of Fame at the World Rugby Awards in Monaco on 24 November 2024.

==References==
==External links==

* University of Otago alumnus profile
* NZ Rugby Museum profile (archived)
* A Civilising Mission; Otago University 
* New Zealand Vice-Chancellors’ Committee Rhodes Scholars (archived)
* Chris Laidlaw Says Goodbye</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1077440" start="0" end="26" title="Chris Laidlaw" label="Christopher Robert Laidlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="90" end="101" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="110" end="124" title="Rhodes Scholarship" label="Rhodes Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410966" start="229" end="252" title="King&amp;#x27;s High School, Dunedin" label="King&amp;#x27;s High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201513" start="331" end="347" title="University of Otago" label="Otago University"/>
<link wikidata="Q55801" start="451" end="461" title="All Blacks" label="All Blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="486" end="504" title="Rhodes Scholarship" label="Rhodes Scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q82513" start="508" end="522" title="Merton College, Oxford" label="Merton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="524" end="530" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="783" end="795" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082373" start="894" end="908" title="Charles Saxton (sportsman)" label="Charlie Saxton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1138" end="1147" title="Rugby union positions#Scrumhalf" label="half-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195664" start="1166" end="1179" title="Kevin Briscoe" label="Kevin Briscoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q807749" start="1289" end="1299" title="Barbarian F.C." label="Barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111221" start="1642" end="1672" title="Commonwealth Secretary-General" label="Commonwealth Secretary-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q958984" start="1673" end="1686" title="Shridath Ramphal" label="Sonny Ramphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="1876" end="1890" title="Robert Muldoon" label="Robert Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="2026" end="2035" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921" start="2349" end="2355" title="Harare" label="Harare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937427" start="2449" end="2475" title="Race Relations Conciliator" label="Race Relations Conciliator"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067733" start="2543" end="2573" title="1992 Wellington Central by-election" label="Wellington Central by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478204" start="2609" end="2619" title="Fran Wilde" label="Fran Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q558647" start="2663" end="2673" title="Mike Moore (New Zealand politician)" label="Mike Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981314" start="2807" end="2824" title="Wellington-Karori" label="Wellington-Karori"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016162" start="2844" end="2865" title="1993 New Zealand general election" label="1993 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155022" start="2893" end="2909" title="Pauline Gardiner" label="Pauline Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456357" start="2940" end="2960" title="Republicanism in New Zealand" label="New Zealand republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="3016" end="3030" title="Charles, Prince of Wales" label="Prince Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199207" start="3240" end="3262" title="The New Zealand Herald" label="The New Zealand Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q856010" start="3476" end="3503" title="Wellington Region" label="Wellington Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957459" start="3571" end="3591" title="2007 New Zealand local elections" label="2007 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016198" start="3690" end="3694" title="2010 New Zealand local elections" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478204" start="3748" end="3758" title="Fran Wilde" label="Fran Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q28182908" start="4358" end="4386" title="2019 New Zealand local elections" label="October 2019 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q72910921" start="4450" end="4462" title="Daran Ponter" label="Daran Ponter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280930" start="4517" end="4543" title="Radio New Zealand National" label="Radio New Zealand National"/>
<link wikidata="Q106962925" start="4675" end="4688" title="Helen Kedgley" label="Helen Kedgley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634166" start="4733" end="4744" title="Sue Kedgley" label="Sue Kedgley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502630" start="4898" end="4922" title="World Rugby Hall of Fame" label="World Rugby Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062575" start="4930" end="4948" title="World Rugby Awards" label="World Rugby Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="4952" end="4958" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610957" wikidata="Q528981" url="?curid=610957" title="Ijaw people">
<text>The Ijaw people, also known as the Ịjọ people, are an ethnic group found in the Niger Delta region in Nigeria, with primary population clusters in Bayelsa, Delta, and Rivers. They also have significant population clusters in Edo, Ondo. and small parts of Akwa Ibom.

The Ijaws are located in roughly 26 local government areas across Nigeria’s 774 local government areas. The Ijaws occupy six Nigerian states and are considered one of the major ethnic groups in the Niger Delta region. Many are found as migrant fishermen in camps and settlements in Benue, and Kogi states and as far west as Sierra Leone, Ghana and as far east as Gabon. As of 2023, Nigeria’s Ijaw population is estimated at around 35 million accounting for around 1.8% of the country’s 236.7 million people, positioning them as the sixth largest ethnic group in Nigeria. The Ijaws are one of the most populous tribes inhabiting the Niger Delta region, and one of the world’s most ancient peoples.

They have long lived in locations near many sea trade routes, and they were well connected to other areas by trade as early as the late 14th and early 15th centuries. In their languages, they often refer to themselves using the endonym Izon.

== History ==

=== Origins ===
The Izon or Ijaw People have lived in the Niger Delta region since before the fifth millennium BCE, and they were able to keep a separate identity because they lived where the agriculturally dependent Benue-Kwa groups were unable to penetrate. Some of the earliest archeological findings of Ijaw tribes have been dated to as far back as the early 800s BCE. The timeline that the archaeological excavations provide offers about 3,000 years of evidence of Ijaw history and presence in the Niger Delta.

There has been much argument about which tribe in Nigeria is the oldest. The Ijaws started inhabiting the Niger Delta region of what is now Nigeria as far back as 800 BCE, thus making them one of the world&#x27;s most ancient peoples. They have existed as a distinct language and ethnic group for over 5,000 years.

Agadagba-bou, the first ancient Ijaw city-state, existed for more than 400 years, lasting until 1050 CE. Due to internal conflict and violent weather patterns, this city-state was abandoned. Some of the descendants of this city-state created another in the 11th century called Isoma-bou, which lasted until the 16th century. This city-state, like the last, was founded in the Central Delta Wilberforce Island region. The Wilberforce Island region remains the most Ijaw-populated area of Nigeria.

The Ijaws are believed by some to be the descendants of an autochthonous people or an ancient tribe of Africa known as the Oru; the Ijaws were originally known by this name (Oru). These were believed to be the aboriginal people of West Africa and the region of Niger/Benue.

=== Development ===
The Ijo people had about 51 different clans and were trading amongst themselves. Their settlements in the Bini region, lower Niger and the Niger Delta were aboriginal (i.e. the Ijaw being the first settlers). They are known to be exceptional sea people.

In the 12th century, the number of Ijaw states grew, and by the 16th century, the Ijaws formed a number of powerful kingdoms with strong central rule. The Ijaw economy was predominantly supported by fishing, and each clustered group claimed a specific culture and autonomy from the others.

They were among the first people in Nigeria to come in contact with Europeans, the earliest explorers arriving in the early 15th century. After contact with European merchants around 1500 CE, communities began trading in enslaved people as middlemen while they also traded in palm oil. Traders who amassed wealth within this business market found themselves parading power over the government. Each trader purchased as many enslaved people as possible, valuing ability over genetic kinship as most enslaved people&#x27;s families were split apart and not valued for their rich culture and heritage. Because an able enslaved person could inherit the business of a trader with no heir, it was possible to have non-Ijaw leaders acculturate as Ijaw; such a leader was King Jaja of Opobo.

The Ijaw people bought slaves from Igboland, one of whom was Jaja (born: &quot;Jubo Jubogha&quot;), who was originally an Igbo man and who was bought by the Ibanis of Bonny. He later earned his way out of slavery and was renamed Jaja.

Historically, various Ijaw clans engaged in the practice of acquiring slaves for purposes such as gifting to newlyweds and showcasing wealth. However, the Ijaws&#x27; approach to slavery differed from many other cultures. As stated above, they permitted slaves to earn their freedom after a specified period of service, and it was common for Ijaw men to marry enslaved women, granting them freedom through marriage. This practice facilitated social mobility and led to some Ijaw clans having remote Igbo ancestry due to these unions. Overall, the Ijaws&#x27; participation in the slave trade reflects a more integrated and complex relationship between the two cultures.

The Nembe Ijo people were the first Ijaws to fight and win a battle against the Europeans. Though a short lived victory, a huge precedent was set by way of this.

King Frederick William Koko (Mingi VIII) of the Nembe-Brass Kingdom (1853–1898) led a successful attack on the British Royal Niger Company trading post in 1895. King Koko also took over 40 British people as hostages, whom he later allegedly ate. King Koko was offered a settlement for his grievances, but he  found the terms unacceptable. After some reprisal attacks by the British, his capital was ransacked. King Koko fled, and so was deposed by the British. He died in exile in 1898.

==Language==
The Ijaws speak nine closely related Niger-Congo languages, all of which belong to the Ijoid branch of the Niger-Congo tree. The primary division between the Ijo languages is that between Eastern Ijo and Central Ijo, the most important of the former group of languages being Izon, which is spoken by about nine million people.

There are two prominent groupings of the Ijaw language. The first, termed Central Izon (Ijaw) consists of central Ijaw speakers: Tuomo Clan, Egbema, Ekeremor, Sagbama (Ogobiri-Mein), Bassan, Apoi, Arogbo, Boma (Bumo), Kabo (Kabuowei), Ogboin, Tarakiri, and Kolokuma-Opokuma. Nembe, Kalabari, Ibani, okrika, Ogbia, Brass and Akassa (Akaha) dialects represent South-eastern Ijo (Izon). Buseni, Epie and Okordia dialects are considered Inland Ijo.

It was discovered in the 1980s that a now extinct Berbice Creole Dutch, spoken in Guyana, is partly based on Ijo lexicon and grammar. Its nearest relative seems to be Eastern Ijo, most likely Kalabari.

==Groups==
The Ijaw people can be categorized into three primary groups: Central Ijaw (Ijo), Eastern Ijaw (Ijo), and Western Ijaw (Ijo).

=== Central Ijaw (Ijo) ===
The Central Ijaw group comprises various clans, subgroups and languages:

* Ogbia subgroup:
This subgroup is native to the Ogbia people of Bayelsa State. The Ogbia subgroup has four clans namely; Abureni Clan, Anyama Clan, Kolo Creek Clan and Oloibiri Clan. It includes numerous communities such as Kolo, Oloibiri, Anyama-Ogbia, Abureni, Okodi, Epebu, Ewoma, Onuebum, Emadike, Opume, Ogbia Town, Emakalakala or Amakalakala, Otokpein, Otuedu, Otuoke, Immiringi, and others. They primarily speak the ogbia language, an ijoid language.

* Epie-Atisa Subgroup: 
Includes the Epie and Atisa people, also in Bayelsa. Communities include; Agudama, Okutukutu, Onopa, swali, Akenfa, Tombia, Akenpai, Igbogene and others. They primarily speak the epie dialect, an ijoid language. 

*Ijaw central subgroup:
Found in areas such as Ekeremor, Sagbama (Kumbo), Amassoma, Apoi clan, Arogbo clan, Boma (Bumo), Kabo (Kabuowei), Olodiama, Ogboin, Tarakiri, Kolokuma-Opokuma, Tungbo, Patani, Bomadi, Tuomo, and others, predominantly in Bayelsa and Delta. They speak the central ijaw dialect, an ijoid language. The Apoi clan, also known as the Eastern Apoi clan clan is relatively small and geographically secluded. Their settlements include Keme-ebiama, Kolokologbene, Ogboinbiri, Sampou, Gbaran, Kassama, and Azama. 

* Nembe-Brass subgroup:
Found in Nembe, Bassambri, Ogbolomabiri, Brass, Akassa (Akaha) and other areas in Nembe and Brass LGA of Bayelsa. They primarily speak the nembe dialect, an ijoid language. The Nembe-Brass kingdom is one of the ancient ijaw kingdom&#x27;s and city State. They were the first to defeat the British under the reign of King Frederick William Koko (Mingi VIII) of the Nembe-Brass Kingdom (1853–1898). 

* Abua subgroup:
Found in Abua/Odual LGA of in Rivers State. They primarily speak the Abua dialect, an ijoid dialect. The Abua dialect bears similarities with the ogbia dialect. 

Other Central Ijaw subgroups include the Biseni people, Akinima, Mbiama, Engeni, and some communities in the Ahoada East region of Rivers State.

=== Eastern Ijaw (Ijo) ===
The Eastern Ijaw group is mainly found in Rivers and Akwa Ibom States. In Rivers State, the Ijaws occupy around 11 local government areas. They are: Abua/Odual, Ahoada West, Akuku Toru, Andoni, Asari Toru, Bonny, Degema, Okrika, Ogu-Bolo, Opobo/Nkoro, and Port Harcourt. Residual populations are also present in Ogba/Egbema/Ndoni local Government Area. 
In Akwa Ibom, the Ijaws, primarily of Andoni-Obolo clan, inhabit areas near the Rivers State border, with populations in Ibeno, Inua Eyet Ikot, and surrounding locations.
Some Eastern Ijo clans and communities include;

* Kalabari subgroup:
Found in areas such as Abonnema, Buguma, Krakrama, Kula, Degema, Bille, and others. The Kalabari share close ancestry with the Nembe and Ogbia subgroups.

* Okrika subgroup (Wakirike/Wakrikese):
Includes the Ogu and Okrika (Wakrikese) people, as well as areas in Port Harcourt South. This subgroup shares ancestry with the Amassoma people in Bayelsa. Communities include Azuabie, Bolo, Dikibo-ama, George-ama, Ibaka, Ibuluya, Isaka, Kalio-ama, Oba-ama, Ogboloma, Ogu, Okrika, Okujagu-ama, Waka-ama, and others.

* Opobo and Nkoro (Ibani Ijaw):
Located near Port Harcourt South, this subgroup migrated from Bonny following internal conflicts. Communities include Abasibea, Bragadappa, Epiema, Kala-Ibiama, Kalama, Nkoro, Kwenima, Ohankalansunugu, Okuminima, Opobo, and others. They speak the ibani dialect, an ijoid language. 

* Bonny and Finima (Ibani Ijaw):
Sharing close ancestry with the Nembe-Brass, Bonny is one of the ancient Ijaw kingdoms and city-states. Towns include Abalama, Abalambie, Bonny, Borokiri, Finima, Oloma, Peterside, and others. They speak the Ibani dialect, an Ijoid language. 

* Andoni and Obolo subgroups:
The Obolo people are part of the Andoni-Obolo Clan and have a significant population in Akwa Ibom State, with a more central presence in Rivers State. Communities include Glilea, Ibotirem, Ibotobom, Ibotokpon, Ichama, Igbanga, Ikuru Town, Ilotombi, Inyoukpo, Isidum, Isioke, Isiokwana, Aama-Runner, Aam-Ekut, Afradiki, Agana, Aganofor, Agbachichama, Ajakajak, Akaradi Province, Ama, Ama Esuuk, Ama Jaba, Ama Ngere, Ama Sunday, Amanku, Amansa, Amaoke, Amatamuno, Anyama, Anyama-Aganna, Anyamaboko, Asakokolo, Asarama, Asuk-Ama, Asuk-Oyet, and many more.

* Port Harcourt south:
This area, on the border between Ijaw and Ikwerre territories, contains significant indigenous Ijaw populations in Borokiri, Diobu, Aggrey, Marine Base, Eastern Bypass, and the riverine areas.

Residual Ijaw populations can also be found in Ogba/Egbema/Ndoni LGA of Rivers State. These populations are a result of migrations during the 1980s and 1990s.

=== Western Ijaw (Ijo) ===
The Western Ijaws are located in Delta, Ondo, and Edo States. Their presence in Ondo and Edo States can be attributed to migrations that occoured around the 9th Century CE.

* Arogbo subgroup:
In Ondo State, the Arogbo clan, a subgroup of the Ijaw, traces its ancestry to migrations from the Arogbo clan and Ujo-Gbaraun town in the Central Ijaw region, now located in present-day Bayelsa State.

In the 9th century AD, members of the Arogbo clan later migrated to regions in south-east Ondo state to form the Arogbo clan. 
Their journey included a brief stop at Oporoza, led by Eji, his brother Perebiyenmo, and their sister Fiyepatei, before moving to Ukparomo, now known as Akpata, Opuba, Ajapa, and Ukpe. 

They settled there for a period, roughly spanning the reign of two Agadagbas (military priest-rulers of the Egbesu shrine), before establishing their current settlement and forming the Arogbo Ibe. 

* Apoi subgroup:

Historically, the Apois live on higher ground compared to other Ijaw clans and are unique in speaking a dialect of Yoruba similar to what is spoken by the Ilajes and Ikales. They no longer speak the Ijaw language. Geographically, they share borders with the Ikales to the north and the Ilajes to the west. 
The clan also shares border with the Arogbo Ijaw to the south of Ondo and the Furupagha Ijaw to the east across the Siloko River.
These communities have retained their distinct cultural heritage while integrating with their surrounding environments.

* Ijaw Central subgroup:
The Ijaw celtral subgroup are found predominantly in Bayelsa and Delta states. In Delta State, they comprise clans and towns such as Isaba, Kabo, Tuomo, Kumbo, Bomadi, Patani, Warri South, Warri North, Ogbe-Ijo, Operemo, Seimbiri, Tarakiri-West, Egbema, Ogulagha, Gbaramatu, and others. The Ijaws are present in six local government areas in Delta State: Bomadi, Burutu, Patani, Warri North, Warri South, and Warri South-West.

Warri serves as a border region for the Ijaws, Urhobos, and Itsekiris. Historically, the old township of Warri was originally known as Ogbo-Ijo (Ogbe-Ijo). Some prominent Ijaw towns in Warri include Oporoama, Oporoza, Opuwedei, Opuwedeibubo, Pepegbene, Tebijo, Ubafan, Opuama, Warri (Iselema), Ajama, Benikurukuru, Binitu, Bumobolou, Diebiri, Okerenkoko (Ekerenkoko), Ifhama, Ikantu, Ikpokpowu, and others.

* Ijo clans in Edo state:
In Edo State, the Ijaw initially settled in an area called Ikoro. Their rulers, known as &quot;Peres&quot; and &quot;Agadagbas&quot;, are believed to have predated the Benin monarchy. The term &quot;Pere&quot; means &quot;king&quot; in some Ijaw languages. 
In Edo, the Ijaws are found in parts of the Ovia Southeast Local Government Area, with clans including Egbema, Furupagha, Olodiama-West, and Okomu-Ijaw (Ukomu). Some towns and communities in this area include Abere, Ajakurama, Ajatitition, Ayakoroma, Binidogha, Gbelebu, Gbelekanga, Ikoro, Ikusangha, Inekorogha, Ingileuba, Itagbene, Ofoniama (Ofunama), Okomu-Ijaw (Ukomu), Siluko, Turukubu, Zide, and others.

=== Clans ===
==Traditional occupations==

The Ijaws were one of the first of Nigeria&#x27;s peoples to have contact with Westerners and were active as go-betweens in the trade between visiting Europeans and the peoples of the interior, particularly in the era before the discovery of quinine, when West Africa was still known as the &quot;White Man&#x27;s Graveyard&quot; because of the endemic presence of malaria, fever and heat. Some of the kin-based trading lineages that arose among the Ijaws developed into substantial corporations which were known as &quot;houses&quot;; each house had an elected leader as well as a fleet of war canoes for use in protecting trade and fighting rivals. The other main occupation common among the Ijaws has traditionally been fishing and farming.

Being a maritime people, many Ijaws were employed in the merchant shipping sector in the early and mid-20th century (pre-Nigerian Independence). With the advent of oil and gas exploration in their territory, some are now employed in that sector. Another major occupation is service in the civil service sector of the Nigerian states of Bayelsa and Rivers, where they are predominant.

Extensive state-government sponsored overseas scholarship programs in the 1970s and 1980s have also led to a significant presence of Ijaw professionals in Europe and North America (the so-called Ijaw diaspora). Another contributing factor to this human capital flight is the abject poverty in their homeland of the Niger Delta, resulting from decades of neglect by the Nigerian government and oil companies in spite of continuous petroleum prospecting in this region since the 1950s.

==Lifestyle==
The Ijaw people live by fishing supplemented by farming paddy-rice, plantains, Cassava, yams, cocoyams, bananas and other vegetables as well as tropical fruits such as guava, mangoes and pineapples; and trading. Smoke-dried fish, timber, palm oil and palm kernels are processed for export. While some clans (those to the east- Akassa, Nembe, Bille, Kalabari, Nkoro, Okrika, Andoni and Bonny) had powerful kings and a stratified society, some clans are believed not to have had any centralized confederacies until the arrival of the British. Individual communities in the western Niger Delta also had chiefs and governments at the village level.

For women, there are traditional rights of passage throughout life, marked with iria ceremonies.

Funeral ceremonies, particularly for those who have accumulated wealth and respect, are often very dramatic. Traditional religious practices center around &quot;Water spirits&quot; in the Niger river, and around tribute to ancestors.

=== Marriages ===
Marriages among the Ijaw clans are vibrant, lively, and share many cultural similarities. The Ijaw traditional wedding ceremony is a grand celebration that showcases the beauty and diversity of Ijaw culture.

The marriage process typically culminates in the payment of a bridal dowry, which increases if the bride comes from a royal family. Unlike many other ethnic groups, the Ijaws observe two distinct types of marriage.

The first type of marriage, known as the small-dowry marriage, involves the groom making an initial payment to the bride’s family. This payment typically includes cash, traditional beads, and items such as a canoe and fabrics like &quot;Ankara, Hollandis, or George,&quot; among other items. However, the cash portion of the dowry is not paid in full upfront. When the bride’s father passes away, the groom is expected to pay the remaining cash balance as part of his contribution to the funeral expenses. In this marriage system, children trace their lineage through either their mother’s or father’s side, allowing them the freedom to choose which heritage, culture, and traditions they wish to follow as they grow older. They can identify with both parents&#x27; ethnic backgrounds and live with either family. This form of marriage is the most common and widely practiced across all Ijaw clans.

The second type, known as the large-dowry marriage, involves a significantly higher dowry, and in this case, the children are considered to belong to the father&#x27;s family. However, this form of marriage is rarely practiced.

A distinctive feature of the Ijaw traditional wedding ceremony is the bride’s expectation to remain composed and unemotional until she is fully satisfied with the gifts presented by the groom and his family. During this rite, the groom showers the bride with money and valuable items, and she only smiles once she is content with the gifts. This tradition serves as a test of the groom’s love and commitment, as he must prove his ability to provide for her and make her happy. It also serves as a challenge to the bride, demonstrating that she is not easily swayed by material wealth and values her dignity and pride.

Another important aspect of the Ijaw wedding celebration is the &quot;Bibife&quot;, a feast hosted by the bride&#x27;s family. This event includes lively music, dancing, and performances, marking the joyous union of the couple and celebrating their new life together.

== Cultural attires ==
The traditional attire of the Ijaw people reflects both elegance and cultural significance, incorporating rich fabrics and intricate accessories that showcase their heritage.

For Ijaw men, the &quot;Etibo&quot; shirt serves as the main garment, typically made from materials like linen, cotton, or brocade. Its high neck and embroidery give it a distinguished look, often worn over a wrapper or trousers. The &quot;George wrapper&quot;, a long piece of luxurious fabric such as &quot;Hollandis or George&quot;, is tied around the waist and drapes elegantly to the ankles or knees, often adorned with intricate patterns. Men complete their look with a hat, such as a fedora or bowler, adding a touch of sophistication. They also carry a walking stick, typically made from wood and designed with intricate carvings, which adds an element of status. Coral beads in the form of necklaces and bracelets (called &quot;Ibolo&quot;) are often worn as accessories, symbolizing wealth and social standing.

Ijaw women&#x27;s traditional attire is equally stunning. The blouse is a loose-fitting, long-sleeved garment that is often richly embroidered. Paired with it are wrappers, typically two pieces made from &quot;Ankara, Hollandis, or George fabrics&quot;, which can be matched or contrasted with the blouse. The headgear, usually a stiff fabric head tie, is an essential part of the outfit, worn in various stylish formations to complement the blouse and wrappers. Like the men, women wear coral beads—necklaces, bracelets, and earrings—that denote both beauty and social status, completing the look.

In addition to the Etibo, George, and other common attire, the Ijaw people also wear special traditional garments such as the &quot;Namatibi/Feni, Peletebite, Don, and Ojubulu attires&quot;. The Don outfit, in particular, holds royal significance. Historically, it was worn primarily by royals and high-ranking individuals. The Don ensemble was heavy on the body and featured an elaborate display of wealth, including a cache of jewels, expensive beads, gold studs, and other coral ornaments. This attire was completed with a stylish hat, further emphasizing the wearer&#x27;s elevated status. The Don dress was not just a garment, but a powerful symbol of power, prestige, and the cultural heritage of the Ijaw people.

Together, these attires not only display the Ijaw people’s taste for elegance but also emphasize the importance of social hierarchy, beauty, and tradition within their culture. The different garments and accessories worn by both men and women reflect the rich history, cultural pride, and social standing that the Ijaw people continue to uphold.

==Religion and cultural practices==
Although the Ijaw are now primarily Christians (65% profess to be), with Roman Catholicism, Zion Church, Anglicanism and Pentecostalism being the varieties of Christianity most prevalent among them, they also have elaborate traditional religious practices of their own.

Traditionally, the Ijaws hold celebrations to honour the spirits that last for several days. The highlight of these festivals is the role of masquerades.

Veneration of ancestors plays a central role in Ijaw traditional religion, while water spirits, known as &quot;Owuamapu&quot;, also figure prominently in the Ijaw pantheon. In addition, the Ijaw practice a form of divination called &quot;Igbadai&quot;, which involves recently deceased individuals being interrogated on the causes of their death. Ijaw religious beliefs hold that the &quot;owuamapu&quot; are like humans in having personal strengths and shortcomings, and that humans dwell among these water spirits before being born. The role of prayer in the traditional Ijaw system of belief is to maintain the living in the good graces of the &quot;owuamapu&quot;, among whom they dwelt before being born into this world, and each year the Ijaw hold celebrations to honour the spirits lasting for several days.

The Ijaw people are known for many of their cultural festivals and ceremonies. These festivals often involve wrestling, boat racing, and traditional dances. Also central to the festivities is the role of masquerades, in which men wearing elaborate outfits and carved masks dance to the beat of drums and manifest the influence of the water spirits through the quality and intensity of their dancing. Particularly spectacular masqueraders are taken to actually be in the possession of the particular spirits on whose behalf they are dancing.

Important deities in the Ijaw religion include Egbesu, whose totems are the leopard, panther, and lion, and who manifests as a god of war, protection and of justice. Many of the Ijaws are warriors, and often offer veneration to Egbesu as a god of war as well. At the sound of the &quot;&#x27;Asawana&quot;&#x27;, the Ijaw warrior readies himself for war using Egbesu as a shield. One of Egbesu&#x27;s prime laws is that an Ijaw person should not be the cause of the problem, or the one to start the fight, but should respond only when he or she must. This is a manifestation of the Ijaw virtue of patience.

There are also a small number of converts to Islam, the most notable being the founder of the Delta People Volunteer Force Mujahid Dokubo-Asari.

== Notable leaders ==
* Jeremiah Omoto Fufeyin 
* Edwin K. Clarke
* Heineken Lokpobiri
* Goodluck Jonathan GCFR GCON
* Kenneth Ibiene Anga

==Food customs==
Like many ethnic groups in Nigeria, the Ijaws have many local foods that are not widespread in Nigeria. Many of these foods involve fish and other seafoods such as clams, oysters and periwinkles; yams and plantains. Some of these foods are:
*Polofiyai — A very rich soup made with yams and palm oil.
*Kekefiyai— A pottage made with chopped unripened (green) plantains, fish, other seafood or game meat (&quot;bushmeat&quot;) and palm oil.
*Fried or roasted fish and plantain — Fish fried in palm oil and served with fried plantains.
*Gbe — The grub of the raffia-palm tree beetle that is eaten raw, dried, fried in groundnut oil or pickled in palm oil.
*Kalabari &quot;sea-harvest&quot; fulo— A rich mixed seafood soup or stew that is eaten with foofoo, rice or yams.
*Owafiya (bean pottage) — A pottage made with Beans, palm oil, fish or bushmeat, Yam or Plantain. It is taken with processed Cassava or Starch.
*Geisha soup — This a kind of soup cooked from the geisha fish; it is made with pepper, salt, water and boiling it for some minutes.
*Opuru-fulou — Also referred to as prawn soup, prepared mainly with prawn, Ogbono (Irvingia gabonensis seeds), dried fish, table salt, crayfish, onions, fresh pepper, and red palm oil.
*Yellow soup - Made with fresh fish (mostly catfish) and fresh pepper and red palm oil and thickened with garri or biscuits. Sometimes fresh tomatoes can be added to the soup, to thicken it and add additional flavour.
* Onunu - Made with pounded yams and boiled overripe plantains. It is mostly enjoyed by the Okrikans
*Kiri-gina — Prepared without cooking on fire with Ogbono (Irvingia gabonensis seeds), dried fish, table salt, crayfish.
*Ignabeni — A watery soup prepared with either yam or plantain seasoned with teabush leaves, pepper, goat meat, and fish.
*Pilo-garri — A Bille meal mostly eaten during the raining season. It is prepared with dry garri, red palm oil, salt and eaten with roasted seafoods (fish, Isemi, Ngbe, Ikoli, etc.).
*Igbugbai fiyai - A soup prepared without oil, only fish, onion, periwinkle, Bush leaves and other seafood. This soup, once prepared, is mostly eaten by Odimodi people. 
*Kpanfaranran [fry fiyai] A soup prepared by frying the palm oil before adding your fish, meat, crayfish, periwinkle, and other seafood. This food is mostly cooked by the Odimodi people.

==Ethnic identity==
Formerly organized into several loose clusters of villages or confederacies, the Ijaw people were autonomous groups that cooperated primarily for defense against outsiders. These groups were united by shared cultural practices and a common language, but each maintained its independence. Over time, however, the Ijaw increasingly view themselves as part of a single, coherent nation—the Izon Nation—bound together by language, culture, and shared history.

This sense of unity has been significantly strengthened by the environmental degradations that have followed the exploitation of oil in the Niger Delta region, the ancestral homeland of the Ijaw. The region, rich in oil reserves, has suffered extensive environmental damage, including oil spills, gas flaring, and deforestation, which have had devastating effects on the local way of life. The Ijaw have also been frustrated by a revenue-sharing formula with the Nigerian Federal Government, which they perceive as unjust, with a disproportionate share of the nation&#x27;s wealth flowing to other regions while the Niger Delta remains impoverished and environmentally degraded. These grievances have fueled a growing sense of injustice and have been a catalyst for numerous high-profile clashes with the Nigerian authorities, including kidnappings, protests, and violent confrontations. In many of these incidents, lives have been lost, and the Ijaw people&#x27;s struggle for fairness and recognition has drawn both national and international attention.

The Ijaw people are resilient and proud, with a deep historical connection to the land and water. Long before the colonial era, the Ijaw were known for their seafaring abilities, traveling by wooden boats and canoes to distant lands, including Cameroon, Ghana, and other parts of West Africa. They navigated the vast rivers of the region, including traveling up the River Niger from the River Nun, a significant waterway that continues to hold cultural and spiritual importance. The Ijaw’s maritime skills and extensive trade networks are a testament to their adaptability, resourcefulness, and the depth of their cultural heritage, which endures despite the challenges they face today.

==Ijaw–Itsekiri conflicts==
One manifestation of ethnic violence on the part of the Ijaw has been an increase in the number and severity of clashes between Ijaw militants and those of Itsekiri origin, particularly in the town of Warri.

Deadly conflicts had rocked the South-South region, especially in Delta State, where intertribal killings had resulted in death on both sides.

In July 2013, local police discovered mutilated corpses of 13 Itsekiris killed by Ijaws, over a dispute on a candidate for a local council chairman. Several Itsekiri villages, including Gbokoda, Udo, Ajamita, Obaghoro and Ayerode-Zion on the Benin river axis, were razed down while several Itsekiris lost their lives.

==Oil conflict==

The December 1998 All Ijaw Youths Conference crystallized the struggle with the formation of the Ijaw Youth Movement (IYM) and the issuing of the Kaiama Declaration. In it, long-held Ijaw concerns about the loss of control of their homeland and their own lives to the oil companies were joined with a commitment to direct action. In the declaration, and in a letter to the companies, the Ijaws called for oil companies to suspend operations and withdraw from Ijaw territory. The IYM pledged “to struggle peacefully for freedom, self-determination and ecological justice,” and prepared a campaign of celebration, prayer, and direct action &#x27;Operation Climate Change&#x27; beginning December 28, 1998.

In December 1998, two warships and 10–15,000 Nigerian troops occupied Bayelsa and Delta states as the Ijaw Youth Movement (IYM) mobilized for Operation Climate Change. Soldiers entering the Bayelsa state capital of Yenagoa announced they had come to attack the youths trying to stop the oil companies. On the morning of December 30, 1998, two thousand young people processed through Yenagoa, dressed in black, singing and dancing. Soldiers opened fire with rifles, machine guns, and tear gas, killing at least three protesters and arresting twenty-five more. After a march demanding the release of those detained was turned back by soldiers, three more protesters were shot dead. The head of Yenagoa rebels - Chief Oweikuro Ibe - was burned alive in his mansion on December 28, 1998. Amongst his family members to flee the premises before the complete destruction was his only son, Desmond Ibe. The military declared a state of emergency throughout Bayelsa state, imposed a dusk-to-dawn curfew, and banned meetings. At military roadblocks, local residents were severely beaten or detained. At night, soldiers invaded private homes, terrorizing residents with beatings and women and girls with rape.

On January 4, 1999, about one hundred soldiers from the military base at Chevron’s Escravos facility attacked Opia and Ikiyan, two Ijaw communities in Delta State. Bright Pablogba, the traditional leader of Ikiyan, who came to the river to negotiate with the soldiers, was shot along with a seven-year-old girl and possibly dozens of others. Of the approximately 1,000 people living in the two villages, four people were found dead and sixty-two were still missing months after the attack. The same soldiers set the villages ablaze, destroyed canoes and fishing equipment, killed livestock, and destroyed churches and religious shrines.

Nonetheless, Operation Climate Change continued, and disrupted Nigerian oil supplies through much of 1999 by turning off valves through Ijaw territory. In the context of high conflict between the Ijaw and the Nigerian Federal Government (and its police and army), the military carried out the Odi massacre, killing scores if not hundreds of Ijaws.

Recent actions by Ijaws against the oil industry have included both renewed efforts at nonviolent action and militarized attacks on oil installations but with no human casualties to foreign oil workers despite hostage-takings. These attacks are usually in response to non-fulfilment by oil companies of memoranda of understanding with their host communities.

==Notable people==
*Goodluck Jonathan, politician and 14th President of Nigeria 
*J.P. Clark, poet and playwright
*Gabriel Okara, poet and novelist
*Owoye Andrew Azazi, a former Nigerian Chief of Defense Staff and National Security Adviser
*Patience Faka Jonathan, First Lady Of Nigeria (2010-2015)
*King Frederick William Koko, (Mingi VIII) King of Nembe-Brass Kingdom (1853–1898)
*Olu Benson Lulu-Briggs OON, (1930-2018) businessman and elder statesman 
*Timi Dakolo, Nigerian singer-songwriter
*Ibinabo Fiberesima, Nigerian Nollywood actress
*Ben Murray-Bruce, Nigerian media mogul and senator
*Ebikabowei Victor Ben, MEND general
*Kingsley Kuku, former chairman, Niger Delta presidential amnesty program 
*Eruani Azibapu Godbless, businessman and former Bayelsa Commissioner for Health
*Dumo Lulu-Briggs, business man and politician 
*Patience Torlowei, artist and fashion designer
*Finidi George, Nigerian footballer and coach
*Taribo West, Nigerian former soccer player and pastor
*Samson Siasia, Nigerian footballer and coach
*Inetimi Odon Timaya, Nigerian singer
*Damini Ogulu (Burna Boy), Nigerian singer and Grammy award winner
*Ideye Brown, Nigerian footballer
* King Alrlfred Diete-Spiff, former Military Governor of Rivers State and Amanayabo (King) of Twon-Brass
* King Edward Asimini William Dappa Pepple III, Perekule XI, Amanayabo (King) of Grand Bonny Kingdom
*High Chief Government Oweizide Ekpemupolo, Nigerian freedom fighter (ex-militant) commander
*Jeremiah Omoto Fufeyin, clergyman.
*Tammy Abraham, professional footballer.
*Agbani Darego, professional model and beauty queen.
*Gentle Jack, professional Nollywood actor.
*Dakore Egbuson Akande, Nollywood Actress
*Kingsley Otuaro Former Deputy Governor of Delta State
*Timini Egbuson, Nollywood actor
*Henry Seriake Dickson, politician and former governor 
*Timipre Sylva, politician and former governor of Bayelsa State, former Minister of State for Petroleum Resources.

* Edwin Kiagbodo Clark, Nigerian Ijaw leader and politician
==Ijaw organisations==
* Ijaw Youth Council (IYC)
* Ijaw National Congress (INC)
* Tuomo Youth Congress

==References==
===Other sources===
* Human Rights Watch, &quot;Delta Crackdown&quot;, May 1999
* Ijaw Youth Movement, letter to &quot;All Managing Directors and Chief Executives of transnational oil companies operating in Ijawland&quot;, December 18, 1998
* Project Underground, &quot;Visit the World of Chevron: Niger Delta&quot;, 1999
* Kari, Ethelbert Emmanuel. 2004. &quot;A Reference Grammar of Degema&quot;. Köln: Rüdiger Köppe Verlag.
* Hlaváčová, Anna: &quot;Three Points of View of Masquerades among the Ijo of the Niger River Delta&quot;. In: &quot;Playful Performers: African Children&#x27;s Masquerades&quot;. Ottenberg, S.; Binkley, D. (eds.)

==External links==

*&quot;Ijaw World Studies&quot;
*&quot;The Ijaw Language Dictionary Online&quot;
*&quot;Ethnologue&quot;: &quot;Ijaw Linguistic Tree&quot;
*&quot;Ijo People&quot;, University of Iowa
*American Museum of Natural History: &quot;The Art of the Kalabari Masquerade&quot;
*&quot;The Warri Crisis: Fueling Violence&quot; – Human Rights Watch report, November 2003 
*&quot;Blood Oil&quot; by Sebastian Junger in &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, February 2007 (accessed 28/1/2007), deals partly with the Ijaw</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q528981" start="4" end="15" title="Ijaw people" label="Ijaw people"/>
<link wikidata="Q528981" start="35" end="45" title="Ijaw people" label="Ịjọ people"/>
<link wikidata="Q29412" start="80" end="91" title="Niger Delta" label="Niger Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="102" end="109" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="124" end="143" title="Population" label="population clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q532153" start="147" end="154" title="Bayelsa State" label="Bayelsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q503910" start="156" end="161" title="Delta State" label="Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q503923" start="167" end="173" title="Rivers State" label="Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q682704" start="225" end="228" title="Edo State" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q836654" start="230" end="234" title="Ondo State" label="Ondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q424388" start="255" end="264" title="Akwa Ibom State" label="Akwa Ibom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15320003" start="503" end="510" title="Migrant worker" label="migrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q331432" start="511" end="520" title="Fisherman" label="fishermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q429908" start="549" end="554" title="Benue State" label="Benue"/>
<link wikidata="Q387745" start="560" end="564" title="Kogi State" label="Kogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="591" end="603" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="605" end="610" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="630" end="635" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="1193" end="1200" title="endonym" label="endonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q528981" start="1201" end="1205" title="Ijaw people" label="Izon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="2020" end="2032" title="Ethnicity" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="2612" end="2625" title="Autochthonous people" label="autochthonous"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="3615" end="3630" title="Enslaved person" label="enslaved people"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="3670" end="3678" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q192989" start="4119" end="4130" title="Acculturation" label="acculturate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160600" start="4158" end="4176" title="Jaja of Opobo" label="King Jaja of Opobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14234624" start="4214" end="4222" title="Igboland" label="Igboland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160600" start="4240" end="4244" title="Jaja of Opobo" label="Jaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="4246" end="4250" title="Birth name" label="born"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983682" start="4336" end="4342" title="Ibani tribe" label="Ibanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991053" start="5090" end="5095" title="Nembe Kingdom" label="Nembe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499089" start="5254" end="5276" title="Frederick William Koko Mingi VIII of Nembe" label="Frederick William Koko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806380" start="5368" end="5387" title="Royal Niger Company" label="Royal Niger Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="5490" end="5493" title="Human cannibalism" label="ate"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="5787" end="5808" title="Niger–Congo languages" label="Niger-Congo languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325759" start="5837" end="5842" title="Ijoid languages" label="Ijoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322020" start="5908" end="5921" title="Ijo languages" label="Ijo languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35483" start="6025" end="6029" title="Izon language" label="Izon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277063" start="6207" end="6217" title="Tuomo" label="Tuomo Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350398" start="6227" end="6235" title="Ekeremor clan" label="Ekeremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11936371" start="6237" end="6259" title="Mein clan" label="Sagbama (Ogobiri-Mein)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868020" start="6261" end="6267" title="Bassan clan" label="Bassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987453" start="6269" end="6273" title="Western Apoi clan" label="Apoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795472" start="6275" end="6281" title="Arogbo clan" label="Arogbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940337" start="6283" end="6287" title="Boma clan" label="Boma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6344288" start="6296" end="6311" title="Kabo clan" label="Kabo (Kabuowei)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510576" start="6353" end="6358" title="Nembe" label="Nembe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35697" start="6360" end="6368" title="Kalabari language" label="Kalabari"/>
<link wikidata="Q35697" start="6370" end="6375" title="Ibani dialect" label="Ibani"/>
<link wikidata="Q35697" start="6377" end="6383" title="Okrika language" label="okrika"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079876" start="6385" end="6390" title="Ogbia" label="Ogbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923946" start="6392" end="6397" title="Brass, Nigeria" label="Brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700355" start="6402" end="6408" title="Akassa clan" label="Akassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001331" start="6462" end="6468" title="Buseni clan" label="Buseni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35291" start="6470" end="6474" title="Epie language" label="Epie"/>
<link wikidata="Q35215" start="6574" end="6594" title="Berbice Creole Dutch" label="Berbice Creole Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="6637" end="6644" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="6649" end="6656" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079876" start="7015" end="7020" title="Ogbia" label="Ogbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q532153" start="7031" end="7044" title="Bayelsa State" label="Bayelsa State"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7102" end="7113" title="Anyama, Ogbia#Anyama Clan" label="Anyama Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021152" start="7197" end="7205" title="Oloibiri" label="Oloibiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q131985787" start="7207" end="7219" title="Anyama, Ogbia" label="Anyama-Ogbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25043656" start="7334" end="7340" title="Otuoke" label="Otuoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813400" start="7390" end="7404" title="ogbia language" label="ogbia language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325759" start="7409" end="7424" title="Ijoid languages" label="ijoid language."/>
<link wikidata="Q1325759" start="7646" end="7660" title="Ijoid languages" label="ijoid language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350399" start="7711" end="7719" title="Ekeremor" label="Ekeremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399088" start="7721" end="7728" title="Sagbama" label="Sagbama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329978" start="7748" end="7757" title="Eastern Apoi tribe" label="Apoi clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329978" start="8016" end="8033" title="Eastern Apoi tribe" label="Eastern Apoi clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510576" start="8225" end="8230" title="Nembe" label="Nembe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859479" start="8257" end="8262" title="Twon-Brass" label="Brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499089" start="8532" end="8559" title="Frederick William Koko Mingi VIII of Nembe" label="King Frederick William Koko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670480" start="8641" end="8655" title="Abua–Odual" label="Abua/Odual LGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q35010" start="8836" end="8842" title="Biseni language" label="Biseni"/>
<link wikidata="Q118594135" start="8851" end="8858" title="Akinima" label="Akinima"/>
<link wikidata="Q503923" start="9042" end="9054" title="Rivers State" label="Rivers State"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670480" start="9117" end="9127" title="Abua–Odual" label="Abua/Odual"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696272" start="9129" end="9140" title="Ahoada West" label="Ahoada West"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701936" start="9142" end="9152" title="Akuku-Toru" label="Akuku Toru"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754534" start="9154" end="9160" title="Andoni" label="Andoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803607" start="9162" end="9172" title="Asari-Toru" label="Asari Toru"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412546" start="9174" end="9179" title="Kingdom of Bonny" label="Bonny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251767" start="9181" end="9187" title="Degema, Nigeria" label="Degema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082573" start="9189" end="9195" title="Okrika" label="Okrika"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080271" start="9197" end="9205" title="Ogu–Bolo" label="Ogu-Bolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098375" start="9207" end="9218" title="Opobo–Nkoro" label="Opobo/Nkoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q20614811" start="9224" end="9237" title="Port Harcourt (local government area)" label="Port Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079867" start="9280" end="9297" title="Ogba–Egbema–Ndoni" label="Ogba/Egbema/Ndoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075271" start="9360" end="9377" title="Obolo people" label="Andoni-Obolo clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983812" start="9443" end="9448" title="Ibeno" label="Ibeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668297" start="9586" end="9594" title="Abonnema" label="Abonnema"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251767" start="9620" end="9626" title="Degema, Nigeria" label="Degema"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911778" start="9628" end="9633" title="Bille kingdom" label="Bille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721908" start="9651" end="9659" title="Kalabari tribe" label="Kalabari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991053" start="9690" end="9695" title="Nembe Kingdom" label="Nembe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079876" start="9700" end="9705" title="Ogbia" label="Ogbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080271" start="9771" end="9774" title="Ogu–Bolo" label="Ogu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082573" start="9779" end="9785" title="Okrika" label="Okrika"/>
<link wikidata="Q11685553" start="9886" end="9894" title="Amassoma" label="Amassoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098375" start="10320" end="10325" title="Opobo–Nkoro" label="Opobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35697" start="10354" end="10359" title="Ibani dialect" label="ibani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412546" start="10468" end="10473" title="Kingdom of Bonny" label="Bonny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075271" start="10701" end="10713" title="Obolo people" label="Obolo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075271" start="10730" end="10747" title="Andoni people" label="Andoni-Obolo Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q424388" start="10785" end="10800" title="Akwa Ibom State" label="Akwa Ibom State"/>
<link wikidata="Q503923" start="10834" end="10846" title="Rivers State" label="Rivers State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079867" start="11515" end="11536" title="Ogba–Egbema–Ndoni" label="Ogba/Egbema/Ndoni LGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q503910" start="11688" end="11693" title="Delta State" label="Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q836654" start="11695" end="11699" title="Ondo State" label="Ondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q682704" start="11705" end="11715" title="Edo State" label="Edo States"/>
<link wikidata="Q836654" start="11851" end="11861" title="Ondo State" label="Ondo State"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795472" start="11867" end="11878" title="Arogbo tribe" label="Arogbo clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q532153" start="12035" end="12048" title="Bayelsa State" label="Bayelsa State"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="12697" end="12703" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795472" start="12926" end="12937" title="Arogbo tribe" label="Arogbo Ijaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509809" start="12967" end="12976" title="Furupagha tribe" label="Furupagha"/>
<link wikidata="Q503910" start="13247" end="13258" title="Delta State" label="Delta State"/>
<link wikidata="Q574593" start="13593" end="13598" title="Warri" label="Warri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993629" start="13640" end="13647" title="Urhobo people" label="Urhobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477983" start="13653" end="13662" title="Itsekiri people" label="Itsekiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q682704" start="14030" end="14039" title="Edo State" label="Edo State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="14890" end="14899" title="Europeans" label="Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q189522" start="14981" end="14988" title="quinine" label="quinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="14995" end="15006" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="15104" end="15111" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027682" start="15261" end="15267" title="House society" label="houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="15773" end="15786" title="civil service" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q532153" start="15820" end="15827" title="Bayelsa" label="Bayelsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="15832" end="15837" title="River" label="River"/>
<link wikidata="Q188823" start="15915" end="15926" title="scholarship" label="scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q702269" start="16007" end="16020" title="professionals" label="professionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q190222" start="16116" end="16136" title="human capital flight" label="human capital flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q29412" start="16184" end="16195" title="Niger Delta" label="Niger Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q842623" start="16424" end="16429" title="Paddy field" label="paddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="16430" end="16434" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q165449" start="16436" end="16445" title="Plantain (cooking)" label="plantains"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="16447" end="16454" title="Cassava" label="Cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="16456" end="16460" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="yams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149005" start="16462" end="16469" title="cocoyam" label="cocoyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="16472" end="16478" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181909" start="16536" end="16541" title="guava" label="guava"/>
<link wikidata="Q169" start="16543" end="16550" title="mangoes" label="mangoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="16555" end="16564" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="16598" end="16604" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="16606" end="16614" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="16619" end="16623" title="Arecaceae" label="palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="16624" end="16630" title="seed" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16826479" start="16695" end="16701" title="Akassa" label="Akassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991053" start="16703" end="16708" title="Nembe Kingdom" label="Nembe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721908" start="16710" end="16725" title="Kalabari tribe" label="Bille, Kalabari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098375" start="16727" end="16732" title="Nkoro" label="Nkoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082573" start="16734" end="16740" title="Okrika" label="Okrika"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754534" start="16742" end="16748" title="Andoni" label="Andoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412546" start="16753" end="16758" title="Kingdom of Bonny" label="Bonny"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="16785" end="16803" title="Social stratification" label="stratified society"/>
<link wikidata="Q29412" start="16947" end="16958" title="Niger Delta" label="Niger Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q118896142" start="17094" end="17109" title="Iria marriage" label="iria ceremonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q201676" start="17112" end="17119" title="Funeral" label="Funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q402152" start="17335" end="17344" title="ancestors" label="ancestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="17643" end="17648" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="18953" end="18972" title="Marriage" label="traditional wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="21882" end="21886" title="Gold jewelry" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="22568" end="22578" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="22605" end="22622" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15855752" start="22624" end="22635" title="Zion Church (disambiguation)" label="Zion Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="22637" end="22648" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="22653" end="22667" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16941296" start="22944" end="22955" title="masquerade ceremony" label="masquerades"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376141" start="23121" end="23129" title="pantheon (religion)" label="pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="23172" end="23182" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q280569" start="24363" end="24369" title="Egbesu" label="Egbesu"/>
<link wikidata="Q263443" start="24377" end="24382" title="totem" label="totem"/>
<link wikidata="Q34706" start="24392" end="24399" title="leopard" label="leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q207963" start="24401" end="24408" title="Black panther" label="panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="24414" end="24418" title="lion" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189320" start="24473" end="24480" title="justice" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12846123" start="24913" end="24921" title="patience" label="patience"/>
<link wikidata="Q10513581" start="24957" end="24974" title="converts to Islam" label="converts to Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951735" start="25047" end="25067" title="Mujahid Dokubo-Asari" label="Mujahid Dokubo-Asari"/>
<link wikidata="Q26897024" start="25094" end="25116" title="Jeremiah Omoto Fufeyin" label="Jeremiah Omoto Fufeyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610574" start="25120" end="25135" title="Edwin Clark (politician)" label="Edwin K. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q13140667" start="25138" end="25156" title="Heineken Lokpobiri" label="Heineken Lokpobiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q57380" start="25159" end="25186" title="Goodluck Jonathan" label="Goodluck Jonathan GCFR GCON"/>
<link wikidata="Q11410" start="25619" end="25623" title="game" label="game"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="25624" end="25628" title="meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q649978" start="25636" end="25644" title="bushmeat" label="bushmeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q941004" start="25973" end="25979" title="foofoo" label="foofoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="26041" end="26046" title="Beans" label="Beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q868844" start="26347" end="26353" title="Irvingia gabonensis" label="Ogbono"/>
<link wikidata="Q868844" start="26355" end="26380" title="Irvingia gabonensis" label="Irvingia gabonensis seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502970" start="26482" end="26492" title="Fresh Fish" label="fresh fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q59576" start="26501" end="26508" title="catfish" label="catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494252" start="26563" end="26568" title="garri" label="garri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082573" start="26767" end="26773" title="Okrika" label="Okrika"/>
<link wikidata="Q868844" start="26835" end="26860" title="Irvingia gabonensis" label="Irvingia gabonensis seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q101815" start="26974" end="26981" title="Camellia sinensis" label="teabush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494252" start="27110" end="27115" title="garri" label="garri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477983" start="29966" end="29974" title="Itsekiri" label="Itsekiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q574593" start="30011" end="30016" title="Warri, Nigeria" label="Warri"/>
<link wikidata="Q503910" start="30085" end="30096" title="Delta State" label="Delta State"/>
<link wikidata="Q20982115" start="30646" end="30664" title="Kaiama Declaration" label="Kaiama Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q648749" start="31420" end="31427" title="Yenagoa" label="Yenagoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q319642" start="32478" end="32485" title="Chevron Corporation" label="Chevron"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="33066" end="33080" title="Climate Change" label="Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850911" start="33336" end="33348" title="Odi massacre" label="Odi massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q177266" start="33501" end="33512" title="militarized" label="militarized"/>
<link wikidata="Q57380" start="33772" end="33789" title="Goodluck Jonathan" label="Goodluck Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455596" start="33834" end="33844" title="J.P. Clark" label="J.P. Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489518" start="33867" end="33880" title="Gabriel Okara" label="Gabriel Okara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114962" start="33901" end="33919" title="Owoye Andrew Azazi" label="Owoye Andrew Azazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144934" start="33993" end="34015" title="Patience Jonathan" label="Patience Faka Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499089" start="34052" end="34079" title="Frederick William Koko Mingi VIII of Nembe" label="King Frederick William Koko"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991053" start="34102" end="34107" title="Nembe Kingdom" label="Nembe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923946" start="34108" end="34113" title="Brass, Nigeria" label="Brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q112967626" start="34135" end="34161" title="Olu Benson Lulu-Briggs" label="Olu Benson Lulu-Briggs OON"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207134" start="34209" end="34220" title="Timi Dakolo" label="Timi Dakolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23777108" start="34250" end="34268" title="Ibinabo Fiberesima" label="Ibinabo Fiberesima"/>
<link wikidata="Q20155621" start="34298" end="34314" title="Ben Murray-Bruce" label="Ben Murray-Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213502" start="34350" end="34371" title="Ebikabowei Victor-Ben" label="Ebikabowei Victor Ben"/>
<link wikidata="Q29414" start="34373" end="34377" title="Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta" label="MEND"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211787" start="34387" end="34400" title="Kingsley Kuku" label="Kingsley Kuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q47162812" start="34462" end="34485" title="Eruani Azibapu Godbless" label="Eruani Azibapu Godbless"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34543" end="34559" title="Dumo Lulu-Briggs" label="Dumo Lulu-Briggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q65455967" start="34591" end="34608" title="Patience Torlowei" label="Patience Torlowei"/>
<link wikidata="Q379349" start="34639" end="34652" title="Finidi George" label="Finidi George"/>
<link wikidata="Q449434" start="34685" end="34696" title="Taribo West" label="Taribo West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562221" start="34740" end="34753" title="Samson Siasia" label="Samson Siasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804587" start="34786" end="34805" title="Timaya" label="Inetimi Odon Timaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q17305712" start="34824" end="34848" title="Burna Boy" label="Damini Ogulu (Burna Boy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q266436" start="34891" end="34902" title="Ideye Brown" label="Ideye Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722544" start="34926" end="34951" title="Alfred Diete-Spiff" label="King Alrlfred Diete-Spiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859479" start="35018" end="35028" title="Twon-Brass" label="Twon-Brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412546" start="35110" end="35129" title="Kingdom of Bonny" label="Grand Bonny Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589122" start="35142" end="35172" title="Tompolo" label="Government Oweizide Ekpemupolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q26897024" start="35224" end="35246" title="Jeremiah Omoto Fufeyin" label="Jeremiah Omoto Fufeyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24050378" start="35260" end="35273" title="Tammy Abraham" label="Tammy Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q289438" start="35301" end="35314" title="Agbani Darego" label="Agbani Darego"/>
<link wikidata="Q58844030" start="35354" end="35365" title="Gentle Jack" label="Gentle Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911033" start="35398" end="35419" title="Dakore Egbuson-Akande" label="Dakore Egbuson Akande"/>
<link wikidata="Q64745088" start="35440" end="35455" title="Kingsley Otuaro" label="Kingsley Otuaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q503910" start="35482" end="35493" title="Delta State" label="Delta State"/>
<link wikidata="Q56249823" start="35495" end="35509" title="Timini Egbuson" label="Timini Egbuson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720323" start="35528" end="35549" title="Henry Seriake Dickson" label="Henry Seriake Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509607" start="35584" end="35597" title="Timipre Sylva" label="Timipre Sylva"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610574" start="35701" end="35721" title="Edwin Clark (politician)" label="Edwin Kiagbodo Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5995101" start="35784" end="35802" title="Ijaw Youth Council" label="Ijaw Youth Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16887761" start="35811" end="35833" title="Ijaw National Congress" label="Ijaw National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q30622397" start="35842" end="35862" title="Tuomo Town" label="Tuomo Youth Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q969298" start="36926" end="36942" title="Sebastian Junger" label="Sebastian Junger"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="36952" end="36963" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610961" wikidata="Q1069007" url="?curid=610961" title="Waššukanni">
<text>Waššukanni (; and ) or Aššukanni () was the capital of the Hurrian kingdom of Mitanni, from around 1500 BC to the 13th century BC.

==Etymology==
It has been suggested that the name Waššukanni is of Old Indo-Aryan origin, and its original form may have been , composed of the Indic term , meaning , to which was added the Indic suffix , followed by the Hurrian suffix .

==Location==
The precise location of Waššukanni is unknown with most suggestions being in the general area defined by the Khabur River, a tributary of the Euphrates River, and the Jaghjagh River in the upper Jezirah of Syria. A proposal by Dietrich Opitz located it under the largely unexcavated mound of Tell el Fakhariya, near Tell Halaf in Syria. This position was supported by M. Oppenheim and more recently by others. A neutron activation comparison with clay from relevant Amarna tablets appeared to rule out Tell Fakhariya. This idea was also rejected by Edward Lipinski. However, this identification received a new support by Stefano de Martino, Mirko Novák and Dominik Bonatz due to recent archaeological excavations by a German team. But despite many seasons of excavations, no documentation of the name of the Mittani capital has yet been found.

On his way to conquer Waššukanni, Suppiluliuma I passed through Isuwa (east of Malatya, within the bend of the Euphrates), Alse (upper Tigris valley), Kutmar (on the Batman-Su ?) and Suta (on the lower Batman-Su ?) and then returns to the Euphrates and Halpa then &quot;Piyasilis and Mattiwaza pass &quot;Irrite and Harran&quot; then wait in Irrite (Irridu) before coming to Waššukanni. This would suggest a location near Mardin.

In the original text:
Tell Farfara and Üçtepe Höyük (near Üçtepe, Bismil in Diyarbakır Province in Turkey) have also been proposed.

The large and relatively recently found, site of Koçlu Tepe has also been proposed.

The site of Tell al-Hawa in the Jazira has also been suggested.

==History==
Waššukanni is known to have been sacked by the Hittites under Suppiluliuma I (reigned –1322 BC) in the first years of his reign, whose treaty inscription relates that he installed a Hurrian vassal king, Shattiwaza. The city was sacked again by the Assyrian king Adad-nirari I around 1290 BC, and became an Assyrian provincial capital for a time before disappearing from history.

===Legacy===
The modern-day Waşokanî refugee camp, built near Hesekê in the Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria to house inhabitants of Serê Kaniyê and Zirgan who had been displaced by the 2019 Turkish offensive into north-eastern Syria, is named after Waššukanni.

==See also==
* Mitanni
* Cities of the ancient Near East
* Indo-Aryan superstrate in Mitanni
* Taite
* Tall Al-Hamidiya

==References==
==Sources==

*Dominik Bonatz, &quot;Waššukanni at the End of the Late Bronze Age: The Fate of a Capital City During Periods of Change&quot;, in Exploring &#x27;Dark Ages&#x27; Archaeological Markers of Transition in the Near East from the Bronze Age to the Early Islamic Period, Benoit et al. (ed), Harrassowitz Verlag, Wiesbaden, pp. 33–52, 2022
*W Mayer, &quot;Taide Oder Wassukanni? Name und Lage der Hauptstadt Mitannis&quot;, in Ugarit-Forschungen. Internationales Jahrbuch für die Altertumskunde Syrien-Palästinas, vol. 18, pp. 231–236, 1986
*A. Moortgat, &quot;Arch. Forschungen der Max Freiherr von Oppenheim-Stiftung im nordlichen Mesopotamien&quot;, Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Forschung des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen 62, 1957</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1069007" start="0" end="10" title="Waššukanni" label="Waššukanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069007" start="23" end="32" title="Waššukanni" label="Aššukanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q190394" start="59" end="66" title="Hurrians" label="Hurrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178665" start="78" end="85" title="Mitanni" label="Mitanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="199" end="213" title="Old Indo-Aryan" label="Old Indo-Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35740" start="353" end="360" title="Hurrian language" label="Hurrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q685344" start="493" end="505" title="Khabur (Euphrates)" label="Khabur River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309873" start="551" end="565" title="Jaghjagh River" label="Jaghjagh River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275195" start="611" end="625" title="Dietrich Opitz" label="Dietrich Opitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149666" start="676" end="693" title="Tell el Fakhariya" label="Tell el Fakhariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142541" start="700" end="710" title="Tell Halaf" label="Tell Halaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="714" end="719" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736" start="850" end="856" title="Amarna" label="Amarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048597" start="933" end="948" title="Edward Lipinski (orientalist)" label="Edward Lipinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q354903" start="1263" end="1277" title="Suppiluliuma I" label="Suppiluliuma I"/>
<link wikidata="Q165995" start="1308" end="1315" title="Malatya" label="Malatya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1395" end="1404" title="Batman-Su" label="Batman-Su"/>
<link wikidata="Q11926853" start="1579" end="1585" title="Irridu" label="Irridu"/>
<link wikidata="Q188022" start="1651" end="1657" title="Mardin" label="Mardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099391" start="1699" end="1711" title="Üçtepe Höyük" label="Üçtepe Höyük"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675124" start="1718" end="1732" title="Üçtepe, Bismil" label="Üçtepe, Bismil"/>
<link wikidata="Q130548341" start="1890" end="1902" title="Tell al-Hawa" label="Tell al-Hawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="2002" end="2010" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q354903" start="2017" end="2031" title="Suppiluliuma I" label="Suppiluliuma I"/>
<link wikidata="Q391340" start="2158" end="2168" title="Shattiwaza" label="Shattiwaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="2203" end="2210" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q295194" start="2217" end="2230" title="Adad-nirari I" label="Adad-nirari I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2363" end="2371" title="Waşokanî" label="Waşokanî"/>
<link wikidata="Q311321" start="2397" end="2403" title="Al Hasakah" label="Hesekê"/>
<link wikidata="Q619829" start="2411" end="2460" title="Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria" label="Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023330" start="2485" end="2496" title="Ras al-Ayn" label="Serê Kaniyê"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2501" end="2507" title="Abu Rasayn" label="Zirgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145466" start="2521" end="2530" title="internally displaced person" label="displaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q70207089" start="2538" end="2585" title="2019 Turkish offensive into north-eastern Syria" label="2019 Turkish offensive into north-eastern Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q178665" start="2630" end="2637" title="Mitanni" label="Mitanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q63780" start="2640" end="2671" title="Cities of the ancient Near East" label="Cities of the ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986700" start="2674" end="2707" title="Indo-Aryan superstrate in Mitanni" label="Indo-Aryan superstrate in Mitanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900440" start="2710" end="2715" title="Taite" label="Taite"/>
<link wikidata="Q126708604" start="2718" end="2734" title="Tall Al-Hamidiya" label="Tall Al-Hamidiya"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610980" wikidata="Q189217" url="?curid=610980" title="Davor Šuker">
<text>Davor Šuker (; born 1 January 1968) is a Croatian football administrator and former professional player who played as a striker. He served as the president of the Croatian Football Federation from 2012 to 2021. As Croatia&#x27;s all-time top scorer with 45 goals, Šuker is generally regarded as the greatest Croatian striker of all time, and as one of the greatest strikers of all time.

Šuker began his footballing career in his hometown for local first division team NK Osijek as a 16-year-old. During his final season with the club, he became the league&#x27;s top goal scorer. He made the move to sign for Dinamo Zagreb in 1989. The Croatian War of Independence halted a promising season for the 21-year-old, eventually resulting in Šuker&#x27;s move to Spanish club Sevilla in 1991. In La Liga, Šuker was highly regarded, showing consistent form with Sevilla and being consecutively amongst the division&#x27;s top goal scorers. He signed with Real Madrid five years later, and was again amongst the league&#x27;s top scorers. While at the Santiago Bernabéu, he helped Madrid claim the Liga and UEFA Champions League titles as well. A move to Arsenal saw him distinguish himself throughout their run to the UEFA Cup final of 2000. He then had a spell with West Ham United, then closed his career playing for German side 1860 Munich.

The crowning moment of Šuker&#x27;s career was the 1998 FIFA World Cup in France, where he won the Golden Boot by scoring six goals in seven matches. He also won the Silver Ball as the second-best player of tournament, behind Ronaldo. His goal-scoring feats proved instrumental in the Croatians winning the bronze medal in their debut World Cup. Croatia did not lose a single match in which Šuker scored prior to their semi-final loss to eventual champions France. Eventually named as Croatia&#x27;s Golden Player at the UEFA Jubilee Awards in 2003, Šuker finished third in the 1998 FIFA World Player of the Year award and second in the 1998 Ballon d&#x27;Or. He is also the only Croatian on the FIFA 100 list created by Pelé.

Under his highly controversial leadership as the president of Croatian Football Federation, Croatia reached runner-up at the 2018 FIFA World Cup, the nation&#x27;s highest achievement since their third-place finish.

==Club career==

===Early career===
Šuker began playing football in his home town of Osijek with the club NK Osijek in 1984. In 1989, he moved to Dinamo Zagreb, where during the following two seasons he scored 34 goals in 60 Yugoslav First League matches. Šuker made such an impression that he received his first call-up to the Yugoslavia national team. His play also attracted several clubs, including Spanish club Sevilla, which he joined in 1991.

===Sevilla===
Šuker made his Primera División debut for Sevilla on 17 November 1991, coming off the substitutes&#x27; bench as a last-minute substitute in Sevilla&#x27;s 1–1 away draw at Espanyol. In the following match, at home against Real Sociedad, he made his first start and went on to score two goals in a 2–2 draw. He finished his first season at the club with 6 goals in 22 appearances. During Sevilla&#x27;s first match of the next season away at Albacete, Šuker scored his first Primera hat-trick, which led a 4–3 victory. He improved his tally from the prior season with 13 goals in 33 matches.

In the 1993–94 season, Šuker was the second-highest scorer in the league with 24 goals to Barcelona&#x27;s Romário. He made a total of 34 Primera appearances that season and also scored five braces and one hat-trick. Šuker played with Argentine legend Diego Maradona at the club within the 1992–93 season. During this and the next season with Sevilla, he scored a total of 33 goals in 64 appearances in the Spanish Primera.

===Real Madrid===
Šuker went on to move to Real Madrid. This transfer came prior to the start of the 1996–97 season. With &quot;Los Galacticos&quot;, his goalscoring potency continued as he scored 24 goals in 38 appearances. Šuker ended up as the third-best scorer within the league, behind Barcelona&#x27;s Ronaldo and Real Betis&#x27;s Alfonso. During that season, he scored three hat-tricks in the Primera seeing Madrid to lift the league title. Along with Raúl and Predrag Mijatović, he formed a dangerous trio that struck fear in the opposing defenses to assure eventual acclaim for the club.

Šuker was again successful with Real Madrid in the following season, which won the 1997–98 UEFA Champions League. In the Primera, Šuker scored 10 goals in 29 appearances. Within the 1998–99 season, his presence at Real Madrid was reduced despite the fact he performed well at that summer&#x27;s World Cup. This was seen as he made only 19 Primera appearances, scoring 4 goals as a whole. By that season&#x27;s end, he opted to leave the club. His decision to leave also marked the close of his eight-season-long spell in the Spanish Primera, where he scored 114 goals in 239 total appearances.

===Arsenal===
Šuker joined FA Premier League club Arsenal for the 1999–2000 season. He made his league debut on 22 August 1999 in a 2–1 defeat to Manchester United at Highbury, coming on as a substitute for the final 15 minutes. He played another two matches as a substitute before making his first start in Arsenal&#x27;s 3–1 home victory over Aston Villa, where he scored a brace, his first two goals in the Premier League. With Arsenal, he played in the 2000 UEFA Cup Final as an extra-time substitute, Šuker missed his penalty as Arsenal lost to Turkish side Galatasaray on penalties.

Šuker also scored once in the League Cup against Middlesbrough and twice in the UEFA Champions League against AIK (once at home and once away). He scored 8 league goals (including 3 braces) in 22 Premiership appearances with Arsenal.

===West Ham United===
At West Ham United, Šuker never managed to find his place in the first team for a long period and only made 11 Premiership appearances for the club throughout the season, scoring twice against Manchester United and Sunderland. He also scored once in the League Cup against Blackburn Rovers. His career in England ended with the end of that season, where he joined German side 1860 Munich for the 2001–02 season.

===1860 Munich===
At 1860 Munich, Šuker made his Bundesliga debut, playing all 90 minutes in the club&#x27;s 1–0 home victory over Energie Cottbus on 1 December 2001. His first goal for 1860 came in their first match after the winter break, a headed effort which completed a 3–0 home victory over 1. FC Köln. His highlight of the season came during the final league match in a 4–2 away victory over Borussia Mönchengladbach, where he scored a brace. He finished his first season in the Bundesliga with 4 goals in 14 appearances.

In the 2002–03 season, Šuker scored in 1860 Munich&#x27;s 3–1 home victory over Arminia Bielefeld on 2 November 2002. While playing with 1860 in the Bundesliga, he scored 5 goals in 25 appearances. He also made five appearances in the DFB-Pokal, scoring three goals.

==International career==
Šuker&#x27;s eye for goals was duly illustrated in his feats at youth level. He finished as the second highest scorer as he netted six goals at the 1987 World Youth Championships in Chile. The Yugoslavians also set a Championship record with 22 goals scored altogether. Yugoslavia went on to win the title with a generation of future talents. Some of these players went on to represent Croatia such as Robert Prosinečki, Zvonimir Boban and Igor Štimac.

Šuker again played for Yugoslavia in the 1988 Seoul Summer Olympic games. Those appearances came in group stage matches against Brazil and Nigeria. In two years time, he featured in the UEFA Under-21 Championship. He scored four goals in five matches as Yugoslavia won their group stage. Šuker also struck the only goal in the second leg of his side&#x27;s 3–0 quarter-final victory on aggregate against Bulgaria. He scored once again against Italy. In the final against Soviet Union he scored one goal in the first leg. In all he tallied a sum of seven goals throughout the Championships winning the Golden Boot. Yugoslavia went on to finish as runners up with Šuker also being named as the Golden Player of the Tournament.

===Senior team===
In 1990, Šuker was named to the Yugoslavia national team&#x27;s 22-man squad for the 1990 FIFA World Cup finals in Italy. However, he did not make an appearance at the tournament.

On 22 December 1990, Šuker made his debut for the newly established Croatia national team in a friendly against Romania. In 1991, he won his only two caps for Yugoslavia at senior level: on 27 February 1991 against Turkey, and on 16 May 1991 against the Faroe Islands. In the latter match, Šuker scored his first senior international goal. This feat was noted given Croatia was not registered with FIFA nor UEFA at that point.

Šuker&#x27;s second and the first official match for Croatia came in a friendly against Mexico in 1992 where he scored a brace in a 3–0 victory. He then led Croatia to their first major international tournament, UEFA Euro 1996, with a then-record 12 goals in 10 matches during the qualifying stages. During the Euro 1996 final stages in England, he scored three goals in four matches, including two in the 3–0 group stage win over defending champions Denmark. It was in this match he set up the final score with an unforgettable looping shot over Danish goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel, still remembered as one of the greatest goals in UEFA European Championship history. Šuker&#x27;s feats during the tournament saw him named to the Team of the Tournament.

Šuker then went on to see Croatia qualify for their first FIFA World Cup after scoring five goals in nine matches during the qualifying stages for the 1998 finals in France. In the tournament proper, he scored six goals in seven matches, scoring in every match Croatia scored. These included goals in 1–0 victories over Japan in the group stage and Romania in the round of 16. In the quarter-finals against Germany, Šuker was fouled by Christian Wörns who received a straight red card. Šuker scored the final goal in a 3–0 victory. He also brought the team to the doorstep of the final by scoring the opener in the semi-final against France. Lilian Thuram took the match back for the hosts with his only two international goals to give France a 2–1 victory and a place in the final.

In the third-place play-off, Šuker scored the match-winner in a 2–1 victory against the Netherlands, leading Croatia to a sensational third-place finish in their first World Cup appearance since becoming an independent nation. Šuker won the Golden Boot as the tournament&#x27;s top scorer, as well as the Silver Ball as the World Cup&#x27;s second-best player, behind Ronaldo of Brazil.

After the 1998 World Cup, Šuker featured for Croatia in their unfruitful run to qualify for the Euro 2000. Šuker was though noted in endeavouring to keep Croatia&#x27;s hopes alive when he scored a 94th-minute winner against the Republic of Ireland at Maksimir Stadium in Zagreb. The win ensured Croatia would have a strong chance of still qualifying for the tournament. The Croatians would miss out on such in their final qualifier, a 2–2 draw at home to Yugoslavia. Šuker did score a late disallowed goal which, if stood, would have assured Croatia&#x27;s qualification. He finished with four goals in seven matches during the campaign.

Šuker was also part of the Croatian team at the 2002 World Cup finals in South Korea and Japan. However, he only played 63 minutes in the tournament, in a 1–0 defeat to Mexico in Croatia&#x27;s opening match. After Croatia&#x27;s elimination, Šuker announced his retirement from international football.

Šuker won a total of 70 international FIFA-recognised caps during his senior career, 2 for Yugoslavia and 68 for Croatia. The forward scored 46 international goals in total. With 45 goals, he is Croatia&#x27;s all-time leading goal-scorer. His 12 goals during the campaign for Euro 1996 was a record that stood for over 10 years—Northern Ireland&#x27;s David Healy broke his record in 2007 after scoring 13 goals during Euro 2008 qualifying.

==Post-retirement==
Šuker established his own school of football entitled the Davor Šuker Soccer Academy, with training camps located in Zagreb and several other Croatian cities. The concept for this academy originated near the end of his playing days.

===Controversies===
In 1996, in the company of two well-known criminals, Šuker posed for a picture at the grave of Croatian fascist dictator and genocide perpetrator, &quot;Poglavnik&quot; Ante Pavelić.

In 2011, Šuker was fined for stealing antique coins left over by another passenger on an airplane. Instead of reporting his findings and handing the coins in, he decided to give them to his girlfriend, who tried to sell them.

In 2015, Croatian Journalists&#x27; Association (HND) accused Šuker of preventing freedom of information and for physically blocking journalists from reporting and doing their work.

==Career statistics==

===Club===
=== International ===


==Honours==
Real Madrid
* La Liga: 1996–97
* Supercopa de España: 1997
* UEFA Champions League: 1997–98
* Intercontinental Cup: 1998

Arsenal
* UEFA Cup runner-up: 1999–2000

Yugoslavia
* FIFA U-20 World Cup: 1987
* UEFA European Under-21 Championship runner-up: 1990

Croatia
* FIFA World Cup third place: 1998

Individual
* 1998 FIFA World Cup: Golden Boot
* 1998 FIFA World Cup: Silver Ball
* 1998 FIFA World Cup: All-Star Team
* Onze de Bronze: 1998
* Ballon d&#x27;Or runner-up: 1998
* FIFA World Player of the Year Bronze Award: 1998
* 1987 FIFA U-20 World Cup: Silver Shoe
* Yugoslav First League Top Goal Scorer: 1988-89
* UEFA European Under-21 Championship 1990: Golden Player
* UEFA European Under-21 Championship 1990: Golden Boot
* UEFA Euro Team of the Tournament: 1996
* ADN Eastern European Footballer of the Season: 1996, 1998
* ESM Team of the Year: 1996–97
* Croatian Footballer of the Year: 1992, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998
*Croatian Team of the Year: 1999, 2000
* Franjo Bučar State Award for Sport: 1998
* Croatian Sportsman of the year: 1998
* World Soccer 100 Greatest Players of the 20th Century: 1999
* UEFA Jubilee Awards Croatia&#x27;s Golden Player: 2004
* FIFA 100: 2004
*Honoree of Osijek: 2008
*Vecernji list Croatian Player of the Century
* All-time top scorer of the Croatia national team

Orders
* Order of Danica Hrvatska with face of Franjo Bučar: 1995
* Order of the Croatian Trefoil: 1998
* Order of Duke Trpimir with Ribbon and Star: 2018

==See also==
* List of top international men&#x27;s football goalscorers by country

==References==
== Further reading ==

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189217" start="0" end="11" title="Davor Šuker" label="Davor Šuker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="50" end="58" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="120" end="127" title="Striker (association football)" label="striker"/>
<link wikidata="Q328689" start="163" end="191" title="Croatian Football Federation" label="Croatian Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q134479" start="214" end="221" title="Croatia national football team" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q738876" start="469" end="478" title="NK Osijek" label="NK Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q172803" start="610" end="623" title="GNK Dinamo Zagreb" label="Dinamo Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="637" end="665" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="Croatian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q10329" start="771" end="778" title="Sevilla FC" label="Sevilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="791" end="798" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="949" end="960" title="Real Madrid C.F." label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q164027" start="1045" end="1062" title="Santiago Bernabéu Stadium" label="Santiago Bernabéu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="1100" end="1121" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="1148" end="1155" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="1212" end="1220" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q840289" start="1230" end="1234" title="2000 UEFA Cup Final" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="1261" end="1276" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q131603" start="1325" end="1336" title="TSV 1860 Munich" label="1860 Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="1390" end="1409" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q368974" start="1438" end="1449" title="World Cup Golden Boot" label="Golden Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q529207" start="1565" end="1572" title="Ronaldo (Brazilian footballer)" label="Ronaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="1674" end="1683" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q585295" start="1777" end="1795" title="1998 FIFA World Cup Final" label="eventual champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="1796" end="1802" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q877573" start="1860" end="1879" title="UEFA Jubilee Awards" label="UEFA Jubilee Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q596167" start="1917" end="1951" title="1998 FIFA World Player of the Year" label="1998 FIFA World Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165632" start="1976" end="1997" title="1998 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="1998 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="2035" end="2043" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="2060" end="2064" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q170645" start="2192" end="2211" title="2018 FIFA World Cup" label="2018 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640" start="2369" end="2375" title="Osijek" label="Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q738876" start="2390" end="2399" title="NK Osijek" label="NK Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q172803" start="2430" end="2443" title="GNK Dinamo Zagreb" label="Dinamo Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q163786" start="2509" end="2530" title="Yugoslav First League" label="Yugoslav First League"/>
<link wikidata="Q188363" start="2612" end="2636" title="Yugoslavia national football team" label="Yugoslavia national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="2700" end="2707" title="Sevilla" label="Sevilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="2764" end="2780" title="La Liga" label="Primera División"/>
<link wikidata="Q8780" start="2922" end="2930" title="RCD Espanyol" label="Espanyol"/>
<link wikidata="Q10315" start="2972" end="2985" title="Real Sociedad" label="Real Sociedad"/>
<link wikidata="Q576285" start="3191" end="3199" title="Albacete Balompié" label="Albacete"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="3232" end="3241" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q720582" start="3349" end="3363" title="1993–94 La Liga" label="1993–94 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="3432" end="3441" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q178649" start="3449" end="3456" title="Romário" label="Romário"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515" start="3594" end="3608" title="Diego Maradona" label="Diego Maradona"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="3810" end="3821" title="Real Madrid C.F." label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931015" start="3868" end="3882" title="1996–97 Real Madrid C.F. season" label="1996–97 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q529207" start="4075" end="4082" title="Ronaldo (Brazilian footballer)" label="Ronaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8723" start="4087" end="4097" title="Real Betis" label="Real Betis"/>
<link wikidata="Q317322" start="4105" end="4112" title="Alfonso Pérez" label="Alfonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q721283" start="4168" end="4175" title="1996–97 La Liga" label="Primera"/>
<link wikidata="Q11576" start="4227" end="4231" title="Raúl (footballer)" label="Raúl"/>
<link wikidata="Q237964" start="4236" end="4253" title="Predrag Mijatović" label="Predrag Mijatović"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931014" start="4417" end="4433" title="1997–98 Real Madrid C.F. season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q241409" start="4449" end="4478" title="1997–98 UEFA Champions League" label="1997–98 UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931016" start="4548" end="4562" title="1998–99 Real Madrid C.F. season" label="1998–99 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="4988" end="5005" title="Premier League" label="FA Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="5011" end="5018" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18991" start="5027" end="5043" title="1999–2000 FA Premier League" label="1999–2000 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="5107" end="5124" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q205309" start="5128" end="5136" title="Arsenal Stadium" label="Highbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="5306" end="5317" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q840289" start="5418" end="5437" title="2000 UEFA Cup Final" label="2000 UEFA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q495299" start="5524" end="5535" title="Galatasaray S.K. (football)" label="Galatasaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="5539" end="5548" title="Penalty shootout (association football)" label="penalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="5581" end="5591" title="EFL Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="5600" end="5613" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q221602" start="5661" end="5664" title="AIK Fotboll" label="AIK"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="5811" end="5826" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="6023" end="6033" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="6081" end="6097" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131603" start="6184" end="6195" title="TSV 1860 Munich" label="1860 Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q304338" start="6204" end="6218" title="2001–02 Bundesliga" label="2001–02 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q82595" start="6270" end="6280" title="Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q107818" start="6352" end="6367" title="FC Energie Cottbus" label="Energie Cottbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q104770" start="6518" end="6528" title="1. FC Köln" label="1. FC Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q101959" start="6620" end="6644" title="Borussia Mönchengladbach" label="Borussia Mönchengladbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q221316" start="6758" end="6772" title="2002–03 Bundesliga" label="2002–03 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q105844" start="6831" end="6848" title="Arminia Bielefeld" label="Arminia Bielefeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q150880" start="6986" end="6995" title="DFB-Pokal" label="DFB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q522635" start="7192" end="7222" title="1987 FIFA World Youth Championship" label="1987 World Youth Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q298190" start="7446" end="7463" title="Robert Prosinečki" label="Robert Prosinečki"/>
<link wikidata="Q231468" start="7465" end="7479" title="Zvonimir Boban" label="Zvonimir Boban"/>
<link wikidata="Q515039" start="7484" end="7495" title="Igor Štimac" label="Igor Štimac"/>
<link wikidata="Q494633" start="7539" end="7570" title="Football at the 1988 Summer Olympics" label="1988 Seoul Summer Olympic games"/>
<link wikidata="Q899189" start="7626" end="7632" title="Brazil national under-23 football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069554" start="7637" end="7644" title="Nigeria national under-23 football team" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q769375" start="7684" end="7710" title="1990 UEFA European Under-21 Championship" label="UEFA Under-21 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q651714" start="7902" end="7910" title="Bulgaria national under-21 football team" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q922698" start="7941" end="7946" title="Italy national under-21 football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q908063" start="7969" end="7981" title="Soviet Union national under-21 football team" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q188363" start="8274" end="8298" title="Yugoslavia national football team" label="Yugoslavia national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="8327" end="8346" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q134479" start="8491" end="8512" title="Croatia national football team" label="Croatia national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q168397" start="8535" end="8542" title="Romania national football team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q483856" start="8638" end="8644" title="Turkey national football team" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q200688" start="8677" end="8690" title="Faroe Islands national football team" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="8821" end="8825" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="8830" end="8834" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="8939" end="8945" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q180563" start="9063" end="9077" title="UEFA Euro 1996" label="UEFA Euro 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q837987" start="9132" end="9149" title="UEFA Euro 1996 qualifying" label="qualifying stages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080070" start="9282" end="9301" title="UEFA Euro 1992 Final" label="defending champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="9302" end="9309" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q182314" start="9416" end="9432" title="Peter Schmeichel" label="Peter Schmeichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="9483" end="9509" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9581" end="9603" title="UEFA Euro 1996#UEFA Team of the Tournament" label="Team of the Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="9664" end="9678" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q845158" start="9731" end="9748" title="1998 FIFA World Cup qualification" label="qualifying stages"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="9757" end="9768" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998 finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q170566" start="9926" end="9931" title="Japan national football team" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="10013" end="10020" title="Germany national football team" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q167241" start="10042" end="10057" title="Christian Wörns" label="Christian Wörns"/>
<link wikidata="Q585295" start="10182" end="10191" title="1998 FIFA World Cup Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="10240" end="10246" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q180326" start="10248" end="10261" title="Lilian Thuram" label="Lilian Thuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="10478" end="10489" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q368974" start="10631" end="10642" title="World Cup Golden Boot" label="Golden Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q529207" start="10758" end="10765" title="Ronaldo (Brazilian footballer)" label="Ronaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="10769" end="10775" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="10874" end="10883" title="UEFA Euro 2000" label="Euro 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="11007" end="11026" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q723603" start="11030" end="11046" title="Maksimir Stadium" label="Maksimir Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="11050" end="11056" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131732" start="11234" end="11244" title="Serbia and Montenegro national football team" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="11466" end="11480" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="11587" end="11593" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q190978" start="12051" end="12067" title="Northern Ireland national football team" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q313617" start="12075" end="12086" title="David Healy (footballer)" label="David Healy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29185" start="12142" end="12162" title="UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying" label="Euro 2008 qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="12534" end="12542" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="12543" end="12550" title="Fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12564" end="12572" title="Ustaše#Ethnic and religious persecution" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048318" start="12592" end="12601" title="Poglavnik" label="Poglavnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q36965" start="12608" end="12620" title="Ante Pavelić" label="Ante Pavelić"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187134" start="12859" end="12897" title="Croatian Journalists&amp;#x27; Association" label="Croatian Journalists&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="13117" end="13124" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q721283" start="13126" end="13133" title="1996–97 La Liga" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q485997" start="13136" end="13155" title="Supercopa de España" label="Supercopa de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q611699" start="13157" end="13161" title="1997 Supercopa de España" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="13164" end="13185" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q241409" start="13187" end="13194" title="1997–98 UEFA Champions League" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q182473" start="13197" end="13217" title="Intercontinental Cup (1960–2004)" label="Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537077" start="13219" end="13223" title="1998 Intercontinental Cup" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="13235" end="13243" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q751822" start="13255" end="13264" title="1999–2000 UEFA Cup" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q201891" start="13279" end="13298" title="FIFA U-20 World Cup" label="FIFA U-20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q522635" start="13300" end="13304" title="1987 FIFA World Youth Championship" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q478770" start="13307" end="13342" title="UEFA European Under-21 Championship" label="UEFA European Under-21 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q769375" start="13354" end="13358" title="1990 UEFA European Under-21 Football Championship" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="13370" end="13384" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="13398" end="13402" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q368974" start="13417" end="13436" title="FIFA World Cup awards" label="1998 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="13438" end="13449" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="Golden Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q368974" start="13452" end="13471" title="FIFA World Cup awards" label="1998 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q368974" start="13473" end="13484" title="Golden Ball (FIFA)" label="Silver Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q368974" start="13487" end="13506" title="FIFA World Cup awards" label="1998 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13508" end="13521" title="FIFA World Cup awards#All-Star Team" label="All-Star Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049896" start="13524" end="13538" title="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Onze de Bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="13547" end="13563" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165632" start="13575" end="13579" title="1998 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q182529" start="13582" end="13611" title="FIFA World Player of the Year" label="FIFA World Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q596167" start="13626" end="13630" title="1998 FIFA World Player of the Year" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q522635" start="13633" end="13657" title="1987 FIFA World Youth Championship" label="1987 FIFA U-20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13659" end="13670" title="FIFA World Youth Championship#Awards" label="Silver Shoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q163786" start="13673" end="13710" title="Yugoslav First League" label="Yugoslav First League Top Goal Scorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718730" start="13712" end="13719" title="1988–89 Yugoslav First League" label="1988-89"/>
<link wikidata="Q478770" start="13722" end="13762" title="UEFA European Under-21 Championship" label="UEFA European Under-21 Championship 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q478770" start="13780" end="13820" title="UEFA European Under-21 Championship" label="UEFA European Under-21 Championship 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q180563" start="13836" end="13868" title="UEFA Euro 1996" label="UEFA Euro Team of the Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q665940" start="13877" end="13922" title="Allgemeiner Deutscher Nachrichtendienst" label="ADN Eastern European Footballer of the Season"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13937" end="13957" title="European Sports Magazines#ESM Team of the Year" label="ESM Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q786180" start="13969" end="14000" title="Croatian Footballer of the Year" label="Croatian Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q241622" start="14038" end="14063" title="Večernji list" label="Croatian Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484794" start="14078" end="14112" title="Franjo Bučar State Award for Sport" label="Franjo Bučar State Award for Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681581" start="14121" end="14151" title="Sportske novosti awards" label="Croatian Sportsman of the year"/>
<link wikidata="Q729035" start="14160" end="14213" title="World Soccer (magazine)" label="World Soccer 100 Greatest Players of the 20th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q877573" start="14222" end="14241" title="UEFA Jubilee Awards" label="UEFA Jubilee Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="14279" end="14287" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640" start="14295" end="14312" title="Osijek" label="Honoree of Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q241622" start="14320" end="14333" title="Večernji list" label="Vecernji list"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14367" end="14415" title="Croatia national football team#Top goalscorers" label="All-time top scorer of the Croatia national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100487" start="14426" end="14476" title="Order of Danica Hrvatska" label="Order of Danica Hrvatska with face of Franjo Bučar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100656" start="14485" end="14514" title="Order of the Croatian Trefoil" label="Order of the Croatian Trefoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q126091" start="14523" end="14544" title="Order of Duke Trpimir" label="Order of Duke Trpimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q746551" start="14588" end="14656" title="List of top international men&amp;#x27;s football goal scorers by country" label="List of top international men&amp;#x27;s football goalscorers by country"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610982" wikidata="Q1139904" url="?curid=610982" title="Crick">
<text>Crick may refer to:
== Places ==
* Crick, Monmouthshire, Wales
* Crick, Northamptonshire, England
* Crick Road, Oxford, England

==People with the name==
* Crick (surname)

==Other uses==
* Crick, the cricket from &quot;Beat Bugs&quot;
* Francis Crick Institute, London, England, known as &quot;The Crick&quot;
* Watson and Crick, a reference to &quot;Molecular Structure of Nucleic Acids: A Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid&quot;, a seminal article published by Francis Crick and James D. Watson in the scientific journal &quot;Nature&quot; [25 April 1953]

== See also ==
* Creek (disambiguation)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1139904" start="0" end="5" title="Crick" label="Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184930" start="35" end="55" title="Crick, Monmouthshire" label="Crick, Monmouthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025703" start="65" end="88" title="Crick, Northamptonshire" label="Crick, Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15212000" start="100" end="110" title="Crick Road" label="Crick Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q16865867" start="156" end="171" title="Crick (surname)" label="Crick (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q26158054" start="220" end="229" title="Beat Bugs" label="Beat Bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q326044" start="238" end="261" title="Francis Crick Institute" label="Francis Crick Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895685" start="313" end="329" title="Watson and Crick" label="Watson and Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q293427" start="582" end="604" title="Creek (disambiguation)" label="Creek (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610984" wikidata="Q3075" url="?curid=610984" title="Fürth">
<text>Fürth (; East Franconian: ; ) is a city in northern Bavaria, Germany, in the administrative division (&quot;Regierungsbezirk&quot;) of Middle Franconia.

It is the second-largest city in Franconia and now contiguous with the larger city of Nuremberg, the centres of the two cities being only apart.

The city forms a continuous conurbation with the neighbouring cities of Nuremberg, Erlangen and Schwabach, which is the heart of an urban area region with around 1.4 million inhabitants, while the larger Nuremberg Metropolitan Region has a population of approximately 3.6 million.

Fürth celebrated its thousand-year anniversary in 2007, its first mention being on 1 November 1007.

== Geography ==

The historic centre of the town is to the east and south of the rivers Rednitz and Pegnitz, which join to form the Regnitz to the northwest of the Old Town. To the west of the town, on the far side of the Main-Danube Canal, is the Fürth municipal forest (&quot;Fürther Stadtwald&quot;). To the east of Fürth, at roughly the same latitude, lies Nuremberg, and to the north is the fertile market-gardening area known as the &quot;Knoblauchsland&quot; (garlic country), some of which is within the borders of the urban district of Fürth. To the south of the town is an area consisting of wide roads, the canal, and meadows.

=== Neighbouring municipalities ===
The following towns and municipalities share borders with Fürth; they are listed in clockwise order, starting in the north:

Erlangen and Nuremberg, which are independent urban districts; Stein, Oberasbach, Zirndorf, Cadolzburg, Seukendorf, Veitsbronn, and Obermichelbach, which are municipalities within the rural district (&quot;Landkreis&quot;) of Fürth.

=== Parts of town ===
Beyond the town proper, the urban district comprises another 20 localities:

*Atzenhof
*Bislohe
*Braunsbach 
*Burgfarrnbach
*Dambach
*Flexdorf
*Herboldshof
*Kronach
*Mannhof
*Oberfürberg
*Poppenreuth
*Ritzmannshof
*Ronhof
*Sack
*Stadeln
*Steinach
*Unterfarrnbach
*Unterfürberg
*Vach
*Weikershof
== History ==

Founded as a Franconian settlement in the mid-8th century AD, the first historical mention of Fürth was in a document dated 1 November 1007, in which the Emperor Heinrich II donated his property in Fürth to the newly created Bishopric of Bamberg. The name &quot;Fürth&quot; derives from the German word for &quot;ford&quot;, as the first settlements originated around a ford. In the following years, Fürth was granted market privileges, but these were later lost to the neighbouring Nuremberg, under Heinrich III. From 1062 onward, Fürth was again permitted to have a market, but by that time Nuremberg was already the more important town.

In the following centuries, the town was under varying authority, involving the Bishopric of Bamberg, the Principality of Ansbach and the City of Nuremberg. For a long time, the character of the settlement remained largely agricultural, and in 1600 the population was probably still only between 1000 and 2000.

In the Thirty Years War, the village was almost completely destroyed by fire, in military actions leading up to the September 1632 Battle of Fürth.

In 1835, the first German railway was opened between Nuremberg and Fürth.

Throughout the Cold War, Fürth had a significant NATO presence, especially the U.S. Army, due to its proximity to both the East German and Czechoslovak borders.

=== Expansion ===
In the course of time, a number of municipalities or other administrative divisions were integrated into the urban district of Fürth:

* 1 January 1899: the western part of the municipality of Höfen, including Weikershof (to the south of the Schwabacher Straße) 
* 1 January 1900: the municipality of Poppenreuth (to the east of the historic centre of the city, on the far side of the river Pegnitz)
* 1 January 1901: the municipality of Dambach (to the west of the current Südstadt (South Town), as well as Unterfürberg and Oberfürberg
* 1 January 1918: Atzenhof (to the north-west, on the right bank of the River Zenn between Unterfarrnbach and Vach)
* 1 January 1918: the municipality of Unterfarrnbach (to the west, on the bank of the river Farrnbach)
* 3 December 1923: the municipality of Burgfarrnbach (to the north-west, on the far side of the canal, not contiguous with Fürth proper)
* 1 July 1927: the municipality of Ronhof, and Kronach
* 1 July 1972: the municipality of Sack, including Bislohe, which is north of the &quot;Knoblauchsland&quot; and is not separately listed in official documents.
* 1 July 1972: the municipality of Stadeln
* 1 July 1972: the municipality of Vach (to the north of Fürth, north of the river Zenn and west of river Regnitz
* 1 July 1972: Herboldshof and Steinach, previously parts of the municipality of Boxdorf

=== Population development ===
In the Middle Ages and early Renaissance, the population of Fürth grew slowly, owing to the numerous wars, epidemics and famines. In the Thirty Years War, the town lost about half its population. When Croatian soldiers set fire to Fürth in 1634, it burned for several days, and was almost completely destroyed. At the end of the war, the population was a mere 800. In 1685, Reformed Christians from France, or Huguenots, settled in Fürth. By 1700 the restoration of the town had been completed, and the population rose to about 6000.

With the beginning of industrialization in the 19th century, the population began to increase rapidly. In 1800 Fürth had a population of 12,000; by 1895 it had multiplied fourfold to 47,000. In 1950 the population of the town exceeded 100,000, making it a &quot;Großstadt&quot;. At the end of 2005, as recorded by the Bavarian Statistical Office (&quot;Landesamt für Statistik und Datenverarbeitung&quot;), the population (based on principal residence) was 113,076, a historical record. This makes Fürth the second largest town in Middle Franconia, after Nuremberg, and the seventh largest town in Bavaria. As of 2015, the proportion of foreign nationals in Fürth is about 18 percent.

The following table shows the population of Fürth over time. Up to 1818 the figures are mainly estimates; after that they are mostly based on census results (¹) or official projections from the appropriate statistical offices or the town administration itself.

¹ Census result

== Religions ==
=== Christianity ===
The population of Fürth was originally under the Bishopric of Würzburg and from 1007 it belonged to the Bishopric of Bamberg. In 1524, as part of the Reformation, it became a Protestant town like Nuremberg, and it remained so for many years. However, because of the connections with Bamberg, there were always some Catholics in the town.

After 1792, the Protestant congregations in Fürth were under the authority of the Prussian Ansbach Consistory, and when Brandenburg-Ansbach was ceded to Bavaria they became part of the Bavarian Protestant Church, which initially comprised Lutheran and Reformed congregations. The congregations later belonged to the Deanery of Zirndorf. In 1885, Fürth became a deanery (&quot;Dekanat&quot;), subsidiary to Nuremberg.

Beside the Bavarian Protestant Church there are also Protestant congregations of free churches in Fürth, e. g. a small congregation of the United Methodist Church.

From the 18th century or earlier, the number of Catholics rose, and in 1829 the first Catholic church since the Reformation was consecrated: the Church of Our Lady. St. Michael was originally a Catholic church until taken by the Protestants during the Reformation. In 1961, Fürth became a Catholic Deanery within the Archdiocese.

The proportion of Protestants to Catholics in the 20th century was about two to one.

=== Judaism ===
The position enjoyed by Jews in Fürth (compared with other towns) led to the sobriquet &quot;Franconian Jerusalem&quot;, though this is based on an older, pejoratively intended reference to Fürth.

Jewish residents are mentioned as early as 1440; in 1528 the Margrave of Ansbach, George the Pious, permitted two Jews, Perman and Uriel, to settle in Fürth (in return for high taxes), and from then on the number of Jewish residents increased.

By the 17th century, there was a local Yeshiva (Talmudic academy) of considerable repute, and in 1617, a synagogue was built. In 1653, the first Jewish hospital in Germany (and Fürth&#x27;s first hospital) was built.

When Emperor Leopold I deported the Viennese Jews in 1670, many upper-class Jewish families moved to Fürth, and by 1716 there were about 400 Jewish families in the town. In 1807, the proportion of Jews in the overall population was about 19%. Following the Mediatization and the Bavarian &quot;Judenedikt&quot; (Jewish Edict) of 1813, there were more restrictions on Jews. In particular, the &quot;Matrikelparagraph&quot; provisions prevented Jewish immigration. In 1824, the Talmudic academy was closed. The Bavarian &quot;Judenedikt&quot; of 1813, with its restrictions on Jewish life and Jewish immigration was rescinded by the law of 29 June 1851, and further laws dated 16 April 1868, and 22 April 1871, which led to further emancipation of the Jews, and restrictions on residence were removed. By 1840, there were 2,535 Jews living in Fürth, more than half of all Bavarian Jews.

In 1862, a Jewish primary school was founded, followed by a secondary school in 1882. The highest number of Jewish residents was reached in 1880, at about 3,300.

In 1933, there were 1,990 Jews in Fürth. By early 1938 after the rise of the Nazis, there were 1,400 Jews in Fürth. In November 1938, there were about 1,200 when the synagogue was destroyed in the Kristallnacht pogroms, and 132 Jews were deported to Dachau. All except a handful of those who remained in Fürth after Kristallnacht either fled while they still could (abroad or to other areas in Germany) or were deported to concentration camps and/or death camps; virtually all those who remained in Germany were deported to their deaths. By 1944, perhaps 23 Jews were left in Furth. Overall, 1,068 Jews from Furth were murdered in the Holocaust.

After the end of the Second World War, a Displaced persons camp for Jewish Holocaust survivors was established in Fürth (Finkenschlag). In 1945 it housed 850 inhabitants; it was shut down in July 1950.

There is a memorial to the Jewish community in the Geleitsgasse square, just off Königstrasse. Archaeologists discovered a Mikvah (ritual bath) in a house in the centre of Fürth. This building now houses the Jewish Museum of Franconia, which opened in 1998.

The old Jewish cemetery (Weiherstraße), which was established in 1607, is one of the oldest in Germany. It suffered considerable destruction and desecration during the Nazi regime and the Second World War, but was restored in 1949 and is now one of the best-preserved Jewish cemeteries in Germany. A new Jewish cemetery was consecrated in 1880, which has been in use from 1906 to the present day.
== Nature ==
The &quot;Nature Trail for Urban Ecology&quot; was established in 1999 (, 10 stops) and expanded in 2003 to include a second route (, 10 stops). Both tours begin at the Stadthalle underground railway station. Along the nature trail, different habitats and their importance for the flora and fauna of the area are explained (e.g. the churchyard of St. Michael&#x27;s Church, the municipal cemetery, Scherbsgraben stream). The trail references the designation of some areas as protected areas, and explains problems of measures that affect the environment, such as river regulation.

Average sunshine duration is 1766 hours per year.

The Gustav-Adolf natural spring, near Weikershof, by the River Rednitz was restored in 2000 and a pavilion was erected. Until the 1980s, the spring water, which comes out of the ground at , was used for a swimming pool.

== Politics ==

=== Coat of arms ===
The Fürth coat of arms depicts a green trefoil (three-leaved clover) on a white (argent) background. The town colours are green and white. The trefoil first appeared on a seal of the governor of the city for the Bamberg Diocese, which depicted a trefoil held by a hand and between two crescents. Its origin is unclear, but the trefoil probably represents the three powers responsible for Fürth during the Middle Ages as well as being a symbol of the Trinity. From 1792 onward, there were three trefoils on a triple hill. In 1818, the town acquired a new coat of arms depicting a green trefoil surrounded by an oak branch (acorned). This coat of arms was retained for over 100 years. However, in 1939, the oak branch was removed. At that time, a new flag was introduced; it had two green stripes on a green background and the coat of arms on a green background on the upper part. Later, however, the flag was simplified to the colours white (below) and green (above).

=== Administration ===
Until the end of the 18th century, the administration of Fürth was in the hands of a representative of the Diocese of Bamberg. Fürth was transferred to Bavaria in 1806; in 1808 it was made a &quot;class II&quot; city and was under the direct authority of the state. From 1818 Fürth became a &quot;class I&quot; city; this meant that it was responsible for its own administration.

Since 2002 Thomas Jung, (SPD), has been the First Mayor.

==Twin towns – sister cities==

Fürth is twinned with:
* Limoges, France (1992)
* Marmaris, Turkey (1995)
* Paisley, Scotland, United Kingdom (1969)
* Xylokastro, Greece (2006)

== Economy and infrastructure ==

As of July 2019, unemployment in Fürth was 2.9 percent.

The toy industry is a major employer in the Fürth economy, with a variety of toy-makers ranging from small crafts to large industrial enterprises.

Brewing was once important in Fürth. The five large breweries were Humbser, Geismann, Grüner, Evora &amp; Meyer, and Berg Bräu. Around the turn of the 19th century, Fürth was more important than Munich as a &quot;beer town&quot;.

Quelle, once the largest mail-order company in Europe, was based in Fürth before its insolvency and liquidation in 2009.

Fürth is also a centre of solar technology. An average of two megawatt of electricity are fed into the grid on sunny days by Infra Fürth, the local energy utility, using photovoltaic technology. A ground-based plant in Atzenhof located on a former landfill produces 1 MW, the largest individual share. 

A new pumping station was built in 2003 near the confluence of the Pegnitz and Rednitz rivers. It provides artificial irrigation to the &quot;Knoblauchsland&quot; market garden area to the north-east of the city.

=== Transport ===

==== Airports ====

In 1914, an aerodrome was built at Atzenhof for the Third Bavarian Army Corps, which was extended in the following years. After the First World War, it became &quot;Fürth–Nuremberg&quot; international airport, which saved it from being completely dismantled. Fürth-Nuremberg Airport was the eighth largest of the 88 German airports. The importance of the airport increased further when Junkers transferred first its central repair workshop, and then the final assembly line for its aircraft from Dessau to Fürth. Under the Nazis, the airport at Atzenhof was expanded and used as a flying school. After Fürth was occupied by Allied troops, the US Army used the site as a barracks, until 1993 (Monteith Barracks Army Heliport). The US Army built the &quot;Monteith Barracks&quot; golf course on the site and maintained the historic buildings. In 1928, the city of Nuremberg took over the main share of the airport&#x27;s operations. Until civil aviation operations ended in 1933, the airport was called &quot;Flughafen Nuremberg-Fürth&quot;.

There was a second airport built at Fürth-Hardhöhe by the Gothaer Waggonfabrik, later called Industrieflughafen. It existed from 1919 until 6. April 1955. 1919-1938 Gothaer Waggonfabrik, 1939-1945 Bachmann, v.Blumenthal, 1945-1949 U.S. Army Airfield R-30 and 1949-1955 &quot;International Airport Nürnberg-Fürth&quot;.

==== Rail ====
The first railway line with steam trains in Germany was between Fürth and Nuremberg, and opened on December 7, 1835. The locomotive, named &quot;Adler&quot; (Eagle) was built in Newcastle by Stephenson, the builder of the famous Rocket. Fürth main station is served by multiple S-Bahn Lines, Regionalbahn and Regional-Express services and several Intercity and InterCity Express services. There is also a number of S-Bahn stations across the city. Nuremberg and Fürth are joined by an underground railway (subway) connection. In Fürth there are currently seven underground stations: Stadtgrenze (partly in Fürth), Jakobinenstraße, Fürth Hauptbahnhof, Rathaus, Stadthalle, Klinikum, and Hardhöhe.

See also: Nuremberg U-Bahn, Nuremberg S-Bahn

==== Water transport ====
A canal between Bamberg and Nuremberg started operation in 1843. There was a port at Poppenreuth. A new canal with a port in Fürth, the Rhine-Main-Danube Canal, was completed in 1992, creating a navigable connection from the Rhine delta in Rotterdam to the Danube Delta on the Black Sea.

==== Local public transport ====
Public transport in Fürth is managed by &quot;Infra Fürth&quot;.

=== Media ===
The &quot;Fürther Nachrichten&quot; is published daily. It was first published in 1946 as a local page in Nürnberger Nachrichten; today it is a separate newspaper but is in fact the same newspaper as &quot;Nürnberger Nachrichten&quot; with some additional sections for the town and the rural district of Fürth, respectively.

=== Companies in Fürth ===
The mail-order business Quelle, now merged with Karstadt to form KarstadtQuelle, was founded by Gustav Schickedanz on 26 October 1927. KarstadtQuelle Versicherungen, an insurance arm, was created in 1984.

Grundig had its headquarters and a number of manufacturing plants in Fürth, from the time the company was founded until the middle of 2000. The former headquarters on Kurgartenstraße was converted into a technology park (&quot;Uferstadt Fürth&quot;), and it now accommodates &quot;Technikum Neue Materialien&quot; (research center into new materials), an institute of the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft, Sellbytel (a call centre operation), Computec Media AG, and the Radio Museum.

Siemens AG, based in Munich has several locations in Fürth.

Uvex headquarters and a manufacturing unit are in Fürth.

The toy manufacturers Simba Dickie Group (Simba, Dickie, BIG) and Bruder are based in Fürth.
=== Education ===
In Fürth, there are a total of 22 elementary schools. There are also 3 high schools (university-entrance level school) (&quot;gymnasia&quot;), in order of foundation: Hardenberg-Gymnasium (1833), Heinrich-Schliemann-Gymnasium (1896), and Helene-Lange-Gymnasium (1907). There are two &quot;commercial&quot; schools (Wirtschaftsschule/Realschule): the Hans Böckler School and the Leopold Ullstein School; there are also a number of vocational schools.

The siting of Erlangen-Nuremberg University&#x27;s Central Institute for New Materials and Process Technology in Fürth in 2004 makes Fürth a university town. Some practical training elements of the Erlangen university medical school are at Fürth municipal hospital.
Wilhelm Löhe Hochschule für angewandte Wissenschaften is a private University of Applied Sciences for health care and welfare.

=== Municipal amenities ===
At Scherbsgraben, there was an indoor and an outdoor swimming pool, a diving pool with a 10-metre tower, a large pool for non-swimmers, and a sauna. These facilities were completely renovated in 2006–2007. The open-air pool was re-opened in June 2006 and a new thermal spa (called Fürthermare) was opened in 2007. The complex is no longer run by the municipal authorities but is completely privatized and called Bäderland Fürth.

Fürth has a municipal library, with a number of branches; since 2003 it has been possible to access the catalogue via the Internet. There is a town archive in Burgfarrnbach.

== Amenities ==
=== Theatre ===
The municipal theatre (&quot;Stadttheater Fürth&quot;) was built by the Viennese theatre architects Fellner &amp; Helmer in the Italian Renaissance and Baroque styles. It is very similar to the municipal theatre of the Ukrainian town of Chernivtsi, which was designed by the same architects.

Another playhouse, the Comödie Fürth, is now housed in the Jugendstil building known as the &quot;Berolzheimerianum&quot;. Regular appearances are made by the Franconian cult comedians Volker Heißmann and Martin Rassau, better known by their &quot;alter ego&quot;s Waltraud and Mariechen. The playhouse hosts other appearances by German stars of comedy theatre.

=== Commercial areas ===
Fürth&#x27;s main district for eating out and drinking is around the Gustavstraße, which is in the Old Town, near the Rathaus. There are many small pubs, cafés and cocktail bars, as well as restaurants serving Franconian cuisine.
Esp. in suburbs und Stadtwald are some traditional franconian restaurants with beer garden / open air area.

Shopping facilities in Fürth include the mall &quot;Neue Mitte&quot; as well as many retail shops and an open market. A second mall, &quot;Flair&quot; is currently being built on the location of the previous &quot;City Center&quot; shopping center, and scheduled to open in April 2021.

== Sights ==

=== Monuments ===
Fürth survived the Second World War with less damage than most German cities, and many historic buildings remain. Fürth has a very high density of historic buildings and monuments per head of population (17 per 1000 inhabitants).

The city centre is typified by the streets with intact architecture from the 19th and early 20th centuries. In the old town, around the Church of St. Michael, there are ensembles of buildings from the 17th and 18th centuries. Of particular note is the Hornschuch Promenade with &quot;Gründerzeit&quot; and &quot;Jugendstil&quot; apartment houses. The &quot;Südstadt&quot;, the southern part of the town, also has many historic buildings, but these tend to be former workers&#x27; tenements, so the house fronts are less grand. A lot of frame and freestones houses from 17.–19. century can be found in quarters and suburbs, f.e. Poppenreuth, Burgfarrnbach, Vach and Dambach.

The Rathaus (town hall), built in the Italian style by Friedrich Bürklein between 1840 and 1850, is modelled on the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence. The &quot;Glockenspiel&quot; in the Rathaus is a mechanical music machine with 25 chromatically tuned cast bronze bells, similar to a carillon. It became nationally known through the daily playing of the rock classic Stairway to Heaven by the British rock group Led Zeppelin at 12:04 pm.

=== Museums ===
* The Jewish Museum in Franconia&#x27; (Königstraße 89), which also has a branch in Schnaittach, was opened in 1999. The main part of the house goes back to the 17th century; Jewish families lived here until the late 19th century. The stucco ceilings, a historic Sukkah and a Mikvah in the basement have remained intact. The museum is also meant to be a meeting place, and has a bookshop and a cafeteria.
* &quot;Fürth Radio museum&quot; (Kurgartenstraße 37)
* &quot;Stadtmuseum&quot; (Municipal/Town Museum), (Ottostr.2) at former Otto schoolhouse shows a lot of town history in a permanent exhibition and alternating special exhibitions
* The &quot;kunst galerie fürth&quot; (Königsplatz 1), which was opened at the end of 2002, is a place for modern art, with varying exhibitions.
* The Jakob-Henle-Haus houses a collection of dialysis technology.

=== Churches ===
The Protestant Church of St. Michael is the oldest building in Fürth. Its beginnings go back to around 1100, the 45-metre (150  ft) tower was added around 1400 at the beginning of the Late Gothic period, and most of the building work was carried out in the 15th century. The interior of the church is mainly Neo-Gothic in character, with most of the Late Gothic ornaments having been replaced in the 19th century. The only remaining late Gothic ornament is the tabernacle on the North wall; it is 6.8 metres (22 ft 4 in) high and was probably created around 1500–1510 by artists near to Adam Kraft. It is the church&#x27;s most valuable work of art.
Other churches with gothic parts from 14.–16. century are St.Johannis in Burgfarrnbach, St.Peter and Paul in Poppenreuth and St.Matthäus in Vach. St. Peter and Paul probably has some older parts, the previous building was probably founded around 900 – 1000 and was mother Church of many other churches f.e. St.Sebald in Nuremberg.

The Catholic Church of Our Lady (1824–1828) is a Classical building, as is the Protestant &quot;Church of the Resurrection&quot; (1825–26), originally belonging to the cemetery and therefore aligned in a north–south direction. In the Südstadt area are the Neo-Gothic Church of St. Paul and the Neo-Baroque Church of St. Henry and Kunigunde. Other churches include the Catholic Church of Christ the King (&quot;Christkönig&quot;), which was built in the 1970s.

=== Secular buildings ===

The renovated Liershof was built in 1621 as a two-story stone-block building with high house ends and a two-story timber-framed spire.

The Lochnersche Gartenhaus (Theaterstraße 33) was built about 1700; the polygonal staircase tower was probably added about 1750.

Fürth Rathaus (Town Hall), with its 55 m high tower in the Italian style, was built in 1840–50 by Georg Friedrich Christian Bürklein with the help of Eduard Bürklein, both students of Friedrich von Gärtner. The tower is modelled on the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence and is now the main landmark of Fürth. The Rathaus was built after Fürth was granted the right to self-administration.

The station building of the historic main rail station was designed by Eduard Rüber and built in 1863–1864.
in front of main station is Centaurenbrunnen, in naturalistic and neo baroque style. 1890 it was created by Rudolf Maison and was built to celebrate railway and water supply in Fürth.

The former abattoir, now a &quot;cultural&quot; centre is to be found below the &quot;Stadthalle&quot; near the River Rednitz.

On the Schwabacher Straße is a brewery with buildings from the beginning of the 20th century.

The Gauklerbrunnen, (2004), created by Harro Frey at the Grüner Markt is the most recent fountain in Fürth; it comprises 3 independent groups of figures, two of which are connected by water elements.

Schloss Burgfarrnbach (Burgfarrnbach Palace) built in 1830 – 1834 is South Germany&#x27;s largest neo-classical palace. It was built by Leonhard Schmidtner as residence for the counts of Pückler-Limpurg. Since the 1980s it is used as municipal archive, academic library, for concerts and special exhibitions and Stadtmuseum depot.

Schloss Steinach is a manor house from 17. century.

=== Parks ===
The Stadtpark (municipal park) is by the Pegnitz and there is a gradual transition to the water meadows further down the river. As well as paths and park benches, the park offers duck ponds, a children&#x27;s playground, a minigolf course, a rose garden, a grassland orchard laid out in 2001, a few statues, and a botanical educational (school project) garden.

In the latter half of 2004 the Südstadtpark, on a former barracks, was opened to the public.

=== Regular events ===
*May: Burgfarrnbach fair (&quot;Bürgerfest&quot;)
*Spring: International Klezmer Festival 
*Spring and Autumn: &quot;Grafflmarkt&quot; flea market
*Summer: Fürth Festival (in town centre)
*Summer:Grüne Nacht (Green Night) - local Folk &amp; Blues Festival at &quot;Grüner Markt&quot; (market place)
*Summer: New Orleans Festival at &quot;Fürther Freiheit&quot;
*Summer: Hardhöhe festival
*Summer: saints&#x27; day fairs in various locations (fairs to celebrate the consecration of the local church)
*September/October: &quot;Michaeliskirchweih&quot; fair. This is one of the largest of such events in Bavaria, and also the largest and most important festivals in Fürth, it has been going on for more than 800 years. It starts on September 29 (Michaelmas), if it is a Saturday, or on the first Saturday following September 29). It usually lasts 12 days. In 2007 it lasted 16 days in celebration of Fürth&#x27;s 1000th anniversary.
*December: Christmas market (&quot;Weihnachtsmarkt&quot;) at &quot;Fürther Freiheit&quot;
*December: Old Town Christmas (&quot;Altstadtweihnacht&quot;) organized by the Old Town Association (&quot;Altstadtverein&quot;) at &quot;Waagplatz&quot;.

=== Prizes awarded by the town of Fürth ===
Every two years, since 1996, Fürth has awarded the Jakob-Wassermann prize, a prize for literature in honour of Fürth&#x27;s famous author Jakob Wassermann.

== Sport and leisure ==

=== Sport ===
In the sporting world, Fürth came to fame through its football club &quot;SpVgg Fürth&quot;, which was German football champion three times. Since merging with the football section of TSV Vestenbergsgreuth the club is now called SpVgg Greuther Fürth. After winning the 2nd Bundesliga in 2011-12, the team moved up to the top level Bundesliga for the first time. The football stadium is in Ronhof (Stadion am Laubenweg).

The baseball team Fürth Pirates was promoted to the premier national baseball league in 2002 and became vice-champion in the 2004 season.

Each August, Fürth plays host to the annual Paul Hunter Classic, which is now a pro-am minor ranking snooker event and part of the European Players Tour Championship.

=== Leisure ===
The largest public barbecue area within Fürth is on the Rednitz, near the railway line to Würzburg and the swimming pool. It is shaded by trees and has barbecue facilities and fixed seating.

There are minigolf courses in the Stadtpark, by the Rhine-Main-Danube Canal, near Burgfarrnbach, and by the Pegnitz, a little upstream from the confluence with the Rednitz and near the municipal cemetery.

==Notable people==
* Max Bernstein (1854–1925), lawyer, art and theatre critic and author
* Hans Böckler (1875–1951), German politician (SPD) and union leader
* Hermann Boehm (1884–1962), German eugenicist, professor of &quot;racial hygiene&quot; and SA-&quot;Sanitäts-Gruppenführer&quot;
* Moritz Ellinger (1830–1907), politician and New York City official
* Ludwig Erhard (1897–1977), politician (CDU), former German chancellor
* Roger C. Field (born 1945), inventor, designer
* Albert Forster (1902–1952), German Nazi governor executed for war crimes
* Max Grundig (1908–1989), founder of electronics company Grundig
* Moshe Heinemann (born 1937), renowned Jewish Orthodox Rabbi based in Baltimore, MD.
* Jakob Henle (1809–1885), anatomist, pathologist and doctor
* Ralph F. Hirschmann (1922–2009), biochemist who led synthesis of the first enzyme.
* Jacob Hirschorn (1829–1906), Mexican War veteran
* Heinrich Hoffmann (1885–1957), personal photographer of Adolf Hitler
* Wilhelm Ihne (1821–1902), classicist and historian
* Henry Kissinger (1923–2023), former United States Secretary of State
* Robert Kurz (1943–2012), communist theorist

* Wilhelm Löhe (1808–1872), Lutheran pastor
* Jean Mandel (1911–1974), footballer and politician, Bavarian senator
* (1870–1922), philanthropist
* Julius Ochs (1826–1888), father of Adolph Ochs, publisher of &quot;New York Times&quot;
* Arthur Rosenthal (1887–1959), mathematician
* Gustav Schickedanz (1895–1977), German entrepreneur
* Alfred Schwarzmann (1912–2000), gymnastic and olympic athlete
* Martin Segitz (1853–1927), union leader and politician (SPD)
* Leopold Ullstein (1826–1899), important German publisher
* Jakob Wassermann (1873–1934), writer and novelist
* Ruth Weiss (born 1924), writer
* Marco Wittmann (born 1989), racing driver and 2-time DTM champion

== Notes ==
==References==
=== Further reading ===
* 

=== Literature in German ===

* Georg Dehio: &quot;Handbuch der deutschen Kunstdenkmäler&quot;. Bayern. Bd I. Franken. Deutscher Kunstverlag, Munich 1999, P.363ff. 
* Katrin Bielefeldt: &quot;Geschichte der Juden in Fürth. Jahrhundertelang eine Heimat&quot;. Historische Spaziergänge. Vol. 3. Edited by Geschichte Für Alle e. V. Sandberg-Verlag, Nuremberg 2005. .
* Erich Keyser (ed.): &quot;Deutsches Städtebuch. Handbuch städtischer Geschichte&quot;. vol. 5. Bayerisches Städtebuch. T 1. part volume Unter-, Mittel- und Oberfranken. Commissioned by the Arbeitsgemeinschaft der historischen Kommissionen and with the support of the Deutscher Städtetag, the Deutscher Städtebund and the Deutscher Gemeindetag. Kohlhammer Verlag, Stuttgart 1971.
* Ralf Nestmeyer: &quot;Nürnberg, Fürth, Erlangen&quot;. Reisehandbuch. Michael Müller, Erlangen 2006. .
* Adolf Schwammberger: &quot;Fürth von A bis Z. Ein Geschichts-Lexikon&quot;. Fürth 1968.
* Andrea Sommer: &quot;&quot;Die Fürther Südstadt&quot;. 4 parts. in: &quot;Fürther Heimatblätter&quot;. Published by the Verein für Heimatforschung Alt-Fürth. NF 39.1989, P.1, NF 40.1990, P.1, NF 40.1990, P.81 und NF 41.1991, P.10.
* Gerd Walther (Hrsg.): &quot;Fürth - Die Kleeblattstadt - Rundgänge durch Geschichte und Gegenwart&quot;. Städtebilder-Verlag, Fürth 1991. 
* Gerd Walther: &quot;Die Fürther Altstadt rund um Sankt Michael&quot;. Fürth 1990. 

=== Literature in English ===
* Simon Pearce: &quot;Bridget and Jane&quot;. A children&#x27;s audio series set in Fürth in the early 19th century. Sydney, 2006. Unpublished.

== External links ==

* Official Fürth Site 
* FürthWiki.de Free city wiki about Fürth 
* Official site for Fürth&#x27;s 1000th anniversary in 2007 
* Official Fürth Website: Historical data and facts
*Official Fürth web site Jewish history in Fürth 
*Official Web site, Jewish Museum of Franconia in Fürth 
*Web site of non-profit organization History for All, Institute for Regional History: Fürth 
*Web site of non-profit organization History for All, Institute for Regional History: A home for centuries - history of the Jews in Fürth 
*Bayern 2 state radio: Fürth - the Franconian Jerusalem 
*Alemannia Judaica home page
*Alemannia Judaica: Fürth Jewish cemetery 
*International Civic Heraldry web site: Fürth 
*JewishEncyclopaedia.com: Fürth, by Gotthard Deutsch, A. Eckstein 
*KUNSTNÜRNBERG - Online - Magazine for Contemporary Art and History of Art in Fürth, Nuremberg and Franconia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3075" start="0" end="5" title="Fürth" label="Fürth"/>
<link wikidata="Q71223" start="9" end="24" title="East Franconian German" label="East Franconian"/>
<link wikidata="Q209208" start="35" end="39" title="List of cities and towns in Germany" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="52" end="59" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q22721" start="108" end="124" title="Regierungsbezirk" label="Regierungsbezirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10551" start="135" end="151" title="Middle Franconia" label="Middle Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="164" end="178" title="Franconia#Towns and cities" label="second-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q150907" start="187" end="196" title="Franconia" label="Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="240" end="249" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126" start="383" end="391" title="Erlangen" label="Erlangen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14889" start="396" end="405" title="Schwabach" label="Schwabach"/>
<link wikidata="Q728664" start="504" end="533" title="Nuremberg Metropolitan Region" label="Nuremberg Metropolitan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q694389" start="771" end="778" title="Rednitz" label="Rednitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q163880" start="783" end="790" title="Pegnitz River" label="Pegnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q643525" start="815" end="822" title="Regnitz" label="Regnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q153085" start="905" end="922" title="Main-Danube Canal" label="Main-Danube Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126" start="1483" end="1491" title="Erlangen" label="Erlangen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="1496" end="1505" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q522045" start="1546" end="1551" title="Stein, Bavaria" label="Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q504751" start="1553" end="1563" title="Oberasbach" label="Oberasbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q72977" start="1565" end="1573" title="Zirndorf" label="Zirndorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q522025" start="1575" end="1585" title="Cadolzburg" label="Cadolzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710810" start="2017" end="2021" title="Vach" label="Vach"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="2203" end="2210" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q103556" start="2211" end="2222" title="Henry II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Heinrich II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936" start="2287" end="2294" title="Bamberg" label="Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511725" start="2467" end="2484" title="Market town" label="market privileges"/>
<link wikidata="Q153023" start="2549" end="2561" title="Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Heinrich III"/>
<link wikidata="Q251337" start="2770" end="2790" title="Archdiocese of Bamberg" label="Bishopric of Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42199" start="2796" end="2819" title="Principality of Ansbach" label="Principality of Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q117020" start="2824" end="2845" title="Free Imperial City of Nuremberg" label="the City of Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="3009" end="3025" title="Thirty Years War" label="Thirty Years War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15727825" start="3133" end="3148" title="Battle of Fürth" label="Battle of Fürth"/>
<link wikidata="Q812251" start="3164" end="3184" title="Bayerische Ludwigsbahn" label="first German railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3275" end="3279" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="3305" end="3314" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="3349" end="3360" title="East Germany" label="East German"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="3365" end="3377" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710810" start="4593" end="4597" title="Vach" label="Vach"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4800" end="4811" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="4822" end="4833" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="4930" end="4946" title="Thirty Years War" label="Thirty Years War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780186" start="5167" end="5198" title="Reformed Church of France" label="Reformed Christians from France"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="5203" end="5212" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="5350" end="5367" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="6156" end="6162" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427044" start="6379" end="6400" title="Bishopric of Würzburg" label="Bishopric of Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q251337" start="6434" end="6454" title="Archdiocese of Bamberg" label="Bishopric of Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="6480" end="6491" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="6505" end="6515" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6645" end="6654" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859" start="6760" end="6767" title="Ansbach" label="Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381335" start="6768" end="6778" title="Consistory (Protestantism)" label="Consistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q42199" start="6789" end="6808" title="Brandenburg-Ansbach" label="Brandenburg-Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="7226" end="7249" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7300" end="7309" title="Catholics" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27836093" start="7417" end="7428" title="St. Michael, Fürth" label="St. Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="7883" end="7889" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42199" start="7944" end="7963" title="Principality of Ansbach" label="Margrave of Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q384941" start="7965" end="7981" title="George the Pious" label="George the Pious"/>
<link wikidata="Q154773" start="8167" end="8174" title="Yeshiva" label="Yeshiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="8233" end="8242" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q150494" start="8359" end="8368" title="Leopold I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Leopold I"/>
<link wikidata="Q314739" start="8603" end="8616" title="German mediatisation" label="Mediatization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8640" end="8650" title="Judenedikt" label="Judenedikt"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="9592" end="9605" title="Reichskristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10063" end="10079" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q622499" start="10083" end="10105" title="Displaced persons camp" label="Displaced persons camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q211351" start="10368" end="10374" title="Mikvah" label="Mikvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465892" start="11083" end="11121" title="Stadthalle (Nuremberg U-Bahn)" label="Stadthalle underground railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q473972" start="11389" end="11403" title="protected area" label="protected area"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="11815" end="11827" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q905612" start="11844" end="11851" title="trefoil" label="trefoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q101538" start="11866" end="11872" title="clover" label="clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="12210" end="12221" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="13202" end="13205" title="Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands" label="SPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="13276" end="13283" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q45656" start="13292" end="13299" title="Limoges" label="Limoges"/>
<link wikidata="Q209908" start="13317" end="13325" title="Marmaris" label="Marmaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q211870" start="13343" end="13350" title="Paisley, Renfrewshire" label="Paisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248347" start="13386" end="13396" title="Xylokastro" label="Xylokastro"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="13464" end="13476" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q136132" start="13883" end="13889" title="KarstadtQuelle" label="Quelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40015" start="14031" end="14036" title="solar energy" label="solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="14175" end="14187" title="Photovoltaics" label="photovoltaic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14597" end="14605" title="Atzenhof" label="Atzenhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="14694" end="14709" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q161168" start="14948" end="14955" title="Junkers (Aircraft)" label="Junkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="15085" end="15090" title="National Socialism" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="15205" end="15212" title="United States Army" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="15424" end="15433" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q696016" start="15661" end="15681" title="Gothaer Waggonfabrik" label="Gothaer Waggonfabrik"/>
<link wikidata="Q812251" start="15942" end="15960" title="Bayerische Ludwigsbahn" label="first railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="16116" end="16125" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q133614" start="16129" end="16139" title="George Stephenson" label="Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q777026" start="16167" end="16173" title="Stephenson&amp;#x27;s Rocket" label="Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q95723" start="16216" end="16222" title="S-Bahn" label="S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q515449" start="16230" end="16242" title="Regionalbahn" label="Regionalbahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138247" start="16247" end="16263" title="Regional-Express" label="Regional-Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q896739" start="16285" end="16294" title="Intercity (Deutsche Bahn)" label="Intercity"/>
<link wikidata="Q129172" start="16299" end="16316" title="InterCity Express" label="InterCity Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q697512" start="16423" end="16451" title="Nuremberg U-Bahn" label="underground railway (subway)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549536" start="16521" end="16532" title="Stadtgrenze (Nuremberg U-Bahn)" label="Stadtgrenze"/>
<link wikidata="Q831661" start="16552" end="16567" title="Jakobinenstraße (Nuremberg U-Bahn)" label="Jakobinenstraße"/>
<link wikidata="Q319542" start="16569" end="16587" title="Fürth Hauptbahnhof" label="Fürth Hauptbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q831966" start="16589" end="16596" title="Rathaus (Nuremberg U-Bahn)" label="Rathaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465892" start="16598" end="16608" title="Stadthalle (Nuremberg U-Bahn)" label="Stadthalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q833511" start="16610" end="16618" title="Klinikum (Nuremberg U-Bahn)" label="Klinikum"/>
<link wikidata="Q832013" start="16624" end="16632" title="Hardhöhe (Nuremberg U-Bahn)" label="Hardhöhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q697512" start="16645" end="16661" title="Nuremberg U-Bahn" label="Nuremberg U-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q564895" start="16663" end="16679" title="Nuremberg S-Bahn" label="Nuremberg S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q153085" start="16843" end="16866" title="Rhine-Main-Danube Canal" label="Rhine-Main-Danube Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="17158" end="17163" title="daily newspaper" label="daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454114" start="17215" end="17237" title="Nürnberger Nachrichten" label="Nürnberger Nachrichten"/>
<link wikidata="Q136132" start="17527" end="17541" title="KarstadtQuelle" label="KarstadtQuelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q109523" start="17558" end="17576" title="Gustav Schickedanz" label="Gustav Schickedanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q680019" start="17668" end="17675" title="Grundig" label="Grundig"/>
<link wikidata="Q161057" start="18040" end="18063" title="Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft" label="Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="18144" end="18154" title="Siemens AG" label="Siemens AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="18165" end="18171" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q879018" start="18285" end="18303" title="Simba Dickie Group" label="Simba Dickie Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q992159" start="18329" end="18335" title="Bruder (toy manufacturer)" label="Bruder"/>
<link wikidata="Q167448" start="18408" end="18426" title="Grundschule" label="elementary schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="18500" end="18508" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40025" start="18839" end="18868" title="Friedrich-Alexander-University, Erlangen-Nuremberg" label="Erlangen-Nuremberg University"/>
<link wikidata="Q157725" start="20121" end="20131" title="Chernivtsi" label="Chernivtsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="20236" end="20246" title="Art Nouveau" label="Jugendstil"/>
<link wikidata="Q694519" start="21738" end="21749" title="Gründerzeit" label="Gründerzeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294605" start="21766" end="21776" title="Jugendstil" label="Jugendstil"/>
<link wikidata="Q70722" start="22184" end="22202" title="Friedrich Bürklein" label="Friedrich Bürklein"/>
<link wikidata="Q271928" start="22245" end="22260" title="Palazzo Vecchio" label="Palazzo Vecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="22264" end="22272" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q505174" start="22408" end="22416" title="carillon" label="carillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192023" start="22491" end="22509" title="Stairway to Heaven" label="Stairway to Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="22536" end="22548" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q520932" start="22663" end="22674" title="Schnaittach" label="Schnaittach"/>
<link wikidata="Q496417" start="22842" end="22848" title="Sukkah" label="Sukkah"/>
<link wikidata="Q211351" start="22855" end="22861" title="Mikvah" label="Mikvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170111" start="23452" end="23462" title="Evangelical Church in Germany" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670363" start="23909" end="23919" title="church tabernacle" label="tabernacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q350212" start="24035" end="24045" title="Adam Kraft" label="Adam Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="24434" end="24442" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="24686" end="24696" title="Neo-Gothic" label="Neo-Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q911397" start="24724" end="24735" title="Baroque Revival architecture" label="Neo-Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q271928" start="25420" end="25435" title="Palazzo Vecchio" label="Palazzo Vecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="25439" end="25447" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q385870" start="27298" end="27309" title="flea market" label="flea market"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360565" start="27906" end="27916" title="Michaelmas" label="Michaelmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60369" start="28521" end="28537" title="Jakob Wassermann" label="Jakob Wassermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="28689" end="28697" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q153539" start="28808" end="28828" title="SpVgg Greuther Fürth" label="SpVgg Greuther Fürth"/>
<link wikidata="Q152665" start="28848" end="28862" title="2. Fußball-Bundesliga" label="2nd Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q701459" start="28866" end="28873" title="2011–12 2. Fußball-Bundesliga" label="2011-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q310725" start="28910" end="28920" title="2012–13 Fußball-Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q684301" start="28976" end="28996" title="Stadion am Laubenweg" label="Stadion am Laubenweg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="29004" end="29012" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993677" start="29183" end="29202" title="Paul Hunter Classic" label="Paul Hunter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11015" start="29240" end="29247" title="snooker" label="snooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529643" start="29279" end="29304" title="Players Tour Championship" label="Players Tour Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999" start="29413" end="29421" title="Würzburg" label="Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q153085" start="29567" end="29590" title="Rhine-Main-Danube Canal" label="Rhine-Main-Danube Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q86731" start="29742" end="29755" title="Max Bernstein" label="Max Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q105130" start="29813" end="29825" title="Hans Böckler" label="Hans Böckler"/>
<link wikidata="Q103654" start="29882" end="29895" title="Hermann Boehm (eugenicist)" label="Hermann Boehm"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="29916" end="29926" title="eugenics" label="eugenicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q717939" start="29947" end="29961" title="racial hygiene" label="racial hygiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q19007787" start="29990" end="30003" title="Gruppenführer" label="Gruppenführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q113971376" start="30012" end="30027" title="Moritz Ellinger" label="Moritz Ellinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496" start="30081" end="30094" title="Ludwig Erhard" label="Ludwig Erhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q719818" start="30153" end="30167" title="Roger C. Field" label="Roger C. Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q704305" start="30202" end="30216" title="Albert Forster" label="Albert Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q77541" start="30277" end="30288" title="Max Grundig" label="Max Grundig"/>
<link wikidata="Q680019" start="30333" end="30340" title="Grundig" label="Grundig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916116" start="30343" end="30358" title="Moshe Heinemann" label="Moshe Heinemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q77130" start="30429" end="30440" title="Jakob Henle" label="Jakob Henle"/>
<link wikidata="Q177306" start="30490" end="30509" title="Ralph F. Hirschmann" label="Ralph F. Hirschmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919046" start="30523" end="30533" title="biochemist" label="biochemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118747" start="30575" end="30590" title="Jacob Hirschorn" label="Jacob Hirschorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q57437" start="30626" end="30643" title="Heinrich Hoffmann (photographer)" label="Heinrich Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q86771" start="30697" end="30709" title="Wilhelm Ihne" label="Wilhelm Ihne"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="30750" end="30765" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="30786" end="30818" title="United States Secretary of State" label="United States Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q65157" start="30821" end="30832" title="Robert Kurz (philosopher)" label="Robert Kurz"/>
<link wikidata="Q72865" start="30868" end="30880" title="Wilhelm Löhe" label="Wilhelm Löhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685671" start="30912" end="30923" title="Jean Mandel" label="Jean Mandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q365489" start="31048" end="31059" title="Adolph Ochs" label="Adolph Ochs"/>
<link wikidata="Q105005" start="31103" end="31119" title="Arthur Rosenthal" label="Arthur Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q109523" start="31149" end="31167" title="Gustav Schickedanz" label="Gustav Schickedanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q61795" start="31203" end="31221" title="Alfred Schwarzmann" label="Alfred Schwarzmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q74286" start="31267" end="31280" title="Martin Segitz" label="Martin Segitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q95921" start="31330" end="31346" title="Leopold Ullstein" label="Leopold Ullstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q60369" start="31389" end="31405" title="Jakob Wassermann" label="Jakob Wassermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q104793" start="31441" end="31451" title="Ruth Weiss (writer)" label="Ruth Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q70756" start="31474" end="31488" title="Marco Wittmann" label="Marco Wittmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q217000" start="31527" end="31530" title="Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters" label="DTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q896685" start="31628" end="31639" title="Georg Dehio" label="Georg Dehio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205044" start="31715" end="31736" title="Deutscher Kunstverlag" label="Deutscher Kunstverlag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352560" start="31962" end="31974" title="Erich Keyser" label="Erich Keyser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778642" start="32306" end="32323" title="Kohlhammer Verlag" label="Kohlhammer Verlag"/>
<link wikidata="Q171" start="33236" end="33245" title="city wiki" label="city wiki"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610986" wikidata="Q298791" url="?curid=610986" title="Brenner">
<text>Brenner may refer to:
* Brenner (surname)
* Brenner (crater)
* &quot;Brenner&quot; (TV series), a television series from 1959 to 1964
* Brenner, South Tyrol, a municipality in South Tyrol, Italy
* Brenner, Kansas, a community in the United States
* Brenner Pass, a pass through the Alps, linking Italy and Austria
** Brenner Base Tunnel, a railway tunnel through the base of the Brenner massif
* Brenner Railway
* Brenner Regional Council, a regional council in Israel
* Brenner tumour
* Brenner (footballer, born 1999), Brenner Alves Sabino, Brazilian football forward for Iwate Grulla Morioka
* Brenner (footballer, born 2000), Brenner Souza da Silva, Brazilian football forward for Udinese Calcio
* Brenner Marlos

==See also==
* Brenna (disambiguation)
* Givat Brenner, a kibbutz in Israel
* Crick, Brenner et al. experiment</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q298791" start="0" end="7" title="Brenner" label="Brenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q909257" start="24" end="41" title="Brenner (surname)" label="Brenner (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q578511" start="44" end="60" title="Brenner (crater)" label="Brenner (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798683" start="63" end="94" title="Brenner (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Brenner&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q375769" start="136" end="156" title="Brenner, South Tyrol" label="Brenner, South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182764" start="197" end="212" title="Brenner, Kansas" label="Brenner, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q212946" start="249" end="261" title="Brenner Pass" label="Brenner Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q697347" start="317" end="336" title="Brenner Base Tunnel" label="Brenner Base Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q509496" start="396" end="411" title="Brenner Railway" label="Brenner Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q111740" start="414" end="438" title="Brenner Regional Council" label="Brenner Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q55790443" start="471" end="485" title="Brenner tumour" label="Brenner tumour"/>
<link wikidata="Q55058092" start="488" end="519" title="Brenner (footballer, born 1999)" label="Brenner (footballer, born 1999)"/>
<link wikidata="Q34567761" start="597" end="628" title="Brenner (footballer, born 2000)" label="Brenner (footballer, born 2000)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29415805" start="702" end="716" title="Brenner Marlos" label="Brenner Marlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q419069" start="733" end="756" title="Brenna (disambiguation)" label="Brenna (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q476835" start="759" end="772" title="Givat Brenner" label="Givat Brenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184931" start="796" end="828" title="Crick, Brenner et al. experiment" label="Crick, Brenner et al. experiment"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610988" wikidata="Q59480" url="?curid=610988" title="Missinaibi River">
<text>The Missinaibi River is a river in northern Ontario, Canada, which flows northeast from Missinaibi Lake, north of Chapleau, and empties into the Moose River, which drains into James Bay. This river (including Missinaibi Lake and Moose River to James Bay) is in length. It is one of the longest free-flowing and undeveloped rivers in Ontario.

The river&#x27;s name (masinâpôy sîpiy, ᒪᓯᓈᐴᔾ ᓰᐱᔾ) means &quot;pictured waters&quot; in the Cree language which is thought to refer to the pictographs found on rock faces along the river.

At Thunderhouse Falls, which is actually a chain of relatively small waterfalls connected by violent rapids, the river drops 40 metres, part of its descent from the Canadian Shield to the Hudson Bay Lowlands.

==History==
In fur trade days the Missinaibi was the main route between James Bay and Lake Superior. The route was: James Bay, Moose Factory, Moose River, Missinaibi River, Missinaibi Lake, portage probably via Crooked Lake, Dog Lake, Michipicoten River to Fort Michipicoten on Lake Superior. Trade was contested by the English from the north and the French from the south. In 1774 the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company began building posts in the interior. In 1775-76 Edward Jarvis from Henley House went up the Kenogami River, crossed to the Missinaibi and went down to Michicopicten. In 1781 Philip Turnor surveyed the Missinaibi route to Michicopicten.

The three main posts, all at times called Brunswick House or similar were
*Wapiscogamy House: In 1776 Thomas Atkinson from Fort Albany, Ontario went 200 miles upriver and established Wapiscogamy House on the west bank of the river. It was rebuilt in 1781, named Brunswick House, closed in 1791, and re-opened from 1800 to 1806.
*Missinaibi Lake House: In 1777 John Thomas was sent from Moose Factory to build a post at Michipicoten on Lake Superior. He selected a better location at the outflow of Missinaibi Lake and called it Missinaibi Lake House. It was occupied each summer until it burnt in 1780. The site was re-occupied from 1817 until about 1821. It was reopened in the early 1870s and in 1879 renamed New Brunswick House. When the railroad was built just north of the lake in 1912-13 operations were moved to the new town of Peterbell and the post was closed in 1914. Around 1980 there were left a few cellar holes and collapsed buildings.
*Macabanish House: In 1788 William Boland established a post between the other two on Micabanish Lake on a tributary west of the river. Its success led to the closing of Wapiscogamy House. In 1799 it was named New Brunswick House and the lake renamed Brunswick Lake. It was the chief post until 1879 when it, and its name, were transferred to Missinaibi Lake. Around 1990 the clearing where it stood was visible from the air. Brunswick House First Nation gets its name from this and the one on Missinaibi Lake.

Today, the river is used for canoeing, fishing, and camping. Recreational use is facilitated by an arrangement which allows canoeists to load their boats on a train so they can be returned south, after canoeing the wild stretches of the river. The river is managed as a provincial waterway park and was designated as a Canadian Heritage River in 2004.
==Tributaries==
*Brunswick River
*Fire River
*Greenhill River
*Hay River
*Mattawitchewan River
**Albany Forks
***Oba River, Oba Lake
*Pivabiska River
*Opasatika River
*Soweska River

==Missinaibi Provincial Park==

The entire length of the Missinaibi River from Missinaibi Lake to the Moose River is protected and part of the Missinaibi Provincial Park. The park also includes Missinaibi Lake, Brunswick River, Brunswick Lake, Little Missinaibi River, and Little Missinaibi Lake.

Established in 1970 the park is huge and encompasses in total over 991 square kilometres (383 square miles) of wilderness.

While rarely visited by travellers it is well known amongst canoeing enthusiasts and is one of their &quot;must visit&quot; destinations.

Two main routes are available to paddlers:

1. Missinaibi River Route - stretching for 238 kilometres (144 miles) from the towns of Missinabie to Mattice

2. Mattice to Moosonee Route - This 316 kilometre (190 mile) route takes paddlers to the edge of James Bay and the near arctic.

Other activities at the park include:
Hiking, fishing, camping, wildlife viewing and hunting.

==See also==
*List of Ontario rivers
*James Bay Rivers

==References==
==External links==
*Ontario Parks - Missinaibi Prov. Park official website
*Missinaibi Provincial Park travel guide
*Snow Falling on Black Spruce- A Northern Ontario Canoe Sojourn Down the Missinaibi
*Missinaibi Complete - Missinaibi canoe trip July 1–22, 2004</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q59480" start="4" end="20" title="Missinaibi River" label="Missinaibi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="44" end="51" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878303" start="88" end="103" title="Missinaibi Lake" label="Missinaibi Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957549" start="114" end="122" title="Chapleau, Ontario" label="Chapleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q59446" start="145" end="156" title="Moose River (Ontario)" label="Moose River"/>
<link wikidata="Q223810" start="176" end="185" title="James Bay" label="James Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q59446" start="229" end="240" title="Moose River (Ontario)" label="Moose River"/>
<link wikidata="Q33390" start="435" end="448" title="Cree language" label="Cree language"/>
<link wikidata="Q52827" start="482" end="493" title="pictogram" label="pictographs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="535" end="553" title="Thunderhouse Falls" label="Thunderhouse Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q76034" start="697" end="712" title="Canadian Shield" label="Canadian Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="720" end="730" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031892" start="869" end="882" title="Moose Factory" label="Moose Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q59446" start="884" end="895" title="Moose River (Ontario)" label="Moose River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878303" start="915" end="930" title="Missinaibi Lake" label="Missinaibi Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524764" start="977" end="995" title="Michipicoten River" label="Michipicoten River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284782" start="999" end="1016" title="Wawa, Ontario" label="Fort Michipicoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="1128" end="1153" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343744" start="1203" end="1216" title="Edward Jarvis (businessman)" label="Edward Jarvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714651" start="1222" end="1234" title="Henley House" label="Henley House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739002" start="1247" end="1261" title="Kenogami River" label="Kenogami River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184492" start="1329" end="1342" title="Philip Turnor" label="Philip Turnor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695763" start="1515" end="1535" title="Fort Albany, Ontario" label="Fort Albany, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031892" start="1778" end="1791" title="Moose Factory" label="Moose Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284782" start="1811" end="1840" title="Wawa, Ontario" label="Michipicoten on Lake Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878303" start="1890" end="1905" title="Missinaibi Lake" label="Missinaibi Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163130" start="2227" end="2236" title="Peterbell, Ontario" label="Peterbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979517" start="2768" end="2796" title="Brunswick House First Nation" label="Brunswick House First Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20856109" start="2883" end="2891" title="canoeing" label="canoeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032150" start="3173" end="3196" title="Canadian Heritage Rivers System" label="Canadian Heritage River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3223" end="3238" title="Brunswick River (Ontario)" label="Brunswick River"/>
<link wikidata="Q22469362" start="3240" end="3250" title="Fire River (Ontario)" label="Fire River"/>
<link wikidata="Q22436165" start="3252" end="3267" title="Greenhill River" label="Greenhill River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3269" end="3278" title="Hay River (Ontario)" label="Hay River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3280" end="3300" title="Mattawitchewan River" label="Mattawitchewan River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3303" end="3315" title="Albany Forks" label="Albany Forks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3319" end="3328" title="Oba River (Ontario)" label="Oba River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3330" end="3338" title="Oba Lake" label="Oba Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q18168205" start="3340" end="3355" title="Pivabiska River" label="Pivabiska River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3357" end="3372" title="Opasatika River" label="Opasatika River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3374" end="3387" title="Soweska River" label="Soweska River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736159" start="4119" end="4127" title="Moosonee" label="Moosonee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839888" start="4343" end="4365" title="List of Ontario rivers" label="List of Ontario rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q223810" start="4367" end="4383" title="James Bay Rivers" label="James Bay Rivers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610989" wikidata="Q207697" url="?curid=610989" title="Diorama">
<text>A diorama is a replica of a scene, typically a three-dimensional model either full-sized or miniature. Sometimes it is enclosed in a glass showcase for a museum. Dioramas are often built by hobbyists as part of related hobbies such as military vehicle modeling, miniature figure modeling, or aircraft modeling.

In the United States around 1950 and onward, natural history dioramas in museums became less fashionable, leading to many being removed, dismantled, or destroyed.

== Etymology ==
Artists Louis Daguerre and Charles Marie Bouton coined the name &quot;diorama&quot; for a theatrical system that used variable lighting to give a translucent painting the illusion of depth and movement. It derives from Greek δια- (through) + ὅραμα (visible image) = &quot;see-through image.&quot; The first use in reference to museum displays is recorded in 1902, although such displays existed before.

==Modern==

The current, popular understanding of the term &quot;diorama&quot; denotes a partially three-dimensional, full-size replica or scale model of a landscape typically showing historical events, nature scenes, or cityscapes, for purposes of education or entertainment.

One of the first uses of dioramas in a museum was in Stockholm, Sweden, where the Biological Museum opened in 1893. It had several dioramas, over three floors. They were also implemented by the Grigore Antipa National Museum of Natural History from Bucharest Romania and constituted a source of inspiration for many important museums in the world (such as the American Museum of Natural History in New York and the Great Oceanographic Museum in Berlin) [reference below].

===Miniature===
Miniature dioramas are typically much smaller, and use scale models and landscaping to create historical or fictional scenes. Such a scale model-based diorama is used, for example, in Chicago&#x27;s Museum of Science and Industry to display railroading. This diorama employs a common model railroading scale of 1:87 (HO scale). Hobbyist dioramas often use scales such as 1:35 or 1:48.

An early, and exceptionally large example was created between 1830 and 1838 by a British Army officer. William Siborne, and represents the Battle of Waterloo at about 7.45 pm, on 18 June 1815. The diorama measures and used around 70,000 model soldiers in its construction. It is now part of the collection of the National Army Museum in London.

Sheperd Paine, a prominent hobbyist, popularized the modern miniature diorama beginning in the 1970s.

=== Full-size ===
Modern museum dioramas may be seen in most major natural-history museums. Typically, these displays simulate a tilted plane effect to represent what would otherwise be a level surface, incorporating a painted background of distant objects. The displays often use false perspective, carefully modifying the scale of objects placed on the plane to reinforce an illusion through depth perception, in which objects of identical real-world size placed farther from the observer appear smaller than those closer. Often the distant painted background or sky will be painted upon a continuous curved surface so that the viewer is not distracted by corners, seams, or edges. All of these techniques are means of presenting a realistic-appearing view of a large scene in a compact space. A photograph or single-eye view of such a diorama can be especially convincing, since in this case there is no distraction by the binocular perception of depth.

=== Uses ===
Miniature dioramas may be used to represent scenes from historic events. A typical example of this type is the dioramas to be seen at Norway&#x27;s Resistance Museum in Oslo, Norway.

Landscapes built around model railways can also be considered dioramas, even though they often have to compromise scale accuracy for better operating characteristics.

Hobbyists also build dioramas of historical or quasi-historical events using a variety of materials, including plastic models of military vehicles, ships or other equipment, along with scale figures and landscaping.

In the 19th and beginning 20th century, building dioramas of sailing ships had been a popular handcraft of mariners. Building a diorama instead of a normal model had the advantage that in the diorama, the model was protected inside the framework and could easily be stowed below the bunk or behind the sea chest. Nowadays, such antique sailing ship dioramas are valuable collectors&#x27; items.
One of the largest dioramas ever created was a model of the entire State of California built for the Panama–Pacific International Exposition of 1915 and that for a long time was installed in San Francisco&#x27;s Ferry Building.

Dioramas are widely used in the American educational system, mostly in elementary and middle schools. They are often made to represent historical events, ecological biomes, cultural scenes, or to visually depict literature. They are usually made from a shoebox and contain a trompe-l&#x27;œil in the background contrasted with two or three-dimensional models in the foreground. In California elementary schools, a popular assignment has fourth graders making a Spanish mission diorama to learn about the California Spanish missions.

Burmese-Chinese brothers Aw Boon Haw and Aw Boon Par, the developers of Tiger Balm, opened Haw Par Villa in 1937 in Singapore, where statues and dioramas were commissioned to teach traditional Chinese values. Today, the site contains over 150 giant dioramas depicting scenes from Chinese Literature, folklore, legends, history, philosophy and statuary of key Chinese religions, Taoism, Buddhism and Confucianism. The best-known attraction in Haw Par Villa is the Ten Courts of Hell, which features gruesome depictions of Hell in Chinese mythology and in Buddhism. Other major attractions include dioramas of scenes from &quot;Journey to the West&quot;, &quot;Fengshen Bang&quot;, &quot;The Twenty-four Filial Exemplars&quot; and the 12 animals in the Chinese zodiac. The park was a major local attraction during the 1970s and 1980s; it is estimated that the park then welcomed at least 1 million annual visitors, and is considered as part of Singapore&#x27;s cultural heritage.

==Historic==
===Daguerre and Bouton===

The Diorama was a popular entertainment that originated in Paris in 1822. An alternative to the also popular &quot;Panorama&quot; (panoramic painting), the Diorama was a theatrical experience viewed by an audience in a highly specialized theatre. As many as 350 patrons would file in to view a landscape painting that would change its appearance both subtly and dramatically. Most would stand, though limited seating was provided. The show lasted 10 to 15 minutes, after which time the entire audience (on a massive turntable) would rotate to view a second painting. Later models of the Diorama theater even held a third painting.

The size of the proscenium was wide by high (7.3 meters x 6.4 meters). Each scene was hand-painted on linen, which was made transparent in selected areas. A series of these multi-layered, linen panels were arranged in a deep, truncated tunnel, then illuminated by sunlight re-directed via skylights, screens, shutters, and colored blinds. Depending on the direction and intensity of the skillfully manipulated light, the scene would appear to change. The effect was so subtle and finely rendered that both critics and the public were astounded, believing they were looking at a natural scene.

The inventors and proprietors of the Diorama were Charles-Marie Bouton (1781– 1853), a Troubador painter who also worked at the Panorama under Pierre Prévost, and Louis Jacques Mandé Daguerre (1787–1851), formerly a decorator, manufacturer of mirrors, painter of Panoramas, and designer and painter of theatrical stage illusions. Daguerre would later co-invent the daguerreotype, the first widely used method of photography.

A second diorama in Regent&#x27;s Park in London was opened by an association of British men (having bought Daguerre&#x27;s tableaux) in 1823, a year after the debut of Daguerre&#x27;s Paris original. The building was designed by Augustus Charles Pugin. Bouton operated the Regent&#x27;s Park diorama from 1830 to 1840, when it was taken over by his protégé, the painter Charles-Caïus Renoux.

The Regent&#x27;s Park diorama was a popular sensation, and spawned immediate imitations. British artists like Clarkson Stanfield and David Roberts produced ever-more elaborate (moving) dioramas through the 1830s; sound effects and even living performers were added. Some &quot;typical diorama effects included moonlit nights, winter snow turning into a summer meadow, rainbows after a storm, illuminated fountains,&quot; waterfalls, thunder and lightning, and ringing bells. A diorama painted by Daguerre is currently housed in the church of the French town Bry-sur-Marne, where he lived and died.

;Daguerre diorama exhibitions (R.D. Wood, 1993):

Exhibition venues : Paris (Pa.1822-28) : London (Lo.1823-32) : Liverpool (Li.1827-32) : Manchester (Ma.1825-27) : Dublin (Du.1826-28) : Edinburgh (Ed.1828-36)

*The Valley of Sarnen :: (Pa.1822-23) : (Lo.1823-24) : (Li.1827-28) : (Ma.1825) : (Du.1826-27) : (Ed. 1828-29 &amp; 1831)
*The Harbour of Brest :: (Pa.1823) : (Lo.1824-25 &amp; 1837) : (Li.1825-26) : (Ma.1826-27) : (Ed. 1834–35)
*The Holyrood Chapel :: (Pa.1823-24) : (Lo.1825) : (Li.1827-28) : (Ma.1827) : (Du.1828) : (Ed.1829-30)
*The Roslin Chapel :: (Pa.1824-25) : (Lo.1826-27) : (Li.1828-29) : (Du.1827-28) : (Ed.1835)
*The Ruins in a Fog :: (Pa.1825-26) : (Lo.1827-28) : (Ed.1832-33)
*The Village of Unterseen :: (Pa.1826-27) : (Lo.1828-29) : (Li.1832) : (Ed.1833-34 &amp; 1838)
*The Village of Thiers :: (Pa.1827-28) : (Lo.1829-30) : (Ed. 1838–39)
*The Mont St. Godard :: (Pa.1828-29) : (Lo.1830-32) : (Ed.1835-36)

=== Gottstein ===

Until 1968, Britain boasted a large collection of dioramas. These collections were originally housed in the Royal United Services Institute Museum, (formerly the Banqueting House), in Whitehall. When the museum closed, the various exhibits and their 15 known dioramas were distributed to smaller museums throughout England and elsewhere, some ending up in Canada. These dioramas were the brainchild of the wealthy furrier Otto Gottstein (1892–1951) of Leipzig, a Jewish immigrant from Hitler&#x27;s Germany, who was an avid collector and designer of flat model figures called flats. In 1930, Gottstein&#x27;s influence is first seen at the Leipzig International Exhibition, along with the dioramas of Hahnemann of Kiel, Biebel of Berlin and Muller of Erfurt, all displaying their own figures, and those commissioned from such as Ludwig Frank in large diorama form. 

In 1933, Gottstein left Germany, and in 1935 founded the British Model Soldier Society. Gottstein persuaded designer and painter friends in both Germany and France to help in the construction of dioramas depicting notable events in English history. But due to the war, many of the figures arrived in England incomplete. The task of turning Gottstein&#x27;s ideas into reality fell to his English friends and those friends who had managed to escape from the Continent. Dennis (Denny) C. Stokes, a talented painter and diorama maker in his own right, was responsible for the painting of the backgrounds of all the dioramas, creating a unity seen throughout the whole series. Denny Stokes was given the overall supervision of the fifteen dioramas.

# The Landing of the Romans under Julius Caesar in 55 B.C.
# The Battle of Hastings
# The Storming of Acre (figures by Muller)
# The Battle of Crecy (figures by Muller)
# The Field of the Cloth of Gold
# Queen Elizabeth reviewing her troops at Tilbury
# The Battle of Marston Moor
# The Battle of Blenheim (painted by Douchkine)
# The Battle of Plessey
# The Battle of Quebec (engraved by Krunert of Vienna)
# The Old Guard at Waterloo
# The Charge of the Light Brigade
# The Battle of Ulundi (figures by Ochel and Petrocochino/Paul Armont)
# The Battle of Fleurs
# The D-Day landings

Krunert, Schirmer, Frank, Frauendorf, Maier, Franz Rieche, and Oesterrich were also involved in the manufacture and design of figures for the various dioramas. Krunert (a Viennese), like Gottstein an exile in London, was given the job of engraving for &quot;The Battle of Quebec&quot;. &quot;The Death of Wolfe&quot; was found to be inaccurate and had to be redesigned. The names of the vast majority of painters employed by Gottstein are mostly unknown, most lived and worked on the continent, among them Gustave Kenmow, Leopold Rieche, L. Dunekate, M. Alexandre, A. Ochel, Honey Ray, and, perhaps Gottstein&#x27;s top painter, Vladimir Douchkine (a Russian émigré who lived in Paris). Douchkine was responsible for painting two figures of the Duke of Marlborough on horseback for &quot;″The Blenheim Diorama″&quot;, one of which was used, the other, Gottstein being the true collector, was never released.

Denny Stokes painted all the backgrounds of all the dioramas, Herbert Norris, the Historical Costume Designer, whom J. F. Lovel-Barnes introduced to Gottstein, was responsible for the costume design of the Ancient Britons, the Normans and Saxons, some of the figures of &quot;The Field of the Cloth of Gold&quot; and the Elizabethan figures for &quot;Queen Elizabeth at Tilbury&quot;. J.F. Lovel-Barnes was responsible for &quot;The Battle of Blenheim&quot;, selecting the figures, and arrangement of the scene. Due to World War II, when flat figures became unavailable, Gottstein completed his ideas by using Greenwood and Ball&#x27;s 20 mm figures. In time, a fifteenth diorama was added, using these 20 mm figures, this diorama representing the D-Day landings. When all the dioramas were completed, they were displayed along one wall in the Royal United Services Institute Museum. When the museum was closed the fifteen dioramas were distributed to various museums and institutions. The greatest number are to be found at the Glenbow Museum, (130-9th Avenue, S. E. Calgary, Alberta, Canada): RE: &quot;The Landing of the Romans under Julius Caesar in 55 BC&quot;, &quot;Battle Of Crecy&quot;, &quot;The Battle of Blenheim&quot;, &quot;The Old Guard at Waterloo&quot; and &quot;The Charge of the Light Brigade at Balaclava&quot;.
The state of these dioramas is one of debate; John Garratt (&quot;The World of Model Soldiers&quot;) claimed in 1968, that the dioramas &quot;appear to have been partially broken up and individual figures have been sold to collectors&quot;. According to the Glenbow Institute (Barry Agnew, curator) &quot;the figures are still in reasonable condition, but the plaster groundwork has suffered considerable deterioration&quot;. There are no photographs available of the dioramas. &quot;The Battle of Hastings&quot; diorama was to be found in the Old Town Museum, Hastings, and is still in reasonable condition. It shows the Norman cavalry charging up Senlac Hill toward the Saxon lines. 
&quot;The Storming of Acre&quot; is in the Museum of Artillery at the Rotunda, Woolwich. John Garratt, in &quot;Encyclopedia of Model Soldiers&quot;, states that &quot;The Field of the Cloth of Gold&quot; was in the possession of the Royal Military School of Music, Kneller Hall; according to the curator, the diorama had not been in his possession since 1980, nor is it listed in their Accession Book, so the whereabouts of this diorama is unknown.

&quot;The Battle of Ulundi&quot; is housed in the Staffordshire Regiment Museum at Whittington near Lichfield in Staffordshire, UK

===Wong===
San Francisco, California artist Frank Wong (born 22 September 1932) created dioramas that depict the San Francisco Chinatown of his youth during the 1930s and 1940s. In 2004, Wong donated seven miniatures of scenes of Chinatown, titled &quot;The Chinatown Miniatures Collection&quot;, to the Chinese Historical Society of America (CHSA). The dioramas are on permanent display in CHSA&#x27;s Main Gallery:

# &quot;The Moon Festival&quot;
# &quot;Shoeshine Stand&quot;
# &quot;Chinese New Year&quot;
# &quot;Chinese Laundry&quot;
# &quot;Christmas Scene&quot;
# &quot;Single Room&quot;
# &quot;Herb Store&quot;

==== Documentary ====

San Francisco filmmaker James Chan is producing and directing a documentary about Wong and the &quot;changing landscape of Chinatown&quot; in San Francisco. The documentary is tentatively titled, &quot;Frank Wong&#x27;s Chinatown&quot;.

===Other===

Painters of the Romantic era like John Martin and Francis Danby were influenced to create large and highly dramatic pictures by the sensational dioramas and panoramas of their day. In one case, the connection between life and diorama art became intensely circular. On 1 February 1829, John Martin&#x27;s brother Jonathan, known as &quot;Mad Martin,&quot; set fire to the roof of York Minster. Clarkson Stanfield created a diorama re-enactment of the event, which premiered on 20 April of the same year; it employed a &quot;safe fire&quot; via chemical reaction as a special effect. On 27 May, the &quot;safe&quot; fire proved to be less safe than planned: it set a real fire in the painted cloths of the imitation fire, which burned down the theater and all of its dioramas.

Nonetheless, dioramas remained popular in England, Scotland, and Ireland through most of the 19th century, lasting until 1880.

A small scale version of the diorama called the Polyrama Panoptique could display images in the home and was marketed from the 1820s.

==Natural history==

Natural history dioramas seek to imitate nature and, since their conception in the late 19th century, aim to &quot;nurture a reverence for nature [with its] beauty and grandeur&quot;. They have also been described as a means to visually preserve nature as different environments change due to human involvement. They were extremely popular during the first half of the 20th century, both in the US and UK, later on giving way to television, film, and new perspectives on science.
Like historical dioramas, natural history dioramas are a mix of two- and three-dimensional elements. What sets natural history dioramas apart from other categories is the use of taxidermy in addition to the foreground replicas and painted background. The use of taxidermy means that natural history dioramas derive not only from Daguerre&#x27;s work, but also from that of taxidermists, who were used to preparing specimens for either science or spectacle. It was only with the dioramas&#x27; precursors (and, later on, dioramas) that both these objectives merged. Popular diorama precursors were produced by Charles Willson Peale, an artist with an interest in taxidermy, during the early 19th century. To present his specimens, Peale &quot;painted skies and landscapes on the back of cases displaying his taxidermy specimens&quot;. By the late 19th century, the British Museum held an exhibition featuring taxidermy birds set on models of plants.

The first habitat diorama created for a museum was constructed by taxidermist Carl Akeley for the Milwaukee Public Museum in 1889, where it is still held. Akeley set taxidermy muskrats in a three-dimensional re-creation of their wetland habitat with a realistic painted background. With the support of curator Frank M. Chapman, Akeley designed the popular habitat dioramas featured at the American Museum of Natural History. Combining art with science, these exhibitions were intended to educate the public about the growing need for habitat conservation. The modern AMNH Exhibitions Lab is charged with the creation of all dioramas and otherwise immersive environments in the museum.

A predecessor of Akeley, naturalist and taxidermist Martha Maxwell created a famous habitat diorama for the first World&#x27;s Fair in 1876. The complex diorama featured taxidermied animals in realistic action poses, running water, and live prairie dogs. It is speculated that this display was the first of its kind [outside of a museum]. Maxwell&#x27;s pioneering diorama work is said to have influenced major figures in taxidermy history who entered the field later, such as Akeley and William Temple Hornaday.

Soon, the concern for accuracy came. Groups of scientists, taxidermists, and artists would go on expeditions to ensure accurate backgrounds and collect specimens, though some would be donated by game hunters. Natural history dioramas reached the peak of their grandeur with the opening of the Akeley Hall of African Mammals in 1936, which featured large animals, such as elephants, surrounded by even larger scenery. Nowadays, various institutions lay different claims to notable dioramas. The Milwaukee Public Museum still displays the world&#x27;s first diorama, created by Akeley; the American Museum of Natural History, in New York, has what might be the world&#x27;s largest diorama: a life-size replica of a blue whale; the Biological Museum in Stockholm, Sweden is known for its three dioramas, all created in 1893, and all in original condition; the Powell-Cotton Museum, in Kent, UK, is known for having the world&#x27;s oldest, unchanged, room-sized diorama, built in 1896.

===Construction===

Natural history dioramas typically consist of 3 parts:
# The painted background
# The foreground
# Taxidermy specimens

Preparations for the background begin in the field, where an artist takes photographs and sketches references pieces. Once back at the museum, the artist has to depict the scenery with as much realism as possible. The challenge lies in the fact that the wall used is curved: this allows the background to surround the display without seams joining different panels. At times the wall also curves upward to meet the light above and form a sky. By having a curved wall, whatever the artist paints will be distorted by perspective; it is the artist&#x27;s job to paint in such a way that minimises this distortion.

The foreground is created to mimic the ground, plants and other accessories to scenery. The ground, hills, rocks, and large trees are created with wood, wire mesh, and plaster. Smaller trees are either used in their entirety or replicated using casts. Grasses and shrubs can be preserved in solution or dried to then be added to the diorama. Ground debris, such as leaf litter, is collected on site and soaked in wallpaper paste for preservation and presentation in the diorama. Water is simulated using glass or plexiglass with ripples carved on the surface. For a diorama to be successful, the foreground and background must merge, so both artists have to work together.

Taxidermy specimens are usually the centrepiece of dioramas. Since they must entertain, as well as educate, specimens are set in lifelike poses, so as to convey a narrative of an animal&#x27;s life. Smaller animals are usually made with rubber moulds and painted. Larger animals are prepared by first making a clay sculpture of the animal. This sculpture is made over the actual, posed skeleton of the animal, with reference to moulds and measurements taken on the field. A papier-mâché mannequin is prepared from the clay sculpture, and the animal&#x27;s tanned skin is sewn onto the mannequin. Glass eyes substitute the real ones.

If an animal is large enough, the scaffolding that holds the specimen needs to be incorporated into the foreground design and construction.
== Toy examples ==
=== Lego ===
Lego dioramas are dioramas that are built from Lego pieces. These dioramas range from small vignettes to large, table-sized displays, and are sometimes constructed in a collaboration of two or more people. Some engage in the building of Lego dioramas.

=== Playmobil ===
Playmobil dioramas are dioramas that are made of Playmobil pieces.

==See also==
*Armor Modeling and Preservation Society
*Cosmorama
*Cyclorama
*Model airport
*Moving panorama
*Myriorama
*Nativity scene
*Model figure
*Tableau vivant
*Toy
*Toy soldier
==Notes==
==References==
* Dioramas Muzeul National de Istorie Naturala Grigore Antipa 
* 

==External links==

*R. D. Wood&#x27;s Essays on the early history of photography and the Diorama
*The world&#x27;s largest collection of antique sailing ship dioramas
*World War II Dioramas in 1:35 scale</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207697" start="2" end="9" title="Diorama" label="diorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156835" start="235" end="260" title="Model military vehicle" label="military vehicle modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888327" start="262" end="287" title="Model figure" label="miniature figure modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q60055387" start="292" end="309" title="Model airplane" label="aircraft modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="357" end="372" title="natural history" label="natural history"/>
<link wikidata="Q131405" start="500" end="514" title="Louis Daguerre" label="Louis Daguerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065447" start="519" end="539" title="Charles Marie Bouton" label="Charles Marie Bouton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="711" end="716" title="greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498959" start="1035" end="1046" title="scale model" label="scale model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="1227" end="1236" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q864536" start="1256" end="1273" title="Biological museum (Stockholm)" label="Biological Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330898" start="1368" end="1417" title="Grigore Antipa National Museum of Natural History" label="Grigore Antipa National Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q217717" start="1534" end="1568" title="American Museum of Natural History" label="American Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1589" end="1615" title="Great Oceanographic Museum" label="Great Oceanographic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1847" end="1854" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414079" start="1862" end="1892" title="Museum of Science and Industry (Chicago)" label="Museum of Science and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="1904" end="1915" title="Rail transport" label="railroading"/>
<link wikidata="Q623272" start="1947" end="1964" title="Rail transport modelling" label="model railroading"/>
<link wikidata="Q911411" start="1980" end="1988" title="HO scale" label="HO scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568957" start="2152" end="2167" title="William Siborne" label="William Siborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="2188" end="2206" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Battle of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q731616" start="2362" end="2382" title="National Army Museum" label="National Army Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494439" start="2395" end="2408" title="Sheperd Paine" label="Sheperd Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970365" start="2565" end="2588" title="Natural history museum" label="natural-history museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q218075" start="2627" end="2646" title="Tilted plane focus" label="tilted plane effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q207697" start="2779" end="2796" title="false perspective" label="false perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q182593" start="2875" end="2883" title="illusion" label="illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749840" start="2892" end="2908" title="depth perception" label="depth perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681118" start="3424" end="3444" title="binocular disparity" label="binocular perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781522" start="3603" end="3634" title="Norway&amp;#x27;s Resistance Museum" label="Norway&amp;#x27;s Resistance Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="3638" end="3642" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="3644" end="3650" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085918" start="3932" end="3945" title="plastic model" label="plastic model"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="4509" end="4519" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q250578" start="4534" end="4573" title="Panama–Pacific International Exposition" label="Panama–Pacific International Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="4624" end="4637" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408117" start="4645" end="4659" title="San Francisco Ferry Building" label="Ferry Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q861654" start="4694" end="4721" title="American educational system" label="American educational system"/>
<link wikidata="Q101998" start="4827" end="4833" title="biomes" label="biomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q468930" start="4937" end="4954" title="trompe-l&amp;#x27;œil" label="trompe-l&amp;#x27;œil"/>
<link wikidata="Q123998060" start="5123" end="5146" title="California mission project" label="Spanish mission diorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824509" start="5166" end="5193" title="Spanish missions in California" label="California Spanish missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q791575" start="5221" end="5232" title="Aw Boon Haw" label="Aw Boon Haw"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995841" start="5237" end="5248" title="Aw Boon Par" label="Aw Boon Par"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355063" start="5268" end="5278" title="Tiger Balm" label="Tiger Balm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018484" start="5287" end="5300" title="Haw Par Villa" label="Haw Par Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="5312" end="5321" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="5574" end="5580" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="5582" end="5590" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="5595" end="5607" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899406" start="5659" end="5677" title="Diyu" label="Ten Courts of Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899406" start="5717" end="5721" title="Diyu" label="Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148173" start="5747" end="5758" title="Naraka (Buddhism)" label="in Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q70784" start="5822" end="5841" title="Journey to the West" label="Journey to the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336310" start="5855" end="5868" title="Investiture of the Gods" label="Fengshen Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851166" start="5882" end="5914" title="The Twenty-four Filial Exemplars" label="The Twenty-four Filial Exemplars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976204" start="5947" end="5961" title="Chinese zodiac" label="Chinese zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q41363" start="6330" end="6338" title="Panorama" label="Panorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026188" start="6346" end="6364" title="panoramic painting" label="panoramic painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q385348" start="6863" end="6873" title="proscenium" label="proscenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065447" start="7491" end="7511" title="Charles Marie Bouton" label="Charles-Marie Bouton"/>
<link wikidata="Q131405" start="7604" end="7632" title="Louis Jacques Mandé Daguerre" label="Louis Jacques Mandé Daguerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q179744" start="7806" end="7819" title="daguerreotype" label="daguerreotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="7853" end="7864" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q105695212" start="7876" end="7905" title="The Diorama, Regent&amp;#x27;s Park" label="diorama in Regent&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871122" start="8097" end="8119" title="Augustus Charles Pugin" label="Augustus Charles Pugin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15970286" start="8238" end="8258" title="Charles-Caïus Renoux" label="Charles-Caïus Renoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095862" start="8372" end="8390" title="Clarkson Stanfield" label="Clarkson Stanfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q369776" start="8395" end="8408" title="David Roberts (painter)" label="David Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q369954" start="8820" end="8833" title="Bry-sur-Marne" label="Bry-sur-Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464767" start="9921" end="9952" title="Royal United Services Institute" label="Royal United Services Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q642039" start="9975" end="9991" title="Banqueting House" label="Banqueting House"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="9997" end="10006" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="10128" end="10135" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="10169" end="10175" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="10265" end="10272" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="10298" end="10319" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler&amp;#x27;s Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="10527" end="10531" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="10543" end="10549" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729" start="10564" end="10570" title="Erfurt" label="Erfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="11460" end="11473" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83224" start="11491" end="11509" title="Battle of Hastings" label="Battle of Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q815116" start="11528" end="11532" title="Siege of Acre (1189–91)" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q27759" start="11559" end="11574" title="Battle of Crecy" label="Battle of Crecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030061" start="11601" end="11627" title="Field of the Cloth of Gold" label="Field of the Cloth of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q478956" start="11630" end="11677" title="Speech to the Troops at Tilbury" label="Queen Elizabeth reviewing her troops at Tilbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q326417" start="11684" end="11706" title="Battle of Marston Moor" label="Battle of Marston Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q154635" start="11713" end="11731" title="Battle of Blenheim" label="Battle of Blenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q203233" start="11761" end="11778" title="Battle of Plessey" label="Battle of Plessey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311726" start="11785" end="11801" title="Battle of Quebec (1759)" label="Battle of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279699" start="11840" end="11849" title="Old Guard (France)" label="Old Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="11853" end="11861" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q757870" start="11868" end="11895" title="Charge of the Light Brigade" label="Charge of the Light Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166177" start="11902" end="11918" title="Battle of Ulundi" label="Battle of Ulundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="11996" end="12010" title="D-Day landings" label="D-Day landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="12757" end="12776" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="Duke of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="13127" end="13142" title="Ancient Britons" label="Ancient Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="13148" end="13155" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="13160" end="13166" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="13242" end="13253" title="Elizabethan" label="Elizabethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464767" start="13765" end="13796" title="Royal United Services Institute" label="Royal United Services Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530896" start="13950" end="13964" title="Glenbow Museum" label="Glenbow Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29245" start="14814" end="14822" title="Hastings" label="Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359492" start="14902" end="14913" title="Senlac Hill" label="Senlac Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006232" start="15018" end="15026" title="Woolwich" label="Woolwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374488" start="15173" end="15203" title="Royal Military School of Music" label="Royal Military School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421942" start="15205" end="15217" title="Kneller Hall" label="Kneller Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="15533" end="15558" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217398" start="15566" end="15576" title="Frank Wong" label="Frank Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073644" start="15635" end="15658" title="Chinatown, San Francisco" label="San Francisco Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100486" start="15826" end="15863" title="Chinese Historical Society of America" label="Chinese Historical Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="16435" end="16443" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q937096" start="16453" end="16464" title="John Martin (painter)" label="John Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q709816" start="16469" end="16482" title="Francis Danby" label="Francis Danby"/>
<link wikidata="Q252575" start="16798" end="16810" title="York Minster" label="York Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395704" start="17371" end="17390" title="Polyrama Panoptique" label="Polyrama Panoptique"/>
<link wikidata="Q454945" start="18568" end="18589" title="Charles Willson Peale" label="Charles Willson Peale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="18823" end="18837" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037711" start="18987" end="18998" title="Carl Akeley" label="Carl Akeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861802" start="19007" end="19030" title="Milwaukee Public Museum" label="Milwaukee Public Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q983999" start="19219" end="19235" title="Frank M. Chapman" label="Frank M. Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q217717" start="19298" end="19332" title="American Museum of Natural History" label="American Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481436" start="19443" end="19463" title="habitat conservation" label="habitat conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002893" start="19476" end="19496" title="AMNH Exhibitions Lab" label="AMNH Exhibitions Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452141" start="19647" end="19661" title="Martha Maxwell" label="Martha Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q984109" start="19703" end="19726" title="Centennial Exposition" label="first World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q943858" start="20083" end="20106" title="William Temple Hornaday" label="William Temple Hornaday"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20402" end="20432" title="American Museum of Natural History#African Mammal Hall" label="Akeley Hall of African Mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q217717" start="20697" end="20731" title="American Museum of Natural History" label="American Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q864536" start="20839" end="20856" title="Biological museum (Stockholm)" label="Biological Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="20860" end="20869" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="20871" end="20877" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q15268337" start="20967" end="20987" title="Powell-Cotton Museum" label="Powell-Cotton Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512035" start="22212" end="22223" title="leaf litter" label="leaf litter"/>
<link wikidata="Q170484" start="23374" end="23378" title="Lego" label="Lego"/>
<link wikidata="Q160719" start="23647" end="23656" title="Playmobil" label="Playmobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793694" start="23680" end="23719" title="Armor Modeling and Preservation Society" label="Armor Modeling and Preservation Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785011" start="23721" end="23730" title="Cosmorama" label="Cosmorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147753" start="23732" end="23741" title="Cyclorama" label="Cyclorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125573" start="23743" end="23756" title="Model airport" label="Model airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892882" start="23758" end="23773" title="Moving panorama" label="Moving panorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q650646" start="23775" end="23784" title="Myriorama (cards)" label="Myriorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q31732" start="23786" end="23800" title="Nativity scene" label="Nativity scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888327" start="23802" end="23814" title="Model figure" label="Model figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q546808" start="23816" end="23830" title="Tableau vivant" label="Tableau vivant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422" start="23832" end="23835" title="Toy" label="Toy"/>
<link wikidata="Q929923" start="23837" end="23848" title="Toy soldier" label="Toy soldier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610997" wikidata="Q1440688" url="?curid=610997" title="Frameshift mutation">
<text>A frameshift mutation (also called a framing error or a reading frame shift) is a genetic mutation caused by indels (insertions or deletions) of a number of nucleotides in a DNA sequence that is not divisible by three. Due to the triplet nature of gene expression by codons, the insertion or deletion can change the reading frame (the grouping of the codons), resulting in a completely different translation from the original. The earlier in the sequence the deletion or insertion occurs, the more altered the protein. A frameshift mutation is not the same as a single-nucleotide polymorphism in which a nucleotide is replaced, rather than inserted or deleted. A frameshift mutation will in general cause the reading of the codons after the mutation to code for different amino acids. The frameshift mutation will also alter the first stop codon (&quot;UAA&quot;, &quot;UGA&quot; or &quot;UAG&quot;) encountered in the sequence. The polypeptide being created could be abnormally short or abnormally long, and will most likely not be functional.

Frameshift mutations are apparent in severe genetic diseases such as Tay–Sachs disease; they increase susceptibility to certain cancers and classes of familial hypercholesterolaemia; in 1997, a frameshift mutation was linked to resistance to infection by the HIV retrovirus. Frameshift mutations have been proposed as a source of biological novelty, as with the alleged creation of nylonase, however, this interpretation is controversial. A study by Negoro &quot;et al.&quot; (2006) found that a frameshift mutation was unlikely to have been the cause and that rather a two amino acid substitution in the active site of an ancestral esterase resulted in nylonase.

==Background==

The information contained in DNA determines protein function in the cells of all organisms. Transcription and translation allow this information to be communicated into making proteins. However, an error in reading this communication can cause protein function to be incorrect and eventually cause disease even as the cell incorporates a variety of corrective measures.Genetic information is conveyed by DNA for protein synthesis within cells. Misinterpretation can lead to faulty function and disease, despite cellular correction mechanisms.

===Central dogma===

In 1956 Francis Crick described the flow of genetic information from DNA to a specific amino acid arrangement for making a protein as the central dogma. For a cell to properly function, proteins are required to be produced accurately for structural and for catalytic activities. An incorrectly made protein can have detrimental effects on cell viability and in most cases cause the higher organism to become unhealthy by abnormal cellular functions. To ensure that the genome successfully passes the information on, proofreading mechanisms such as exonucleases and mismatch repair systems are incorporated in DNA replication.

===Transcription and translation===
After DNA replication, the reading of a selected section of genetic information is accomplished by transcription.
Nucleotides containing the genetic information are now on a single strand messenger template called mRNA. The mRNA is incorporated with a subunit of the ribosome and interacts with an rRNA. The genetic information carried in the codons of the mRNA are now read (decoded) by anticodons of the tRNA. As each codon (triplet) is read, amino acids are being joined until a stop codon (UAG, UGA or UAA) is reached. At this point the polypeptide (protein) has been synthesised and is released. For every 1000 amino acid incorporated into the protein, no more than one is incorrect. This fidelity of codon recognition, maintaining the importance of the proper reading frame, is accomplished by proper base pairing at the ribosome A site, GTP hydrolysis activity of EF-Tu a form of kinetic stability, and a proofreading mechanism as EF-Tu is released.

Frameshifting may also occur during prophase translation, producing different proteins from overlapping open reading frames, such as the gag-pol-env retroviral proteins. This is fairly common in viruses and also occurs in bacteria and yeast (Farabaugh, 1996). Reverse transcriptase, as opposed to RNA Polymerase II, is thought to be a stronger cause of the occurrence of frameshift mutations. In experiments only 3–13% of all frameshift mutations occurred because of RNA Polymerase II. In prokaryotes the error rate inducing frameshift mutations is only somewhere in the range of .0001 and .00001.

There are several biological processes that help to prevent frameshift mutations. Reverse mutations occur which change the mutated sequence back to the original wild type sequence. Another possibility for mutation correction is the use of a suppressor mutation. This offsets the effect of the original mutation by creating a secondary mutation, shifting the sequence to allow for the correct amino acids to be read. Guide RNA can also be used to insert or delete Uridine into the mRNA after transcription, this allows for the correct reading frame.

===Codon-triplet importance===


A codon is a set of three nucleotides, a triplet that codes for a certain amino acid. The first codon establishes the reading frame, whereby a new codon begins. A protein&#x27;s amino acid backbone sequence is defined by contiguous triplets. Codons are key to translation of genetic information for the synthesis of proteins. The reading frame is set when translating the mRNA begins and is maintained as it reads one triplet to the next. The reading of the genetic code is subject to three rules the monitor codons in mRNA. First, codons are read in a 5&#x27; to 3&#x27; direction. Second, codons are nonoverlapping and the message has no gaps. The last rule, as stated above, that the message is translated in a fixed reading frame.

==Mechanism==

Frameshift mutations can occur randomly or be caused by an external stimulus. The detection of frameshift mutations can occur via several different methods. Frameshifts are just one type of mutation that can lead to incomplete or incorrect proteins, but they account for a significant percentage of errors in DNA.In an unaltered gene, codons (triplets of nucleotides) are sequentially interpreted, with each codon encoding a specific amino acid. This is known as the standard reading frame. However, in cases of frame shift mutations, an extra nucleotide (or more) is inserted into the DNA sequence, disrupting the typical reading frame and causing a shift in the sequence.

This insertion prompts a shift in the reading frame due to the triplet nature of the genetic code. For instance, the addition of an extra &quot;A&quot; leads to a sequence shift, triggering the reading of an entirely different set of codons. This deviation in genetic information causes the ribosome, which reads the mRNA for protein synthesis, to misinterpret the genetic data. Consequently, an entirely different series of amino acids is generated, resulting in the generation of an altered protein sequence. In most instances, the new reading frame results in an early encounter with a stop codon, leading to the formation of a shortened and usually inactive protein. This form of mutation is termed an early stop codon or a nonsense mutation.

===Genetic or environmental===

This is a genetic mutation at the level of nucleotide bases. Why and how frameshift mutations occur are continually being sought after. An environmental study, specifically the production of UV-induced frameshift mutations by DNA polymerases deficient in 3′ → 5′ exonuclease activity was done. The normal sequence 5′ GTC GTT TTA CAA 3′ was changed to GTC GTT T TTA CAA (MIDT) of GTC GTT C TTA CAA (MIDC) to study frameshifts. E. coli pol I Kf and T7 DNA polymerase mutant enzymes devoid of 3′ → 5′ exonuclease activity produce UV-induced revertants at higher frequency than did their exonuclease proficient counterparts. The data indicates that loss of proofreading activity increases the frequency of UV-induced frameshifts.

===Detection===

====Fluorescence====

The effects of neighboring bases and secondary structure to detect the frequency of frameshift mutations has been investigated in depth using fluorescence. Fluorescently tagged DNA, by means of base analogues, permits one to study the local changes of a DNA sequence. Studies on the effects of the length of the primer strand reveal that an equilibrium mixture of four hybridization conformations was observed when template bases looped-out as a bulge, i.e. a structure flanked on both sides by duplex DNA. In contrast, a double-loop structure with an unusual unstacked DNA conformation at its downstream edge was observed when the extruded bases were positioned at the primer–template junction, showing that misalignments can be modified by neighboring DNA secondary structure.

====Sequencing====

Sanger sequencing and pyrosequencing are two methods that have been used to detect frameshift mutations, however, it is likely that data generated will not be of the highest quality. Even still, 1.96 million indels have been identified through Sanger sequencing that do not overlap with other databases. When a frameshift mutation is observed it is compared against the Human Genome Mutation Database (HGMD) to determine if the mutation has a damaging effect. This is done by looking at four features. First, the ratio between the affected and conserved DNA, second the location of the mutation relative to the transcript, third the ratio of conserved and affected amino acids and finally the distance of the indel to the end of the exon.

Massively Parallel Sequencing is a newer method that can be used to detect mutations. Using this method, up to 17 gigabases can be sequenced at once, as opposed to limited ranges for Sanger sequencing of only about 1 kilobase. Several technologies are available to perform this test and it is being looked at to be used in clinical applications. When testing for different carcinomas, current methods only allow for looking at one gene at a time. Massively Parallel Sequencing can test for a variety of cancer causing mutations at once as opposed to several specific tests. An experiment to determine the accuracy of this newer sequencing method tested for 21 genes and had no false positive calls for frameshift mutations.

====Diagnosis====

A US patent (5,958,684) in 1999 by Leeuwen, details the methods and reagents for diagnosis of diseases caused by or associated with a gene having a somatic mutation giving rise to a frameshift mutation. The methods include providing a tissue or fluid sample and conducting gene analysis for frameshift mutation or a protein from this type of mutation. The nucleotide sequence of the suspected gene is provided from published gene sequences or from cloning and sequencing of the suspect gene. The amino acid sequence encoded by the gene is then predicted. NA Sequencing: Sanger sequencing or Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) can be used to directly sequence the DNA and identify insertions or deletions.Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR): PCR can be used to amplify the specific region containing the mutation for subsequent analysis.Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA): MLPA is a technique used to detect copy number variations and small insertions or deletions.Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH): CGH is used to detect chromosomal imbalances, which may include large insertions or deletions.

====Frequency====

Despite the rules that govern the genetic code and the various mechanisms present in a cell to ensure the correct transfer of genetic information during the process of DNA replication as well as during translation, mutations do occur; frameshift mutation is not the only type. There are at least two other types of recognized point mutations, specifically missense mutation and nonsense mutation. A frameshift mutation can drastically change the coding capacity (genetic information) of the message. Small insertions or deletions (those less than 20 base pairs) make up 24% of mutations that manifest in currently recognized genetic disease.

Frameshift mutations are found to be more common in repeat regions of DNA. A reason for this is because of slipping of the polymerase enzyme in repeat regions, allowing for mutations to enter the sequence. Experiments can be run to determine the frequency of the frameshift mutation by adding or removing a pre-set number of nucleotides. Experiments have been run by adding four basepairs, called the +4 experiments, but a team from Emory University looked at the difference in frequency of the mutation by both adding and deleting a base pair. It was shown that there was no difference in the frequency between the addition and deletion of a base pair. There is however, a difference in the result of the protein.

Huntington&#x27;s disease is one of the nine codon reiteration disorders caused by polyglutamine expansion mutations that include spino-cerebellar ataxia (SCA) 1, 2, 6, 7 and 3, spinobulbar muscular atrophy and dentatorubal-pallidoluysianatrophy. There may be a link between diseases caused by polyglutamine and polyalanine expansion mutations, as frame shifting of the original SCA3 gene product encoding CAG/polyglutamines to GCA/polyalanines. Ribosomal slippage during translation of the SCA3 protein has been proposed as the mechanism resulting in shifting from the polyglutamine to the polyalanine-encoding frame. A dinucleotide deletion or single nucleotide insertion within the polyglutamine tract of huntingtin exon 1 would shift the CAG, polyglutamineen coding frame by +1 (+1 frame shift) to the GCA, polyalanine-encoding frame and introduce a novel epitope to the C terminus of Htt exon 1 (APAAAPAATRPGCG).

==Diseases==
Several diseases have frameshift mutations as at least part of the cause. Knowing prevalent mutations can also aid in the diagnosis of the disease. Currently there are attempts to use frameshift mutations beneficially in the treatment of diseases, changing the reading frame of the amino acids.

===Cancer===

Frameshift mutations are known to be a factor in colorectal cancer as well as other cancers with microsatellite instability. As stated previously, frameshift mutations are more likely to occur in a region of repeat sequence. When DNA mismatch repair does not fix the addition or deletion of bases, these mutations are more likely to be pathogenic. This may be in part because the tumor is not told to stop growing. Experiments in yeast and bacteria help to show characteristics of microsatellites that may contribute to defective DNA mismatch repair. These include the length of the microsatellite, the makeup of the genetic material and how pure the repeats are. Based on experimental results longer microsatellites have a higher rate of frameshift mutations. The flanking DNA can also contribute to frameshift mutations. In prostate cancer a frameshift mutation changes the open reading frame (ORF) and prevents apoptosis from occurring. This leads to an unregulated growth of the tumor. While there are environmental factors that contribute to the progression of prostate cancer, there is also a genetic component. During testing of coding regions to identify mutations, 116 genetic variants were discovered, including 61 frameshift mutations. There are over 500 mutations on chromosome 17 that seem to play a role in the development of breast and ovarian cancer in the BRCA1 gene, many of which are frameshift.

===Crohn&#x27;s disease===

Crohn&#x27;s disease has an association with the NOD2 gene. The mutation is an insertion of a Cytosine at position 3020. This leads to a premature stop codon, shortening the protein that is supposed to be transcribed. When the protein is able to form normally, it responds to bacterial liposaccharides, where the 3020insC mutation prevents the protein from being responsive.

===Cystic fibrosis===

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a disease based on mutations in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. There are over 1500 mutations identified, but not all cause the disease. Most cases of cystic fibrosis are a result of the ∆F508 mutation, which deletes the entire amino acid. Two frameshift mutations are of interest in diagnosing CF, CF1213delT and CF1154-insTC. Both of these mutations commonly occur in tandem with at least one other mutation. They both lead to a small decrease in the function of the lungs and occur in about 1% of patients tested. These mutations were identified through Sanger sequencing.

===HIV===

CCR5 is one of the cell entry co-factors associated with HIV, most frequently involved with nonsyncytium-inducing strains, is most apparent in HIV patients as opposed to AIDS patients. A 32 base pair deletion in CCR5 has been identified as a mutation that negates the likelihood of an HIV infection. This region on the open reading frame ORF contains a frameshift mutation leading to a premature stop codon. This leads to the loss of the HIV-coreceptor function in vitro. CCR5-1 is considered the wild type and CCR5-2 is considered to be the mutant allele. Those with a heterozygous mutation for the CCR5 were less susceptible to the development of HIV. In a study, despite high exposure to the HIV virus, there was no one homozygous for the CCR5 mutation that tested positive for HIV.

===Tay–Sachs disease===

Tay–Sachs disease is a fatal disease affecting the central nervous system. It is most frequently found in infants and small children. Disease progression begins in the womb but symptoms do not appear until approximately 6 months of age. There is no cure for the disease. Mutations in the β-hexosaminidase A (Hex A) gene are known to affect the onset of Tay-Sachs, with 78 mutations of different types being described, 67 of which are known to cause disease. Most of the mutations observed (65/78) are single base substitutions or SNPs, 11 deletions, 1 large and 10 small, and 2 insertions. 8 of the observed mutations are frameshift, 6 deletions and 2 insertions. A 4 base pair insertion in exon 11 is observed in 80% of Tay-Sachs disease presence in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. The frameshift mutations lead to an early stop codon which is known to play a role in the disease in infants. Delayed onset disease appears to be caused by 4 different mutations, one being a 3 base pair deletion.

===Smith–Magenis syndrome===

Smith–Magenis syndrome (SMS) is a complex syndrome involving intellectual disabilities, sleep disturbance, behavioural problems, and a variety of craniofacial, skeletal, and visceral anomalies. The majority of SMS cases harbor an ~3.5 Mb common deletion that encompasses the retinoic acid induced-1 (&quot;RAI1&quot;) gene. Other cases illustrate variability in the SMS phenotype not previously shown for RAI1 mutation, including hearing loss, self-abusive behaviours, and mild global delays. Sequencing of RAI1 revealed mutation of a heptamericC-tract (CCCCCCC) in exon 3 resulting in frameshift mutations. Of the seven reported frameshift mutations occurring in poly C-tracts in RAI1, four cases (~57%) occur at this heptameric C-tract. The results indicate that this heptameric C-tract is a preferential recombination hotspot insertion/deletions (SNindels) and therefore a primary target for analysis in patients suspected for mutations in RAI1.

===Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy===

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most common cause of sudden death in young people, including trained athletes, and is caused by mutations in genes encoding proteins of the cardiac sarcomere. Mutations in the Troponin C gene (&quot;TNNC1&quot;) are a rare genetic cause of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A recent study has indicated that a frameshift mutation (c.363dupG or p.Gln122AlafsX30) in Troponin C was the cause of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (and sudden cardiac death) in a 19-year-old male.

===Cures===
Finding a cure for the diseases caused by frameshift mutations is rare. Research into this is ongoing. One example is a primary immunodeficiency (PID), an inherited condition which can lead to an increase in infections. There are 120 genes and 150 mutations that play a role in primary immunodeficiencies. The standard treatment is currently gene therapy, but this is a highly risky treatment and can often lead to other diseases, such as leukemia. Gene therapy procedures include modifying the zinc fringer nuclease fusion protein, cleaving both ends of the mutation, which in turn removes it from the sequence. Antisense-oligonucleotide mediated exon skipping is another possibility for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. This process allows for passing over the mutation so that the rest of the sequence remains in frame and the function of the protein stays intact. This, however, does not cure the disease, just treats symptoms, and is only practical in structural proteins or other repetitive genes. A third form of repair is revertant mosaicism, which is naturally occurring by creating a reverse mutation or a mutation at a second site that corrects the reading frame. This reversion may happen by intragenic recombination, mitotic gene conversion, second site DNA slipping or site-specific reversion. This is possible in several diseases, such as X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, and Bloom syndrome. There are no drugs or other pharmacogenomic methods that help with PIDs.

A European patent (EP1369126A1) in 2003 by Bork records a method used for prevention of cancers and for the curative treatment of cancers and precancers such as DNA-mismatch repair deficient (MMR) sporadic tumours and HNPCC associated tumours. The idea is to use immunotherapy with combinatorial mixtures of tumour-specific frameshift mutation-derived peptides to elicit a cytotoxic T-cell response specifically directed against tumour cells.

==See also==
* Translational frameshift
* Mutation
* Transcription (genetics)
* Translation (biology)
* codon
* protein
* reading frame
* point mutation
* Crohn&#x27;s disease
* Tay–Sachs disease

==References==
== Further reading ==
* 


==External links==
* NCBI dbSNP database — &quot;a central repository for both single base nucleotide substitutions and short deletion and insertion polymorphisms&quot;
* Wise2 - aligns a protein against a DNA sequence allowing frameshifts and introns
* FastY - compare a DNA sequence to a protein sequence database, allowing gaps and frameshifts
* Path - tool that compares two frameshift proteins (back-translation principle)
* HGMD - Human Genome Mutation Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1440688" start="2" end="21" title="Frameshift mutation" label="frameshift mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440688" start="37" end="50" title="Frameshift mutation" label="framing error"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440688" start="56" end="75" title="Frameshift mutation" label="reading frame shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="82" end="98" title="genetic mutation" label="genetic mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576681" start="109" end="114" title="indel" label="indel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650834" start="117" end="127" title="gene insertion" label="insertions"/>
<link wikidata="Q656732" start="131" end="140" title="genetic deletion" label="deletions"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="157" end="167" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="248" end="263" title="gene expression" label="gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="267" end="272" title="codon" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q923372" start="316" end="329" title="reading frame" label="reading frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="396" end="407" title="Translation (genetics)" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q501128" start="562" end="592" title="single-nucleotide polymorphism" label="single-nucleotide polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322407" start="663" end="673" title="frameshift" label="frameshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q560337" start="1115" end="1132" title="Tay–Sachs disease" label="Tay–Sachs disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711291" start="1197" end="1227" title="familial hypercholesterolaemia" label="familial hypercholesterolaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353307" start="1428" end="1436" title="nylonase" label="nylonase"/>
<link wikidata="Q423026" start="1651" end="1662" title="active site" label="active site"/>
<link wikidata="Q418750" start="1679" end="1687" title="esterase" label="esterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q123280" start="2300" end="2313" title="Francis Crick" label="Francis Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="2361" end="2364" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="2415" end="2422" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="2549" end="2558" title="catalytic" label="catalytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="2631" end="2635" title="Cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="2681" end="2689" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="2761" end="2767" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q834191" start="2808" end="2820" title="proofreading" label="proofreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q411664" start="2840" end="2851" title="exonuclease" label="exonuclease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984243" start="2857" end="2872" title="mismatch repair" label="mismatch repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="2901" end="2916" title="DNA replication" label="DNA replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="3054" end="3067" title="transcription (genetics)" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="3169" end="3173" title="mRNA" label="mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="3222" end="3230" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="3253" end="3257" title="rRNA" label="rRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="3400" end="3411" title="amino acids" label="amino acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q28354" start="3437" end="3447" title="stop codon" label="stop codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="3496" end="3507" title="polypeptide" label="polypeptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q392227" start="3799" end="3802" title="Guanosine triphosphate" label="GTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q24726678" start="3826" end="3831" title="EF-Tu" label="EF-Tu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6013254" start="3949" end="3957" title="prophase" label="prophase"/>
<link wikidata="Q189308" start="4062" end="4072" title="retroviral" label="retroviral"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="4108" end="4115" title="viruses" label="viruses"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="4135" end="4143" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="4148" end="4153" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q28774" start="4173" end="4194" title="Reverse transcriptase" label="Reverse transcriptase"/>
<link wikidata="Q15334993" start="4210" end="4227" title="RNA Polymerase II" label="RNA Polymerase II"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="4402" end="4413" title="prokaryotes" label="prokaryotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q128723" start="4673" end="4682" title="wild type" label="wild type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146845" start="4753" end="4772" title="suppressor mutation" label="suppressor mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039747" start="4928" end="4937" title="Guide RNA" label="Guide RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="5097" end="5102" title="codon" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="5121" end="5132" title="nucleotides" label="nucleotides"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="5169" end="5179" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="5293" end="5301" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="7492" end="7494" title="UV" label="UV"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="7727" end="7734" title="E. coli" label="E. coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="7773" end="7780" title="enzymes" label="enzymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q411664" start="7885" end="7896" title="exonuclease" label="exonuclease"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="8209" end="8221" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q181940" start="8867" end="8884" title="Sanger sequencing" label="Sanger sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342248" start="8889" end="8903" title="pyrosequencing" label="pyrosequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576681" start="9075" end="9080" title="indel" label="indel"/>
<link wikidata="Q373027" start="9600" end="9604" title="exon" label="exon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784807" start="9607" end="9636" title="Massively parallel sequencing" label="Massively Parallel Sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q181940" start="9790" end="9807" title="Sanger sequencing" label="Sanger sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="10356" end="10362" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q120877" start="10799" end="10806" title="cloning" label="cloning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656896" start="11842" end="11859" title="missense mutation" label="missense mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q518638" start="11864" end="11881" title="nonsense mutation" label="nonsense mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="12325" end="12333" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="12335" end="12345" title="Experiment" label="Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q621043" start="12562" end="12578" title="Emory University" label="Emory University"/>
<link wikidata="Q190564" start="12845" end="12870" title="Huntington&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Huntington&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083" start="14136" end="14146" title="colorectal" label="colorectal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="14171" end="14178" title="cancers" label="cancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q488212" start="14184" end="14210" title="microsatellite instability" label="microsatellite instability"/>
<link wikidata="Q265193" start="14670" end="14684" title="microsatellite" label="microsatellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q908550" start="14963" end="14981" title="open reading frame" label="open reading frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="15001" end="15010" title="apoptosis" label="apoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="15070" end="15075" title="tumor" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="15153" end="15168" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472" start="15531" end="15551" title="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q178425" start="15625" end="15633" title="Cytosine" label="Cytosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178194" start="15930" end="15945" title="Cystic fibrosis" label="Cystic fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q424204" start="15993" end="16006" title="transmembrane" label="transmembrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="16447" end="16452" title="lungs" label="lungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q418404" start="16566" end="16570" title="CCR5" label="CCR5"/>
<link wikidata="Q908550" start="16904" end="16907" title="Open reading frame" label="ORF"/>
<link wikidata="Q560337" start="17378" end="17395" title="Tay–Sachs disease" label="Tay–Sachs disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="17546" end="17550" title="womb" label="womb"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="18133" end="18142" title="Ashkenazi" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295338" start="18406" end="18428" title="Smith–Magenis syndrome" label="Smith–Magenis syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q179630" start="18448" end="18456" title="syndrome" label="syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q21174723" start="18712" end="18716" title="RAI1" label="RAI1"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="18776" end="18785" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631211" start="19213" end="19234" title="recombination hotspot" label="recombination hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364270" start="19391" end="19418" title="Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy" label="Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="19447" end="19459" title="sudden cardiac death" label="sudden death"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032046" start="19625" end="19630" title="TNNC1" label="TNNC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043160" start="20025" end="20049" title="primary immunodeficiency" label="primary immunodeficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137767" start="20603" end="20621" title="muscular dystrophy" label="muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q211675" start="21116" end="21129" title="Genetic recombination" label="recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="21131" end="21138" title="mitotic" label="mitotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423538" start="21255" end="21296" title="X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency" label="X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q953638" start="21305" end="21329" title="Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome" label="Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469646" start="21335" end="21349" title="Bloom syndrome" label="Bloom syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322407" start="21884" end="21908" title="Translational frameshift" label="Translational frameshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="21911" end="21919" title="Mutation" label="Mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="21922" end="21946" title="Transcription (genetics)" label="Transcription (genetics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="21949" end="21970" title="Translation (biology)" label="Translation (biology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="21973" end="21978" title="codon" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="21981" end="21988" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q923372" start="21991" end="22004" title="reading frame" label="reading frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415380" start="22007" end="22021" title="point mutation" label="point mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472" start="22024" end="22044" title="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q560337" start="22047" end="22064" title="Tay–Sachs disease" label="Tay–Sachs disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="22296" end="22303" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322407" start="22336" end="22346" title="frameshift" label="frameshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q207551" start="22352" end="22358" title="intron" label="intron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322407" start="22443" end="22453" title="frameshift" label="frameshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322407" start="22487" end="22497" title="frameshift" label="frameshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="22513" end="22524" title="Translation (genetics)" label="translation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610998" wikidata="Q7056238" url="?curid=610998" title="North Otago">
<text>North Otago is an area in New Zealand that covers the area of the Otago region between Shag Point and the Waitaki River, and extends inland to the west as far as the village of Omarama (which has experienced rapid growth as a developing centre for astronomy and for gliding).

==Geography==
Prominent rivers include the Shag, the Waianakarua, the Kakanui and the Waitaki. The Kakanui Mountains form the principal cordillera, rising at their highest point, Mount Pisgah, to . These are separated from the lower, parallel Horse Range by the upper valleys of the Waianakarua and Shag rivers.

The large east-coast town of Oamaru serves as North Otago&#x27;s main centre. Other towns and settlements in the region include Alma, Totara, Teschemakers, Reidston, Maheno, Kakanui, Herbert (also known as &quot;Otepopo&quot;), Waianakarua, Hampden, and Moeraki, all on or close to the coast south of Oamaru. The coastal plain north of Oamaru has the settlements of Hilderthorpe and Pukeuri.

Inland settlements include Weston, Ardgowan, Windsor, Five Forks, Peebles, Papakaio, Duntroon, Kurow (on the south bank of the Waitaki), Omarama, and Otematata.

==History and economy==
The area aspired to provincial status in the 19th century, but never attained this. Most of its territory belonged to the Waitaki County, and today is officially part of the Waitaki District. Some sense of regional identity survives in support of sport, notably the North Otago rugby team. In 1989, the northwestern part of the area, including the towns of Omarama, Otematata, Kurow, and Duntroon officially became part of Canterbury region, testing this sense of identity and raising the ire of many locals.

The rolling, tussock-clad hill country of North Otago provides the important agricultural base, originally through sheep-farming but now largely superseded by dairy. The generation of hydro-electricity in the Waitaki Valley has also drawn attention to the area (see Project Aqua), and tourism has grown in recent years.

== References ==
==External links==
* Omarama Gliding Club website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7056238" start="0" end="11" title="North Otago" label="North Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="26" end="37" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q692912" start="66" end="71" title="Otago" label="Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175889" start="87" end="97" title="Shag Point" label="Shag Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033279" start="106" end="119" title="Waitaki River" label="Waitaki River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726946" start="177" end="184" title="Omarama" label="Omarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="248" end="257" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q624161" start="266" end="273" title="gliding" label="gliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276344" start="320" end="324" title="Shag River (Otago)" label="Shag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959899" start="330" end="341" title="Waianakarua River" label="Waianakarua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6349227" start="347" end="354" title="Kakanui River" label="Kakanui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033279" start="363" end="370" title="Waitaki River" label="Waitaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446763" start="376" end="393" title="Kakanui Mountains" label="Kakanui Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446763" start="456" end="468" title="Mount Pisgah (New Zealand)" label="Mount Pisgah"/>
<link wikidata="Q130467134" start="520" end="531" title="Horse Range (New Zealand)" label="Horse Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782" start="619" end="625" title="Oamaru" label="Oamaru"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="718" end="722" title="Alma, New Zealand" label="Alma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733803" start="756" end="762" title="Maheno, New Zealand" label="Maheno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6349226" start="764" end="771" title="Kakanui" label="Kakanui"/>
<link wikidata="Q5733391" start="773" end="780" title="Herbert, New Zealand" label="Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5733391" start="818" end="829" title="Waianakarua" label="Waianakarua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645969" start="831" end="838" title="Hampden, New Zealand" label="Hampden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6890239" start="844" end="851" title="Moeraki" label="Moeraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989367" start="1010" end="1016" title="Weston, New Zealand" label="Weston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1018" end="1026" title="Ardgowan, New Zealand" label="Ardgowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024527" start="1028" end="1035" title="Windsor, North Otago" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839115" start="1068" end="1076" title="Duntroon, New Zealand" label="Duntroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292255" start="1078" end="1083" title="Kurow" label="Kurow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726946" start="1120" end="1127" title="Omarama" label="Omarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108513" start="1133" end="1142" title="Otematata" label="Otematata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669071" start="1189" end="1199" title="provinces of New Zealand" label="provincial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760804" start="1343" end="1359" title="Waitaki District" label="Waitaki District"/>
<link wikidata="Q657004" start="1592" end="1602" title="Canterbury, New Zealand" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743290" start="1692" end="1699" title="tussock grass" label="tussock"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="1863" end="1880" title="hydro-electricity" label="hydro-electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249001" start="1945" end="1957" title="Project Aqua" label="Project Aqua"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="610999" wikidata="Q29830665" url="?curid=610999" title="Firedrake">
<text>Firedrake may refer to:

== Ships ==
* , an &quot;Acheron&quot;-class destroyer launched in 1912 and sold in 1921
* , an F-class destroyer launched in 1934 and sunk in 1942
* , a &quot;Mount Hood&quot;-class ammunition ship launched in 1944 and decommissioned in 1971

== Arts and entertainment ==
* Firedrakes, the species of mythological creatures the character &quot;Fenella&quot; belongs to in Gerald Durrells 1974 fantasy children&#x27;s book &quot;The Talking Parcel&quot;
* Firedrake, a character in the comic book series Miracleman
* Firedrake, a character in the 1997 children&#x27;s novel &quot;Dragon Rider&quot;
* Firedrake (&quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;), a role playing game monster
* &quot;The Firedrake&quot;, a 1965 historical novel by Cecelia Holland

== Other users ==
* Firedrake (mythology), a dragon or similar creature in Teutonic mythology
* Firedrake Lake, a lake in the Northwest Territories, Canada
* The Firedrake, a shortwave radio jammer in China</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q29830665" start="0" end="9" title="Firedrake" label="Firedrake"/>
<link wikidata="Q310400" start="398" end="412" title="Gerald Durrell" label="Gerald Durrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q58608602" start="454" end="472" title="The Talking Parcel" label="The Talking Parcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q117288829" start="529" end="539" title="Miracleman" label="Miracleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q841963" start="605" end="617" title="Dragon Rider (novel)" label="Dragon Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q113443316" start="626" end="672" title="Firedrake (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="Firedrake (&amp;quot;Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055869" start="758" end="773" title="Cecelia Holland" label="Cecelia Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q862809" start="795" end="816" title="Firedrake (mythology)" label="Firedrake (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4480634" start="871" end="885" title="Firedrake Lake" label="Firedrake Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281176" start="960" end="981" title="Radio jamming in China" label="radio jammer in China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="611005" wikidata="Q745023" url="?curid=611005" title="Mercedes-Benz 300 SL">
<text>The Mercedes-Benz 300 SL (chassis code W 198) is a two-seat sports car that was produced by Mercedes-Benz from 1954 to 1957 as a gullwinged coupé and from 1957 to 1963 as a roadster. The 300 SL traces its origins to the company&#x27;s 1952 racing car, the W194, and was equipped with a mechanical direct fuel injection system that significantly increased the power output of its three-liter overhead camshaft straight-six engine.

The 300 SL was capable of reaching speeds of up to 260 km/h (162 mph), earning it a reputation as a sports car racing champion and making it the fastest production car of its time. The car&#x27;s iconic gullwing doors and innovative lightweight tubular-frame construction contributed to its status as a groundbreaking and highly influential automobile.

The designation &quot;SL&quot; is an abbreviation of the German term , meaning &quot;super-light&quot;, a reference to the car&#x27;s racing-bred lightweight construction. The 300 SL was introduced to the American market at the suggestion of Max Hoffman, Mercedes-Benz&#x27;s United States importer at the time, who recognized the potential demand for a high-performance sports car among American buyers. The Mercedes-Benz 300 SL remains a highly sought-after classic car and is celebrated for its performance, design, and technological advancements.

==Development==
===Origin in the W194 racing car===
The 300 SL traces its origin to an endurance racer, the Mercedes-Benz W194, developed by Daimler-Benz in 1951. It used the 3-liter inline-6 M186 engine, shared by the company flagship 300 &quot;Adenauer&quot; saloon (W186) and the two-seat 300 S grand tourer (W188).

Although W194&#x27;s engine produced less power than competing cars by Ferrari and Jaguar, its low weight and low aerodynamic drag made the W194 fast enough to be competitive in endurance races.

Mercedes-Benz developed a new version for the 1953 racing season by replacing the M186&#x27;s carburetors with fuel injection, and shifting to 16-inch wheels; the gearbox was installed on its rear axle. Its body was made of Elektron, a magnesium alloy, which reduced its weight by . Mercedes-Benz decided not to race this alloy car, choosing instead to begin participating in Formula One in 1954. Later versions revised the body to lower air resistance, and did not continue the transmission arrangement.

===Origin of the 300 SL===

The idea of Mercedes producing a toned-down Grand Prix car targeted to affluent performance enthusiasts in the booming post-war American market was suggested by the company&#x27;s U.S. importer, Max Hoffman, at a 1953 directors&#x27; meeting in Stuttgart. Mercedes&#x27; new general director, Fritz Konecke, agreed to Hoffman&#x27;s order for 1,000 cars to guarantee the success of the production run; the 300 SL was introduced at the February 1954 New York International Auto Show instead of the Frankfurt or Geneva shows, where company models usually debuted. In addition, the production of a smaller roadster, the Mercedes-Benz 190 SL, was announced after Hoffman placed an initial order for 1,000 to support their production. Mercedes received a positive visitor response to both cars in New York, and production began at the Sindelfingen plant in August of that year.

===Cost===
The price for the 300 SL coupé in Germany was DM 29,000, and $6,820 in the US. The roadster was DM 32,500 in Germany, and $10,950 in the US – 10 percent more expensive than the coupé in Europe, and over 70 percent more in the US.

===SL abbreviation===
Mercedes-Benz did not announce what the abbreviation &quot;SL&quot; meant when the car was introduced; magazines and company officials have called it &quot;Sport Leicht&quot; and &quot;Super Leicht&quot; (&quot;light&quot;). It was called &quot;Sport Leicht&quot; on the company website until 2017, when &quot;SL&quot; was changed to &quot;Super Leicht&quot; after a chance finding in the corporate archives.

====300 SLS====
A special 300 SLS (Super Light Special) version of the 300 SL roadster was created for the Mercedes-Benz US racing team to compete on the Sports Car Club of America (SCCA) national circuit in 1957. After the 300 SL coupé dominated the D Production class en route to titles in 1955 and 1956, the rules were changed to make the class more competitive by enlarging the maximum engine size from 3 to 3.5 liters. Rather than radically modifying its engine size (on the cusp of releasing the company&#x27;s new 300 SL roadster, replacing the coupé), Mercedes-Benz created two roadsters to campaign on the D Modified class SCAA circuit. They featured a solid cover over the passenger seat, a low-profile racing screen in place of a full-width and -height windscreen, a driver&#x27;s seat roll bar, a custom cowl with engine air intake, and no front and rear bumpers. These and other modifications lowered vehicle weight from to . Engine output was increased , to . Team driver Paul O&#x27;Shea again won the title for the company.

==Overview==
The 300 SL has a steel tubular frame chassis, with a steel body combined with an aluminum bonnet, doors, dashboard, and boot lid to further reduce weight. An additional could be eliminated with an expensive all-aluminum body, but only 29 were made. Depending on the rear axle ratio, fuel consumption was 17 liters per 100 km (14 miles per US gallon; 17 miles per imperial gallon).

===Interior===
Three checkered-pattern seat fabrics were standard: grey and green, grey and blue, and cream and red. Most customers opted for leather upholstery, which became standard on the roadster. With upward-opening doors, the coupé has an unusually-high sill; entering and exiting the car is problematic. The steering wheel pivots on its hub 90 degrees away from the dashboard to facilitate entry.&lt;ref name=&quot;ams 21/1955&quot;&gt;&quot;Mercedes-Benz 300 SL&quot;. Test in &quot;Auto, Motor und Sport&quot;, Motorbuch Verlag, Stuttgart, Heft 21/1955, Reprint in &quot;Motor Klassik&quot;, Spezial Nr. 3.&lt;/ref&gt; Storage space for luggage is behind the seats in the coupé; the boot only holds a spare wheel and fuel tank. The roadster was available with two custom-fitted leather suitcases for the larger boot. The coupé&#x27;s windows are fixed and roll down in the roadster.

===Exterior===
The body consists mainly of sheet steel, with the bonnet, boot lid, dashboard, sill, and door skins made of aluminum. Silver-grey was the standard color; all others were options.

The objective of the overall design was to make the vehicle as streamlined as possible. The width of the tubular frame along the cockpit allowed the cabin roofline to be inset considerably on both sides, dramatically reducing the front area. The structure was also quite high between the wheels, prohibiting the attachment of standard doors. The only option – already used on the W194 race car – which would allow passengers over its high, deep sill was a gullwing door.

The car’s distinctive eyebrows are a functional feature in the front, both physically and aerodynamically deflecting road water from the windscreen, and stylistic in the rear, added for visual symmetry.
===Engine===
The Mercedes-Benz M198 engine is a water-cooled overhead cam straight six. Like the racing Mercedes-Benz M194, the 300 SL borrowed the basic two-valves-per-cylinder M186 engine from the regular four-door 300 (W186 &quot;Adenauer&quot;) luxury touring car introduced in 1951.

It featured the M186&#x27;s aluminum head: a 30-degree diagonal base, allowing larger intake and exhaust valves than a standard horizontal joint with the engine block. To improve performance, the M198 replaced the W194&#x27;s triple two-barrel Solex carburetors with a Bosch mechanical fuel-injection system. This raised output on the 300 SL from SAE gross to SAE gross at 6,100 rpm. Compression was set at 8.55:1.

Another performance feature was dry sump lubrication, which ensured proper oil distribution in high-speed cornering and reduced engine height by eliminating a traditional oil pan. A more-powerful version of the M198, with a radical sports camshaft and 9.5:1 compression ratio, could be ordered free of additional charge for the coupé. The roadster had this engine only in its 1957 debut year. For the M198 engine to be installed in a low-profile car, it was tilted 50 degrees toward the driver&#x27;s side. The result was aerodynamic efficiency and an enormous, sand-cast aluminum intake manifold as wide as the engine.

The engine was coupled by a single-disc dry clutch to a four-speed transmission with gear ratios of 3.34:1, 1.97:1, 1.39:1, and 1:1, and a reverse ratio of 2.73:1. The stock rear-axle ratio at the beginning of production was 1:3.42; at the 41st vehicle, it was changed to 1:3.64 for better acceleration. It allows a top speed of and acceleration from 0 to 100 km/h (62 mph) in 9.3 seconds. Faster acceleration was provided with ratios of 1:3.89 and 1:4.11. The lowest final-gear ratio, 1:3.25, delivered a top speed of up to and made the 300 SL the fastest production car of its time. City drivers found the tall first gear challenging. Clutch-pedal operation was initially cumbersome, remedied by an improved clutch-arm helper spring.

Unlike present-day electronic fuel-injection systems, the 300 SL&#x27;s mechanical fuel pump would continue to inject gasoline into the engine during the interval between ignition shut-off and the engine&#x27;s coming to a stop. This extra fuel washed away the oil film critical to an engine during start-up and led to oil dilution, excessive ring wear, and scouring of the cylinder walls. Exacerbating the problem was the engine&#x27;s dry-sump lubrication system, with its large oil cooler and enormous oil capacity, which virtually guaranteed that the oil would not get hot enough on the short trips frequently taken by most car owners to flow properly. Owners might block off airflow through the oil cooler and stick rigidly to the appropriately low recommended oil-change interval. An auxiliary fuel pump provided additional fuel for extended high-speed operation (or cold starts), but overuse could also lead to oil dilution. From March 1963 to the end of production later that year, a light alloy crankcase was installed in 209 vehicles.

===Chassis===
Like modern racing cars, the 300 SL has a tubular frame, designed by Mercedes head engineer Rudolf Uhlenhaut and made of chrome-molybdenum steel. Such a frame provided high rigidity with low mass. Thin straight tubes were assembled as triangles, with the finished frame weighing a remarkable . Elements of the coupé frame fill span the entire width of the vehicle’s track from wheel to wheel, making for an unusually high and deep threshold for access to the passenger compartment. The upper tube is so high it is level with the driver&#x27;s elbow, making conventional horizontally, hinged doors infeasible. The resulting design—upward opening &quot;gullwing&quot; doors—gave the car its iconic nickname.

===Suspension===
The suspension was a regular Mercedes-Benz W186 with a sportier tuning. Front-to-rear weight distribution is almost exactly in the center of the vehicle.

The recirculating ball steering was relatively precise for its time, and the four-wheel independent suspension allowed for a reasonably-comfortable ride and markedly-better overall handling.

The front suspension consisted of unequal-length double wishbones, coil springs, hydraulic telescopic shock absorbers, and a torsion anti-roll bar.

The rear has a low-pivot swing axle, radius arms, and coil springs. Being jointed only at the differential (not at the wheels themselves), the swing axle could make rear end cornering treacherous at high speeds or on bad roads due to extreme changes in camber. This was remedied in the roadster by switching to a high-pivot geometry.

===Brakes===
The 300SL had the same self-cooled, drum brakes as the Mercedes 300S. A brake booster was used to decrease pedal force by using negative pressure from the intake manifold. Brake shoes were wide. The front drum brakes were two-wheel brake cylinders/wheels, and the rear drum brakes were one-wheel brake cylinders/wheels. The handbrake was a mechanical parking brake that acted on the rear wheels. The roadster had the same drum brakes until March 1961, when Ø front and rear disc brakes were introduced.

The roadster&#x27;s wheels were larger than the coupé&#x27;s. The wheels were steel bowl/aluminum rim rivet compound wheels. Rudge 5J × 15-inch rims were a valuable option. The tires were 6.50-15 inches on the coupé and 6.70–15 on the roadster.
==Roadster==

The roadster variant of the 300SL made its debut at the Geneva Motor Show in March 1957 and began production that May, coinciding with the final assembly of the Gullwing coupes. This roadster featured a re-engineered version of the coupe’s tubular space frame, incorporating lower sill trusses to allow for conventional front-hinged doors and a revised rear structure that provided trunk space. Similar to the coupe, the roadster utilized steel bodywork, with aluminum panels used for the hood, trunk lid, door skins, sills, floors, and bulkhead.


In mid-1956, sales of the 300SL Gullwing began to decline, prompting the Mercedes-Benz board to consider a convertible version tailored to the California market. The convertible model was showcased at the Geneva Motor Show in March 1957, and by May, the factory had been converted for roadster production.

The 300 SL Roadster, now featuring conventional front-hinged doors, premiered at the Geneva Salon in May 1957. The shift to an open-top design involved redesigning the cockpit, with lower sills to facilitate easier entry and exit. Additionally, the rear suspension was enhanced with low-pivot swing axles, resulting in notable improvements in handling and ride comfort.

Weighing , the roadster was heavier than the coupe but produced slightly more power at . The tubular frame was modified to create additional boot space, with a re-positioned spare tire located beneath the boot floor and a smaller fuel tank to allow room for custom-fitted luggage. The lower sill design also enhanced access.

A significant change to the roadster&#x27;s design was the updated rear axle, which incorporated a single-joint arrangement with a pivot point below the differential centerline. The lead engineer, Rudolf Uhlenhaut, initially wanted to introduce this low-pivot axle design on the coupe, but the board rejected the proposal due to the remaining inventory of approximately 3,000 axle units and the vehicle&#x27;s already high production costs.

In September 1958, an optional hardtop became available for the roadster, enhancing its appeal as both a sporty convertible and a more practical hardtop option.

==Racing==

Mercedes decided to return to international motorsport at the beginning of the 1950s, and Alfred Neubauer was again entrusted with the task. In 1951, the company built five V8 W165 cars and engines to enter the Grand Prix. Ferrari&#x27;s V12 performed well at Silverstone, however, and Neubauer knew that the W165 could not win; Mercedes began planning a V12 W195. The FIA sporting commission changed the rules for 1954 in October 1951, and the W195s could not compete; the company began to develop a six-cylinder 300 SL for racing. Its doors originally extended onto the bottom of the side windows, and access through them required a removable steering wheel.

=== 1952 ===
The 300 SL&#x27;s first race was the 1952 Mille Miglia. The race was from Brescia to Rome and back, pitting Karl Kling&#x27;s 300 SL against Giovanni Bracco&#x27;s new 3-liter V-12 Ferrari. Bracco won, besting the second place Mercedes by four minutes and 32 seconds. Rudolf Caracciola placed fourth.

Two weeks after the Mille Miglia, the original four cars raced at Bern before the Grand Prix. Concerned that Le Mans officials would not accept the gullwing-door design, Daimler-Benz revised the door down into the side of the body. Rear-brake locking was a continuing problem for the 300 SL; Caracciola&#x27;s coupé hit a tree head-on, and he did not race again. Kling, Hermann Lang and Fritz Riess finished first, second and third when the 4.1-liter Ferrari broke down at the start.

Three new cars were built for the 24 Hours of Le Mans race in June. The engines were detuned for the long race to 166 bhp, and the fuel-tank filler rose above the rear window. The team brought an experimental spare car with a rooftop air brake which folded flat until the driver activated it. The unusual brake design unnerved the other drivers. The brake was effective; at 100 mph it could exert a deceleration of up to 0.2 g, but it also weakened the supporting pylons. The cars used more tires than expected, and Kling and Hans Klenk were forced out of the race by a generator failure. Lang and Riess won the race with an average speed of , and Theo Helfrich and Helmut Niedermayr placed second.

The Nürburgring race on August 2 was held on a challenging track. The competition shifted to Jaguar and Alfa Romeo. Nürburgring required a light, powerful car; aerodynamics were less critical, so the top of the coupé was removed (creating a 300 SL roadster with the rear deck and the passenger&#x27;s side covered by an aluminum cover). All four cars raced at Nürburgring in unsupercharged form after trials indicated no benefit with a supercharged engine, which was no faster than the standard 300 SL. The team concluded that the car&#x27;s relatively-crude swing-axle rear suspension was already at its limit in transmitting power to the road, and the engine was less durable. Lang won the race, with Kling and Riess finishing second and third. This was the official end of the company&#x27;s efforts with the 300 SL, it felt that it had done all it could with the six-cylinder racers and would focus on the Grand Prix.

For a final outing, the company (pressured by the Daimler-Benz representative in Mexico City) sent Mexico two -ton trucks and 35 people to compete in the third Carrera Panamericana. Two 300 SL coupés and two roadsters were updated with right-side exhaust and new window molding. Since there was no three-liter class, the cylinder displacement was increased to 3.1 liters to provide 177 bhp. Continental did not have the time (or expertise) to make special tires for the event, so the company sent 300 tires of different types. Lang hit a dog, and Kling struck a buzzard in the early stages at a speed of . The 300 SLs did better later, overtaking the lead Ferrari driven by Bracco. Kling and Klenk finished first, ahead of Lang and Erwin Grupp. A 1-2-3 finish might have been the final result, but American John Fitch was disqualified for allowing a mechanic to touch his car on the next-to-last day.

The race team prepared a new version of the 300 SL for the 1953 season; the 300 SLK would be lighter, with a shorter wheelbase, larger wheels, fuel injection, and better brakes. After Mercedes prioritized its efforts on a new Grand Prix car, however, the 300 SLK was canceled.

=== Mid-1950s ===
Werner Engel won the 1955 European Rally Championship in a 300 SL. Stirling Moss won the overall title at the 1955 Mille Miglia in a 300 SLR racing car, and John Fitch won his class in a production 300 SL coupé. The marathon Liege-Rome-Liege rally was won in 1955 by Olivier Gendebien, and in 1956 by Willy Mairesse. A 300 SL won the Sports Car Club of America Class D championship from 1955 to 1957.

===Racing roadster===

Although roadsters were made for touring, Daimler-Benz marketed its roadster by racing on American tracks. Since production began, the Sports Car Club of America could not admit the roadster as a standard model for the 1957 season; it would have to compete in the Class D sports-racing car class with other three-liter cars such as the Maserati 300S, Ferrari Monza, and Aston Martin DB3S. The O&#x27;Shea-Tilp team used a lightened roadster with drilled front coil-spring mounts, no fan, a welded sheet-aluminum inlet manifold, and twin exhaust-pipe outlets. The roadster (sometimes known as the SLS) won the 1957 Class D Sports championship with triple the points of its nearest competitor, Carroll Shelby&#x27;s Maserati.

=== 1957present ===
Horácio Macedo finished second in the 1960 Rali Vinho da Madeira. Former Gull Wing Group International president Bob Sirna set a Bonneville Speedway F/GT three-liter sports-car speed record of in a modified coupé in 2016.

==Reception and sales==
Sales quintupled in the model&#x27;s second year but dropped off over the next three years. Roadster sales were initially high before leveling off to about 200 a year. Initially, the model was distributed only by Max Hoffman, later on by the Studebaker-Packard Corporation.

=== Production numbers ===
==Legacy==
Building on the 1954 debut of the 300 SL, a less-expensive, 1.9-liter roadster was introduced the following year as the 190 SL. The latter was succeeded by the then only SL in the Mercedes line, the 230 SL, in 1963, produced in increasing displacement and cost up to a 280 SL through 1971. Subsequent SL generations include the R107 (variously produced in models and displacements from 280 SL to 560 SL from 1971 to 1989) and the R129 (likewise, in 280 SL through 600 SL from 1989 to 2001).

The two generations of the SL that have followed are grand tourers available as coupe convertibles.

The gullwing-door V8 SLS AMG debuted in 2009 as the spiritual successor of the original 300 SL coupé. Produced through the end of 2014, it was replaced by the AMG GT, with traditional doors. 

Mercedes-Benz 300 SL owners are supported by Gull Wing Group International, which began in 1961.

==References==
===Notes===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q745023" start="4" end="24" title="Mercedes-Benz 300 SL" label="Mercedes-Benz 300 SL"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="92" end="105" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124439" start="129" end="139" title="Gull-wing door" label="gullwinged"/>
<link wikidata="Q213853" start="140" end="145" title="Coupe" label="coupé"/>
<link wikidata="Q828170" start="173" end="181" title="Roadster (automobile)" label="roadster"/>
<link wikidata="Q750076" start="256" end="260" title="Mercedes-Benz W194" label="W194"/>
<link wikidata="Q308881" start="304" end="318" title="fuel injection" label="fuel injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163122" start="391" end="408" title="Overhead camshaft engine" label="overhead camshaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794865" start="1027" end="1038" title="Max Hoffman" label="Max Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q750076" start="1445" end="1463" title="Mercedes-Benz W194" label="Mercedes-Benz W194"/>
<link wikidata="Q23637376" start="1529" end="1533" title="Mercedes-Benz M186 engine" label="M186"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195076" start="1573" end="1597" title="Mercedes-Benz W186" label="300 &amp;quot;Adenauer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q556323" start="1629" end="1634" title="Mercedes-Benz W188" label="300 S"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="1728" end="1735" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q30055" start="1740" end="1746" title="Jaguar Cars" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q308881" start="1964" end="1978" title="fuel injection" label="fuel injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q129261" start="2077" end="2085" title="Elektron (alloy)" label="Elektron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="2229" end="2240" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="2431" end="2441" title="Formula One" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794865" start="2582" end="2593" title="Max Hoffman" label="Max Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="2632" end="2641" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q964426" start="2836" end="2868" title="New York International Auto Show" label="New York International Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2884" end="2893" title="International Motor Show Germany#History" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q684911" start="2897" end="2903" title="Geneva Motor Show" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511468" start="3004" end="3024" title="Mercedes-Benz 190 SL" label="Mercedes-Benz 190 SL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019" start="3217" end="3229" title="Sindelfingen" label="Sindelfingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467696" start="4089" end="4115" title="Sports Car Club of America" label="Sports Car Club of America"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4172" end="4181" title="SCCA National Sports Car Championship#Production classes (1954–1965)" label="dominated"/>
<link wikidata="Q578444" start="5012" end="5025" title="space frame" label="tubular frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124439" start="6915" end="6928" title="gullwing door" label="gullwing door"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7151" end="7169" title="Mercedes-Benz M186 engine#M198" label="Mercedes-Benz M198"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163122" start="7195" end="7207" title="Overhead camshaft engine" label="overhead cam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148385" start="7208" end="7220" title="straight-six engine" label="straight six"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7252" end="7256" title="Mercedes-Benz M194 engine#M198" label="M194"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195076" start="7351" end="7354" title="Mercedes-Benz W186" label="300"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402386" start="7390" end="7401" title="touring car" label="touring car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758322" start="7667" end="7672" title="Solex Carburetor" label="Solex"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="7673" end="7683" title="carburetor" label="carburetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q234021" start="7692" end="7697" title="Robert Bosch GmbH" label="Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7698" end="7723" title="Manifold injection#Mechanical controlling" label="mechanical fuel-injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q779325" start="7871" end="7879" title="dry sump" label="dry sump"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980103" start="8401" end="8410" title="Sand casting" label="sand-cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q194302" start="8504" end="8510" title="clutch" label="clutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q578444" start="10299" end="10312" title="space frame" label="tubular frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q91202" start="10349" end="10365" title="Rudolf Uhlenhaut" label="Rudolf Uhlenhaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310203" start="11224" end="11246" title="independent suspension" label="independent suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076192" start="11377" end="11393" title="double wishbone suspension" label="double wishbones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175877" start="11395" end="11406" title="coil spring" label="coil spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500099" start="11453" end="11474" title="anti-roll bar" label="torsion anti-roll bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309241" start="11502" end="11512" title="swing axle" label="swing axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193137" start="11571" end="11583" title="Differential (mechanical device)" label="differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756174" start="11730" end="11736" title="Camber angle" label="camber"/>
<link wikidata="Q854852" start="11861" end="11871" title="drum brake" label="drum brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q908409" start="11897" end="11910" title="brake booster" label="brake booster"/>
<link wikidata="Q568968" start="11980" end="11995" title="intake manifold" label="intake manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q755174" start="12299" end="12309" title="disc brake" label="disc brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q448617" start="12454" end="12459" title="Rudge-Whitworth" label="Rudge"/>
<link wikidata="Q78697" start="14847" end="14862" title="Alfred Neubauer" label="Alfred Neubauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="14968" end="14978" title="Grand Prix motor racing" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="15017" end="15028" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="15126" end="15149" title="Fédération Internationale de l&amp;#x27;Automobile" label="FIA sporting commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935482" start="15469" end="15486" title="Mille Miglia" label="1952 Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221" start="15506" end="15513" title="Brescia" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q63713" start="15540" end="15550" title="Karl Kling" label="Karl Kling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389834" start="15573" end="15588" title="Giovanni Bracco" label="Giovanni Bracco"/>
<link wikidata="Q57365" start="15700" end="15717" title="Rudolf Caracciola" label="Rudolf Caracciola"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="15800" end="15804" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513515" start="15843" end="15850" title="Le Mans Prototype" label="Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q60409" start="16104" end="16116" title="Hermann Lang" label="Hermann Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q60925" start="16121" end="16132" title="Fritz Riess" label="Fritz Riess"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="16253" end="16272" title="24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16337" end="16340" title="Horsepower#Brake horsepower" label="bhp"/>
<link wikidata="Q62235" start="16745" end="16755" title="Hans Klenk" label="Hans Klenk"/>
<link wikidata="Q61295" start="16867" end="16880" title="Theo Helfrich" label="Theo Helfrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q61287" start="16885" end="16902" title="Helmut Niedermayr" label="Helmut Niedermayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q152207" start="16923" end="16939" title="Nürburgring" label="Nürburgring race"/>
<link wikidata="Q30055" start="17012" end="17018" title="Jaguar Cars" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q26921" start="17023" end="17033" title="Alfa Romeo" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044949" start="18002" end="18022" title="Carrera Panamericana" label="Carrera Panamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q163241" start="18233" end="18244" title="Continental AG" label="Continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q172492" start="18649" end="18659" title="John Fitch (driver)" label="John Fitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q303871" start="19066" end="19093" title="European Rally Championship" label="European Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q172728" start="19107" end="19120" title="Stirling Moss" label="Stirling Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463900" start="19150" end="19167" title="1955 Mille Miglia" label="1955 Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303469" start="19173" end="19180" title="Mercedes-Benz 300 SLR" label="300 SLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q172492" start="19197" end="19207" title="John Fitch (racing driver)" label="John Fitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257373" start="19265" end="19281" title="Liege-Rome-Liege" label="Liege-Rome-Liege"/>
<link wikidata="Q172142" start="19307" end="19324" title="Olivier Gendebien" label="Olivier Gendebien"/>
<link wikidata="Q171881" start="19341" end="19355" title="Willy Mairesse" label="Willy Mairesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467696" start="19374" end="19400" title="Sports Car Club of America" label="Sports Car Club of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850744" start="19801" end="19814" title="Maserati 300S" label="Maserati 300S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126922" start="19816" end="19829" title="Ferrari Monza" label="Ferrari Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810992" start="19835" end="19852" title="Aston Martin DB3S" label="Aston Martin DB3S"/>
<link wikidata="Q354043" start="20157" end="20187" title="Carroll Shelby" label="Carroll Shelby&amp;#x27;s Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q5907096" start="20210" end="20224" title="Horácio Macedo (rally driver)" label="Horácio Macedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715766" start="20253" end="20274" title="Rali Vinho da Madeira" label="Rali Vinho da Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087224" start="20283" end="20312" title="Gull Wing Group International" label="Gull Wing Group International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642181" start="20339" end="20358" title="Bonneville Speedway" label="Bonneville Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794865" start="20670" end="20681" title="Max Hoffman" label="Max Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q750490" start="20699" end="20729" title="Studebaker-Packard Corporation" label="Studebaker-Packard Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511468" start="20890" end="20896" title="Mercedes-Benz 190 SL" label="190 SL"/>
<link wikidata="Q890349" start="20969" end="20975" title="Mercedes-Benz W113" label="230 SL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21039" end="21045" title="Mercedes-Benz W113#280 SL (1967–1971)" label="280 SL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547602" start="21098" end="21102" title="Mercedes-Benz R107 and C107" label="R107"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921308" start="21200" end="21204" title="Mercedes-Benz R129" label="R129"/>
<link wikidata="Q744620" start="21315" end="21328" title="grand tourers" label="grand tourers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779003" start="21342" end="21360" title="Retractable hardtop" label="coupe convertibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q476636" start="21384" end="21391" title="Mercedes-Benz SLS AMG" label="SLS AMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011551" start="21522" end="21528" title="AMG GT" label="AMG GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087224" start="21601" end="21630" title="Gull Wing Group International" label="Gull Wing Group International"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="611006" wikidata="Q213611" url="?curid=611006" title="Franz Waxman">
<text>Franz Waxman (né Wachsmann; December 24, 1906February 24, 1967) was a German-born composer and conductor of Jewish descent, known primarily for his work in the film music genre. His film scores include &quot;Bride of Frankenstein&quot;, &quot;Rebecca&quot;, &quot;Sunset Boulevard&quot;, &quot;A Place in the Sun&quot;, &quot;Stalag 17&quot;, &quot;Rear Window&quot;, &quot;Peyton Place&quot;, &quot;The Nun&#x27;s Story&quot;, and &quot;Taras Bulba&quot;. He received twelve Academy Award nominations, and won two Oscars in consecutive years (for &quot;Sunset Boulevard&quot; and &quot;A Place in the Sun&quot;). He also received a Golden Globe Award for the former film. Bernard Herrmann said that the score for &quot;Taras Bulba&quot; was &quot;the score of a lifetime.&quot;

He also composed concert works, including the oratorio &quot;Joshua&quot; (1959), and &quot;The Song of Terezín&quot; (1964–65), a work for orchestra, chorus, and children&#x27;s chorus based upon poetry written by children in the Theresienstadt concentration camp during World War II. Waxman also founded the Los Angeles Music Festival in 1947 with which he conducted a number of West Coast premieres by fellow film composers, and concert composers alike.

== Biography ==

=== Early life (1906–1934) ===
Waxman was born Franz Wachsmann () in Königshütte to Jewish parents in the German Empire&#x27;s Prussian Province of Silesia (now Chorzów, Poland). At the age of three Waxman suffered a serious eye injury involving boiling water tipped from a stove, which left his vision permanently impaired.

In 1923, at age 16, Waxman enrolled in the Dresden Music Academy and studied composition and conducting. Waxman lived from the money he made playing popular music and managed to put himself through school. While working as a pianist with the Weintraub Syncopators, a dance band, Waxman met Frederick Hollander, who eventually introduced Waxman to the eminent conductor Bruno Walter.

Waxman worked as an orchestrator for the German film industry, including on Hollander&#x27;s score for &quot;The Blue Angel&quot; (1930). One of his first dramatic scores was for the film &quot;Liliom&quot; (1934). That year Waxman suffered a severe beating by Nazi sympathizers in Berlin that led him to leave Germany and move with his wife first to Paris, and soon after to Hollywood.

=== Film music and the Los Angeles Music Festival (1935–1949) ===

In Hollywood, Waxman met James Whale, who had been highly impressed by Waxman&#x27;s score for &quot;Liliom&quot;. The success of his score for Whale&#x27;s &quot;Bride of Frankenstein&quot; (1935) led to the young composer&#x27;s appointment as Head of Music at Universal Studios. Waxman, however, was more interested in composition than musical direction for film, and in 1936 he left Universal to become a composer at MGM. Waxman scored a number of pictures during the next few years, but the score for Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s &quot;Rebecca&quot; (1940) made his name. Waxman was frequently called to work on scores of horror or suspense films, and &quot;Rebecca&quot; was the culmination of the genre for Waxman.

&quot;Rebecca&quot; was Hitchcock&#x27;s first Hollywood film as part of his contract with David O. Selznick, and thus it was the first time he was allowed a full symphonic score. Selznick financed the film at the same time as he was making &quot;Gone With the Wind&quot;. Waxman&#x27;s score for &quot;Rebecca&quot; is eerie and ethereal, often setting the mood and as Jack Sullivan put it, becoming a &quot;soundboard for the subconscious.&quot;

In 1943, Waxman left MGM and moved to Warner Bros., where he worked alongside such great film composers as Max Steiner and Erich Wolfgang Korngold. A period of extended composition followed, including such films as &quot;Mr. Skeffington&quot; (1944) and &quot;Objective, Burma!&quot; (1945). A climactic scene in &quot;Objective, Burma!&quot; was scored fugally, and this would become one of Waxman&#x27;s trademarks, returning in &quot;The Spirit of St. Louis&quot; (1957) and &quot;Taras Bulba&quot; (1962).

In 1947, Waxman formed the Los Angeles Music Festival, for which he served as music director and conductor for the rest of his life. Waxman&#x27;s goal with the LA Music Festival was to bring the thriving town to &quot;European cultural standards&quot;, according to Tony Thomas. In addition to performing the work of great masters such as Stravinsky, he also collaborated with his colleagues, such as Miklós Rózsa, conducting his Violin Concerto.

=== Post-war film scores (1947–1959) ===
By 1947, Waxman had left Warner Bros., to become a freelance film composer, taking only the jobs he wanted rather than being appointed by the studio. Waxman scored the film &quot;Sorry, Wrong Number&quot; (1948), which climaxes with the use of a passacaglia, highlighting Waxman&#x27;s highly inventive use of unusual musical forms in film. Waxman had used classical forms before: the climactic &quot;Creation&quot; cue from &quot;The Bride of Frankenstein&quot; (1935), as Christopher Palmer expresses it, &quot;is in effect a fantasia on one note.&quot;

His work on &quot;Sunset Boulevard&quot; (1950) led to an Academy Award. The score is fast-paced and powerful, utilizing various techniques to highlight the insanity of Norma Desmond, including low pulsing notes (first heard in &quot;The Bride of Frankenstein&quot;) and frequent trills. According to Mervyn Cooke, Richard Strauss&#x27;s opera &quot;Salome&quot; was the inspiration for the wild trills heard during Desmond&#x27;s insane final performance.

Waxman received a second consecutive Oscar for &quot;A Place in the Sun&quot; (1951). However, while awards for film music highlighted the beginning of the 1950s, Waxman now began to write serious works for the concert hall. The Sinfonietta for Strings and Timpani came in 1955 and 1959 saw the completion of Waxman&#x27;s oratorio &quot;Joshua&quot;. Composed to commemorate the death of Waxman&#x27;s wife, &quot;Joshua&quot; with its strong Hebrew influences and extensive use of form is a powerful example of Waxman&#x27;s compositional powers by the end of the 1950s.

=== Later life (1960–1967) ===

Waxman&#x27;s later life saw continuing growth of his reputation as a composer. Christopher Palmer writes that at the time of his death in 1967, &quot;Waxman was at the zenith of his powers.&quot; Waxman&#x27;s output in the 1960s was perhaps more subdued than that which came before it, however he did write &quot;Taras Bulba&quot; in 1962. Waxman worked on several television shows, including &quot;Gunsmoke&quot;, in 1966.

&quot;The Song of Terezín&quot; (1964–65) was based upon poetry by children trapped in the Nazi&#x27;s Theresienstadt concentration camp. Perhaps Waxman&#x27;s deep spiritual connection to the subject came from his own encounters with Nazism on a Berlin street in 1934, but whatever the reason for Waxman&#x27;s deep commitment to the subject, &quot;The Song of Terezín&quot; stands as the exemplary work of the composer&#x27;s life. The work is composed for mixed chorus, children&#x27;s chorus, soprano soloist, and orchestra.

He had a son, John Waxman; John had two children, Josh and Alyce Waxman; and Josh had three children, Andrew, Christopher, and Grace Waxman.

Waxman died from cancer in February 1967, two months after his sixtieth birthday. His legacy contains over 150 film scores and an abundant collection of concert works.

=== Legacy ===
Some of Waxman&#x27;s music has been featured on commercial recordings, both on LP and CD. Charles Gerhardt and the National Philharmonic Orchestra played highlights from various Waxman scores for an RCA Victor recording in the early 1970s that utilized Dolby surround sound. Twenty years later, Australian composer and conductor Richard Mills (b. 1949) recorded an anthology of film suites with the Queensland Symphony for the record label Varèse-Sarabande (VSD5242/5257/5480/5713) which were (as the Gerhardt above) produced by George Korngold, son of Erich Wolfgang Korngold, a colleague of Waxman, as well as another pioneer of the &quot;Hollywood sound&quot;. The music for &quot;Taras Bulba&quot; has been recorded by the [City of Prague Philharmonic/Nic Raine, on 2 cd Tadlow013-2]

The American Film Institute ranked Waxman&#x27;s score for &quot;Sunset Boulevard&quot; No. 16 on their list of the greatest film scores. His scores for the following films were also nominated for the list:
*&quot;Bride of Frankenstein&quot; (1935)
*&quot;Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde&quot; (1941)
*&quot;The Nun&#x27;s Story&quot; (1959)
*&quot;Peyton Place&quot; (1957)
*&quot;The Philadelphia Story&quot; (1940)
*&quot;A Place in the Sun&quot; (1951)
*&quot;Rebecca&quot; (1940)
*&quot;Sayonara&quot; (1957)
*&quot;The Spirit of St. Louis&quot; (1957)
*&quot;Taras Bulba&quot; (1962)

== Filmography ==

* &quot;Burglars&quot; (1930)
* &quot;The Man in Search of His Murderer&quot; (1931)
* &quot;Caught in the Act&quot; (1931)
* &quot;Scampolo&quot; (1932)
* &quot;The First Right of the Child&quot; (1932)
* &quot;The Empress and I&quot; (1933)
* &quot;The Only Girl&quot; (1933)
* &quot;Greetings and Kisses, Veronika&quot; (1933)
* &quot;Liliom&quot; (1934)
* &quot;Mauvaise Graine&quot; (1934)
* &quot;The Crisis is Over&quot; (1934)
* &quot;Dédé&quot; (1935)
* &quot;Bride of Frankenstein&quot; (1935)
* &quot;Flash Gordon&quot; (serial, stock music from &quot;Bride of Frankenstein&quot;, 1936)
*&quot;Fury&quot; (1936)
*&quot;The Invisible Ray&quot; (1936)
*&quot;The Devil-Doll&quot; (1936)
*&quot;Captains Courageous&quot; (1937)
* &quot;Flash Gordon&#x27;s Trip to Mars&quot; (serial, stock music from &quot;Bride of Frankenstein&quot;, 1938)
*&quot;A Christmas Carol&quot; (1938)
* &quot;The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn&quot; (1939)
* &quot;The Young in Heart&quot; (1938, 2 Academy Award nominations)
* &quot;On Borrowed Time&quot; (1939)
* &quot;Lady of the Tropics&quot; (1939)
* &quot;Flash Gordon Conquers the Universe&quot; (serial, stock music from &quot;Bride of Frankenstein&quot;, 1940)
* &quot;Strange Cargo&quot; (1940)
*&quot;Rebecca&quot; (1940, Academy Award nomination)
*&quot;Boom Town&quot; (1940)
*&quot;The Philadelphia Story&quot; (1940)
*&quot;Suspicion&quot; (1941, Academy Award nomination)
*&quot;Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde&quot; (1941, Academy Award nomination)
*&quot;Woman of the Year&quot; (1942)
*&quot;Her Cardboard Lover&quot; (1942)
*&quot;Edge of Darkness&quot; (1943)
*&quot;Destination Tokyo&quot; (1943)
*&quot;Air Force&quot; (1943)
*&quot;To Have and Have Not&quot; (1944, uncredited)
*&quot;Mr. Skeffington&quot; (1944)
*&quot;Objective, Burma!&quot; (1945, Academy Award nomination)
*&quot;Hotel Berlin&quot; (1945)
*&quot;Humoresque&quot; (1946, Academy Award nomination)
*&quot;Possessed&quot; (1947)
*&quot;That Hagen Girl&quot; (1947)
*&quot;Cry Wolf&quot; (1947)
*&quot;The Paradine Case&quot; (1947)
*&quot;Sorry, Wrong Number&quot; (1948)
*&quot;Alias Nick Beal&quot; (1949)
*&quot;Night Unto Night&quot; (1949)
*&quot;Johnny Holiday&quot; (1949)
*&quot;Sunset Boulevard&quot; (1950) (Academy Award)
*&quot;The Furies&quot; (1950)
*&quot;Night and the City&quot; (1950)
*&quot;Dark City&quot; (1950)
*&quot;The Blue Veil&quot; (1951)
*&quot;He Ran All the Way&quot; (1951)
*&quot;Anne of the Indies&quot; (1951)
*&quot;A Place in the Sun&quot; (1951) (Academy Award)
*&quot;Red Mountain&quot; (1951)
*&quot;Decision Before Dawn&quot; (1951)
*&quot;Phone Call from a Stranger&quot; (1952)
*&quot;Come Back, Little Sheba&quot; (1952)
*&quot;My Cousin Rachel&quot; (1952)
*&quot;Botany Bay&quot; (1953)
*&quot;Stalag 17&quot; (1953)
*&quot;Demetrius and the Gladiators&quot; (1954)
* &quot;Elephant Walk&quot; (1954)
*&quot;Prince Valiant&quot; (1954)
*&quot;Rear Window&quot; (1954)
*&quot;The Silver Chalice&quot; (1954) (Academy Award nomination)
*&quot;Mister Roberts&quot; (1955)
*&quot;Miracle in the Rain&quot; (1956)
*&quot;Peyton Place&quot; (1957)
*&quot;Sayonara&quot; (1957)
*&quot;The Spirit of St. Louis&quot; (1957)
*&quot;Run Silent, Run Deep&quot; (1958)
*&quot;The Nun&#x27;s Story&quot; (1959) (Academy Award nomination)
*&quot;Sunrise at Campobello&quot; (1960)
*&quot;Cimarron&quot; (1960)
*&quot;Return to Peyton Place&quot; (1961)
*&quot;The Big Bankroll&quot; (1961)
*&quot;My Geisha&quot; (1962)
*&quot;Hemingway&#x27;s Adventures of a Young Man&quot; (1962)
*&quot;Taras Bulba&quot; (1962, Academy Award nomination)
*&quot;Lost Command&quot; (1966)
*&quot;The Raid&quot; (1966) Gunsmoke episodes 11.18 &amp; 11.19
== Selected concert works ==
*&quot;Carmen Fantasie&quot;, (1946) for violin and orchestra
*&quot;Tristan and Isolde Fantasy&quot;, for violin, piano and orchestra
*&quot;Four Scenes from Childhood&quot; (1948), for violin and piano (written for Jascha Heifetz on the occasion of the birth of his son Jay)
*&quot;Auld Lang Syne Variations&quot; (1947), for violin and chamber ensemble. Movements: &quot;Eine kleine Nichtmusik,&quot; &quot;Moonlight Concerto,&quot; &quot;Chaconne a son gout,&quot; and &quot;Hommage to Shostakofiev.&quot;
*&quot;The Song of Terezín&quot; (1964–65), based on poems by children of Theresienstadt concentration camp
*&quot;Joshua&quot; (1959), Oratorio

== References ==
==External links==
*Official website
*Franz Waxman Papers at Syracuse University Library
*Franz Waxman Remembered by David Raksin (archived)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213611" start="0" end="12" title="Franz Waxman" label="Franz Waxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q213611" start="17" end="26" title="Franz Waxman" label="Wachsmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="160" end="170" title="film music" label="film music"/>
<link wikidata="Q875904" start="208" end="229" title="Bride of Frankenstein" label="Bride of Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q204212" start="243" end="250" title="Rebecca (1940 film)" label="Rebecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q193570" start="264" end="280" title="Sunset Boulevard (film)" label="Sunset Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q733627" start="294" end="312" title="A Place in the Sun (1951 film)" label="A Place in the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356753" start="326" end="335" title="Stalag 17" label="Stalag 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q34414" start="349" end="360" title="Rear Window" label="Rear Window"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532392" start="374" end="386" title="Peyton Place (film)" label="Peyton Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q781608" start="400" end="420" title="The Nun&amp;#x27;s Story (film)" label="The Nun&amp;#x27;s Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q498150" start="438" end="449" title="Taras Bulba (1962 film)" label="Taras Bulba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422140" start="633" end="651" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q296804" start="673" end="689" title="Bernard Herrmann" label="Bernard Herrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q15111616" start="1011" end="1044" title="Theresienstadt concentration camp" label="Theresienstadt concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q104302" start="1324" end="1335" title="Königshütte (Silesia)" label="Königshütte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1339" end="1345" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="1361" end="1374" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="1382" end="1390" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q675032" start="1391" end="1410" title="Province of Silesia" label="Province of Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1624" end="1645" title="Dresden Music Academy" label="Dresden Music Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213900" start="1871" end="1890" title="Frederick Hollander" label="Frederick Hollander"/>
<link wikidata="Q156910" start="1950" end="1962" title="Bruno Walter" label="Bruno Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q158047" start="2074" end="2088" title="The Blue Angel" label="The Blue Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q646400" start="2159" end="2165" title="Liliom (1934 film)" label="Liliom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="2226" end="2230" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="2247" end="2253" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q381831" start="2445" end="2456" title="James Whale" label="James Whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q875904" start="2583" end="2604" title="Bride of Frankenstein" label="Bride of Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="2683" end="2700" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="2841" end="2844" title="MGM" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="2926" end="2942" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q204212" start="2956" end="2963" title="Rebecca (1940 film)" label="Rebecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q72291" start="3229" end="3246" title="David O. Selznick" label="David O. Selznick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875" start="3385" end="3403" title="Gone With the Wind (film)" label="Gone With the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="3625" end="3637" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q350704" start="3694" end="3705" title="Max Steiner" label="Max Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q313371" start="3710" end="3733" title="Erich Wolfgang Korngold" label="Erich Wolfgang Korngold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169497" start="3808" end="3823" title="Mr. Skeffington" label="Mr. Skeffington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194211" start="3847" end="3864" title="Objective, Burma!" label="Objective, Burma!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676240" start="4024" end="4047" title="The Spirit of St. Louis (film)" label="The Spirit of St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q498150" start="4071" end="4082" title="Taras Bulba (1962 film)" label="Taras Bulba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="4438" end="4448" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q319396" start="4500" end="4512" title="Miklós Rózsa" label="Miklós Rózsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262450" start="4767" end="4786" title="Sorry, Wrong Number" label="Sorry, Wrong Number"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113023" start="5062" end="5080" title="Christopher Palmer" label="Christopher Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193570" start="5163" end="5179" title="Sunset Boulevard (film)" label="Sunset Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="5203" end="5216" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="5460" end="5475" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q723407" start="5495" end="5501" title="Salome (opera)" label="Salome"/>
<link wikidata="Q733627" start="5656" end="5674" title="A Place in the Sun (1951 film)" label="A Place in the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113023" start="6289" end="6307" title="Christopher Palmer" label="Christopher Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641" start="6610" end="6618" title="Gunsmoke" label="Gunsmoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15111616" start="6739" end="6772" title="Theresienstadt concentration camp" label="Theresienstadt concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q841983" start="7572" end="7574" title="Long Playing" label="LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064527" start="7583" end="7599" title="Charles Gerhardt (conductor)" label="Charles Gerhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394269" start="7608" end="7639" title="National Philharmonic Orchestra" label="National Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="7692" end="7702" title="RCA Victor" label="RCA Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q261288" start="7746" end="7751" title="Dolby" label="Dolby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327820" start="7822" end="7835" title="Richard Mills (composer)" label="Richard Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q313371" start="8046" end="8069" title="Erich Wolfgang Korngold" label="Erich Wolfgang Korngold"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="8286" end="8309" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641239" start="8331" end="8369" title="Sunset Boulevard (film score)" label="score for &amp;quot;Sunset Boulevard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454952" start="8380" end="8418" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years of Film Scores" label="their list of the greatest film scores"/>
<link wikidata="Q875904" start="8496" end="8517" title="Bride of Frankenstein" label="Bride of Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q718917" start="8538" end="8561" title="Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (1941 film)" label="Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q781608" start="8582" end="8602" title="The Nun&amp;#x27;s Story (film)" label="The Nun&amp;#x27;s Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532392" start="8623" end="8635" title="Peyton Place (film)" label="Peyton Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q498822" start="8656" end="8678" title="The Philadelphia Story (film)" label="The Philadelphia Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q733627" start="8699" end="8717" title="A Place in the Sun (1951 film)" label="A Place in the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q204212" start="8738" end="8745" title="Rebecca (1940 film)" label="Rebecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q614864" start="8766" end="8774" title="Sayonara" label="Sayonara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676240" start="8795" end="8818" title="The Spirit of St. Louis (film)" label="The Spirit of St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q498150" start="8839" end="8850" title="Taras Bulba (1962 film)" label="Taras Bulba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306159" start="8892" end="8900" title="Burglars (film)" label="Burglars"/>
<link wikidata="Q822599" start="8922" end="8955" title="The Man in Search of His Murderer" label="The Man in Search of His Murderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41799734" start="8977" end="8994" title="Caught in the Act (1931 film)" label="Caught in the Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314270" start="9016" end="9024" title="Scampolo (1932 film)" label="Scampolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171105" start="9046" end="9074" title="The First Right of the Child" label="The First Right of the Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q998712" start="9096" end="9113" title="The Empress and I" label="The Empress and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590762" start="9135" end="9148" title="The Only Girl (film)" label="The Only Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3945870" start="9170" end="9200" title="Greetings and Kisses, Veronika" label="Greetings and Kisses, Veronika"/>
<link wikidata="Q646400" start="9222" end="9228" title="Liliom (1934 film)" label="Liliom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736777" start="9250" end="9265" title="Mauvaise Graine" label="Mauvaise Graine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406229" start="9287" end="9305" title="The Crisis is Over" label="The Crisis is Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043026" start="9327" end="9331" title="Dédé (1935 film)" label="Dédé"/>
<link wikidata="Q875904" start="9353" end="9374" title="Bride of Frankenstein" label="Bride of Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667789" start="9396" end="9408" title="Flash Gordon (serial)" label="Flash Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q884223" start="9489" end="9493" title="Fury (1936 film)" label="Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q451717" start="9514" end="9531" title="The Invisible Ray (1936 film)" label="The Invisible Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141261" start="9552" end="9566" title="The Devil-Doll" label="The Devil-Doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q241876" start="9587" end="9606" title="Captains Courageous (1937 film)" label="Captains Courageous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746401" start="9628" end="9660" title="Flash Gordon&amp;#x27;s Trip to Mars" label="Flash Gordon&amp;#x27;s Trip to Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q181248" start="9741" end="9758" title="A Christmas Carol (1938 film)" label="A Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472318" start="9780" end="9814" title="The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn (1939 film)" label="The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162433" start="9836" end="9854" title="The Young in Heart" label="The Young in Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126734" start="9905" end="9921" title="On Borrowed Time" label="On Borrowed Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q931735" start="9943" end="9962" title="Lady of the Tropics" label="Lady of the Tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746399" start="9984" end="10018" title="Flash Gordon Conquers the Universe" label="Flash Gordon Conquers the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219922" start="10100" end="10113" title="Strange Cargo (1940 film)" label="Strange Cargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q204212" start="10134" end="10141" title="Rebecca (1940 film)" label="Rebecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193014" start="10188" end="10197" title="Boom Town (film)" label="Boom Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q498822" start="10218" end="10240" title="The Philadelphia Story (film)" label="The Philadelphia Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509470" start="10261" end="10270" title="Suspicion (1941 film)" label="Suspicion"/>
<link wikidata="Q718917" start="10317" end="10340" title="Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (1941 film)" label="Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212587" start="10387" end="10404" title="Woman of the Year" label="Woman of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052335" start="10425" end="10444" title="Her Cardboard Lover" label="Her Cardboard Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q760014" start="10465" end="10481" title="Edge of Darkness (1943 film)" label="Edge of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q830585" start="10502" end="10519" title="Destination Tokyo" label="Destination Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425082" start="10540" end="10549" title="Air Force (film)" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q538390" start="10570" end="10590" title="To Have and Have Not" label="To Have and Have Not"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169497" start="10623" end="10638" title="Mr. Skeffington" label="Mr. Skeffington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194211" start="10659" end="10676" title="Objective, Burma!" label="Objective, Burma!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5911256" start="10723" end="10735" title="Hotel Berlin" label="Hotel Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637200" start="10756" end="10766" title="Humoresque (1946 film)" label="Humoresque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604885" start="10813" end="10822" title="Possessed (1947 film)" label="Possessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070848" start="10843" end="10858" title="That Hagen Girl" label="That Hagen Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224089" start="10879" end="10887" title="Cry Wolf (1947 film)" label="Cry Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q506638" start="10908" end="10925" title="The Paradine Case" label="The Paradine Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262450" start="10946" end="10965" title="Sorry, Wrong Number" label="Sorry, Wrong Number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284362" start="10986" end="11001" title="Alias Nick Beal" label="Alias Nick Beal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126577" start="11022" end="11038" title="Night Unto Night" label="Night Unto Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q11361385" start="11059" end="11073" title="Johnny Holiday (film)" label="Johnny Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641239" start="11094" end="11110" title="Sunset Boulevard (film score)" label="Sunset Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250146" start="11147" end="11157" title="The Furies (1950 film)" label="The Furies"/>
<link wikidata="Q425904" start="11178" end="11196" title="Night and the City" label="Night and the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300273" start="11217" end="11226" title="Dark City (1950 film)" label="Dark City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316133" start="11247" end="11260" title="The Blue Veil (1951 film)" label="The Blue Veil"/>
<link wikidata="Q388311" start="11281" end="11299" title="He Ran All the Way" label="He Ran All the Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215485" start="11320" end="11338" title="Anne of the Indies" label="Anne of the Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q733627" start="11359" end="11377" title="A Place in the Sun (1951 film)" label="A Place in the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823226" start="11414" end="11426" title="Red Mountain (film)" label="Red Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345327" start="11447" end="11467" title="Decision Before Dawn" label="Decision Before Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304513" start="11488" end="11514" title="Phone Call from a Stranger" label="Phone Call from a Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737875" start="11535" end="11558" title="Come Back, Little Sheba (1952 film)" label="Come Back, Little Sheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337495" start="11579" end="11595" title="My Cousin Rachel (1952 film)" label="My Cousin Rachel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948511" start="11616" end="11626" title="Botany Bay (film)" label="Botany Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356753" start="11647" end="11656" title="Stalag 17" label="Stalag 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213081" start="11677" end="11705" title="Demetrius and the Gladiators" label="Demetrius and the Gladiators"/>
<link wikidata="Q166711" start="11727" end="11740" title="Elephant Walk" label="Elephant Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605973" start="11761" end="11775" title="Prince Valiant (1954 film)" label="Prince Valiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q34414" start="11796" end="11807" title="Rear Window" label="Rear Window"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999028" start="11828" end="11846" title="The Silver Chalice (film)" label="The Silver Chalice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621174" start="11894" end="11908" title="Mister Roberts (1955 film)" label="Mister Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q29396523" start="11929" end="11948" title="Miracle in the Rain (film)" label="Miracle in the Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532392" start="11969" end="11981" title="Peyton Place (film)" label="Peyton Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q614864" start="12002" end="12010" title="Sayonara" label="Sayonara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676240" start="12031" end="12054" title="The Spirit of St. Louis (film)" label="The Spirit of St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741380" start="12075" end="12095" title="Run Silent, Run Deep (1958 film)" label="Run Silent, Run Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q781608" start="12116" end="12136" title="The Nun&amp;#x27;s Story (film)" label="The Nun&amp;#x27;s Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569632" start="12184" end="12205" title="Sunrise at Campobello" label="Sunrise at Campobello"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719291" start="12226" end="12234" title="Cimarron (1960 film)" label="Cimarron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610624" start="12255" end="12277" title="Return to Peyton Place (film)" label="Return to Peyton Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q12102311" start="12298" end="12314" title="The Big Bankroll" label="The Big Bankroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788982" start="12335" end="12344" title="My Geisha" label="My Geisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452547" start="12365" end="12407" title="Hemingway&amp;#x27;s Adventures of a Young Man" label="Hemingway&amp;#x27;s Adventures of a Young Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q498150" start="12428" end="12439" title="Taras Bulba (1962 film)" label="Taras Bulba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066531" start="12486" end="12498" title="Lost Command" label="Lost Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641" start="12541" end="12549" title="Gunsmoke" label="Gunsmoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043464" start="12613" end="12628" title="Carmen Fantasie (Waxman)" label="Carmen Fantasie"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="13340" end="13367" title="Syracuse University Library" label="Syracuse University Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176253" start="13396" end="13408" title="David Raksin" label="David Raksin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="611011" wikidata="Q4560903" url="?curid=611011" title="1920 in Greece">
<text>The following lists events that happened during 1920 in Greece.

During 1920, a number of changes took place in Greece. On a regional level, Greece struck several favorable bargains and treaties in the aftermath of World War I through the statesmanlike qualities and the tact of the Greek prime minister, Eleftherios Venizelos.

==Incumbents==
*Monarch: 
**Alexader (until 25 October) 
**Constantine I (starting 19 December)

*Prime Minister: 
**Eleftherios Venizelos (until 17 November) 
**Dimitrios Rallis (starting 17 November)

==First half of 1920==
During the first half of the year Greece was chiefly occupied with establishing its position at Smyrna and in taking over the other territories which had been allotted to it by the Supreme Council. It was decided that the portion of Thrace which had been taken from Bulgaria should be given to Greece, and Greece was authorized to occupy this district at the end of May. Turkish Thrace, including the great town of Adrianople, was also assigned to Greece and was occupied by that country at the end of July. Greece thus extended its dominions to the coast of the Black Sea.

During the summer it was announced that King Alexander had contracted a morganatic marriage with a certain Mlle Manos in the previous November.

==Attempted assassination==
While Venizelos was in Paris in August an attempt was made to assassinate him, and it was reported that the criminals were adherents of the royalist cause. The publication in Athens of the news of the attempted assassination led to outbreaks of serious riots against real and supposed partisans of ex-King Constantine.

==Meeting of parliament==
Fortunately Venizelos was not seriously wounded and he was able to attend the meeting of parliament on September 7. The prime minister received an extremely enthusiastic welcome in the Chamber of Deputies, and a speech of welcome was made by the president of the house, who proposed a resolution proclaiming that the prime minister was the saviour of Greece, and that a permanent memorial should be erected to him in the Chamber. It is worth recording that this resolution was passed unanimously. Venizelos then rose to reply to the president and to thank the Chamber for its welcome, and also to present three treaties to parliament. The treaties in question were that with Turkey, that with the Great Powers relating to the transfer from them to Greece of the portion of Thrace which had been ceded to the Powers by Bulgaria; and, thirdly, one with Italy regarding the Dodecanese. The first two of these treaties at any rate were thoroughly satisfactory to Greece, and were certainly a monument to Venizelos&#x27;s statesmanship. The prime minister said that since the Chamber was to be dissolved within a few days there would not be time for the ratification of these treaties, but this need not be regarded as a serious matter, because so far as the territorial sections of the agreements were concerned, the treaties had already been carried into effect. Venizelos said that so soon as the Chamber was dissolved, martial law and the censorship would be abolished, and the general election would be held in the autumn. Replying to the charges of his opponents, Venizelos said that he would guarantee that the elections would be held under conditions of absolute liberty.

==The Chamber of Deputies==
The last ordinary sitting of the Chamber was on September 23. It is perhaps worth recording here that the Chamber which was now dissolved was that which had been elected in 1915 and had been dissolved by King Constantine in the following year, and had then been recalled by Venizelos in 1917. The issue of the general election was therefore fraught with the greatest possible interest.

In consequence of the peculiar history of the Chamber of Deputies which was being dissolved, the elections would under any circumstances have been of the very greatest importance to the country, but they were rendered even more critical by the tragic event which intervened between the dissolution of parliament and the day of the elections. The event in question was the death of King Alexander.

==The death of the King==
The king&#x27;s death took place under the most tragic and unusual circumstances. On October 2 the king was walking in the grounds of the Royal Gardens behind the Royal Palace, when his pet dog was attacked by a monkey. The king endeavoured to separate the animals, and was himself badly bitten by another monkey. It was at first thought that his wounds were not serious, but blood poison ensued, and it was soon realized that the king&#x27;s condition was critical. The best medical assistance was obtained from Paris, but the efforts of the physicians were unavailing and King Alexander died on October 25.

King Alexander was the second son of ex-King Constantine and ex-Queen Sophie, sister of the ex-Emperor Wilhelm II of Germany. He was proclaimed king of the Greeks in June 1917. He had gained the sympathy of many people, both in Greece and abroad, by his romantic marriage with Mlle Aspasia Manos.

The election campaign was already proceeding when the king died, but the date of the elections was postponed, and Venizelos summoned the Chamber to meet for a special session on October 28. The Chamber duly met on that afternoon, but less than half the deputies were present. The prime minister announced to the deputies that King Alexander had died, and declared that in his opinion the constitutional successor to the throne was the late king&#x27;s younger brother, Prince Paul. The prime minister also announced that the government had sent a message to Prince Paul offering him its sympathy on the death of his elder brother, and informing him of his succession to the Hellenic throne. The government appear to have also intimated to Prince Paul that he should not come to Greece until after the general election had proved whether the existing government enjoyed the confidence of the Greek people. Venizelos said that it was therefore necessary to elect a regent to serve during the interval, and he proposed that Admiral Pavlos Kountouriotis should be elected to that post. The few members of the opposition who were present declared that they considered that the question of the succession could be satisfactorily settled in only one way – by a vote of the entire Greek people. Admiral Kountouriotis was subsequently elected regent by a large majority of the deputies present.

==The funeral of the King==
The funeral of King Alexander took place in the cathedral at Athens. It was, of course, one of the tragedies of the late king&#x27;s position that none of his nearest relatives could be present either during his last illness or at the funeral. Ex-King Constantine, Ex-Queen Sophie, the ex-crown prince, Prince Paul, and the three princesses, were all exiled in Switzerland. The Dowager Queen Olga came to Athens, but did not arrive until after the king&#x27;s death. Madame Manos was, however, constantly with her husband during his last illness. The funeral was attended by the Dowager Queen Olga, Madame Manos, Admiral Kountouriotis, the crown prince of Sweden, and Crown Prince Alexander of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes.

==Declaration by Prince Paul==
The reply of Prince Paul to the message of the Greek government caused considerable perturbation in Greece and to some extent even in Europe generally. The reply was as follows:

&quot;I declare that I do not share the point of view of the Hellenic government that, according to the constitution, I am today called upon to ascend the throne. The throne does not belong to me; it belongs to my august father King Constantine, and, constitutionally, my eldest brother is his successor. Neither of them has ever renounced his rights, but both have been obliged to leave Greece in obedience to the dictates of their patriotic duty.&quot;

Prince Paul then went on to say that he could not ascend the throne in the existing circumstances. &quot;I would only ascend the throne if the Hellenic people were to decide that it did not want the return of my august father, and were to exclude the Crown Prince George from his right of succession.&quot;

This declaration by Prince Paul placed the government in a difficult position, and it soon became evident that there was a strong movement aiming at the restoration of King Constantine. Venizelos was quite prepared to face the issue, and the question of the return of King Constantine immediately became the real issue of the general election. Venizelos declared openly that if he and the Liberal Party were returned to power the result would be a condemnation of the claims of King Constantine. If, on the other hand, the opposition obtained a majority, he (Venizelos) would retire altogether from political life. The opposition leader came out openly in support of King Constantine.

==Georgios Streit Proclamation==
In the meantime a proclamation was issued by Georgios Streit from Luzern. Streit was King Constantine&#x27;s confidential adviser and had been foreign minister during the first part of the war when King Constantine was still on the Greek throne. Venizelos had stated that King Constantine and his advisers had undertaken obligations towards the Central Powers. In his proclamation Streit said that having been foreign minister he was in a position to give a formal denial to this statement. He said that King Constantine had undertaken before the war no engagement which could prevent the freedom of the foreign policy of the country. And that &quot;at no moment during the war was any obligation assumed by King Constantine to fight by the side of the Central Powers, or imposing upon Greece a neutral attitude.&quot;

==The General election==

The general election was duly held on November 1, delayed by the death and funeral of King Alexander. It had long been known to those who kept in contact with affairs in the Near East that the royalist People&#x27;s Party under the leadership of Dimitrios Gounaris had never ceased to be powerful. But the result of the general election, despite the fact that the Liberal Party polled over 7,000 more votes than the United Opposition, was a sweeping victory for the opposition which came as a surprise in Great Britain. The Liberals were badly defeated in almost all parts of the country, and in some provinces they were literally crushed. It was stated that in the Peloponnesus, in Thessaly, and in Macedonia, there was not a single Venizelist candidate elected. The opposition were returned with a majority of 151, having secured a total of 261 seats.

On the following day Venizelos tendered to the regent the resignation of the Liberal cabinet. A cabinet was then formed by the aged statesman Dimitrios Rallis, who thereupon requested Admiral Kountouriotis to resign the regency. The Dowager Queen Olga was then appointed regent, in the expectation that King Constantine would soon return to Greece. Rallis arranged, however, that before King Constantine was formally invited to return to the throne, a plebiscite upon the question should be held. Venizelos left Greece and went to France.

==Results of the election==
The result of the elections placed the Allied Powers in a somewhat difficult position. They had, of course, always favoured Venizelos, and they had certainly favoured Greece in the peace settlements. On the other hand, the Greek people appeared now to have given a decisive verdict in favour of the return of King Constantine. It was reported that the French government wished to forbid King Constantine to return. But the British and Italian governments were not in favour of placing the Allies in the position of appearing to oppose the declared wishes of the Greek people on a question which was primarily the concern of Greece. The result of these differences of opinion in the highest quarters was that a somewhat compromising proclamation was issued by the British, French, and Italian governments. The proclamation stated that the recall of King Constantine could only be regarded as a ratification by the Greek people of the actions of the king which had been hostile to the Allies. And the proclamation stated that the recall of the king would create an unfavourable situation between Greece and the Great Powers, and that in the event of that recall taking place the Great Powers would &quot;reserve to themselves complete liberty in dealing with the situation thus created.&quot;

This proclamation made the situation difficult for Rallis, but that statesman decided to proceed with the plebiscite. This second poll of the people was held on December 5.

It was stated on behalf of the Liberals that they would refrain from taking any part in the poll. They thus confessed beforehand that they anticipated defeat. It is doubtful whether the Liberals of the rank and file obeyed the orders of their leaders to refrain from the poll. The total number of votes cast in the plebiscite appears to have been greater than in the general election a few weeks earlier. It is more probable that the Liberals of the rank and file, like their compatriots of other parties, were in truth carried away by an enthusiasm – temporary or otherwise – to see the return of the royal exile. However this may have been, there was an enormous majority in favour of King Constantine. It was stated that 1,012,742 votes were cast and that of these 999,962 were in favour of King Constantine. After a result such as this only one course of action was possible, and Rallis formally invited King Constantine to return.

==Allied powers reply==
The Allied Powers took no definite steps to forbid this consummation, but they issued a declaration that King Constantine would not be recognized, and withdrawing the subsidies which Greece had been receiving from the Powers.

King Constantine and Queen Sophie left Switzerland, and arrived in Athens on December 19, their return to their capital being made the occasion for a tremendous demonstration of sympathy. King Constantine was received everywhere with immense enthusiasm.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4560903" start="48" end="62" title="1920 in Greece" label="1920 in Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="112" end="118" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="215" end="226" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q205545" start="305" end="326" title="Eleftherios Venizelos" label="Eleftherios Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840097" start="345" end="352" title="Monarchy of Greece" label="Monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q151742" start="357" end="365" title="Alexander of Greece" label="Alexader"/>
<link wikidata="Q152099" start="388" end="401" title="Constantine I of Greece" label="Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377230" start="427" end="441" title="Prime Minister of Greece" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q205545" start="446" end="467" title="Eleftherios Venizelos" label="Eleftherios Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q209144" start="491" end="507" title="Dimitrios Rallis" label="Dimitrios Rallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35997" start="651" end="657" title="İzmir" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="788" end="794" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="821" end="829" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="970" end="980" title="Edirne" label="Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q151742" start="1175" end="1184" title="Alexander of Greece" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q240442" start="1237" end="1247" title="Aspasia Manos" label="Mlle Manos"/>
<link wikidata="Q152099" start="1609" end="1620" title="Constantine I of Greece" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q646284" start="4302" end="4315" title="National Garden of Athens" label="Royal Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q155822" start="4835" end="4850" title="Sophia of Prussia" label="ex-Queen Sophie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="4877" end="4898" title="Wilhelm II of Germany" label="Wilhelm II of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q240442" start="5056" end="5069" title="Aspasia Manos" label="Aspasia Manos"/>
<link wikidata="Q155394" start="5548" end="5552" title="Paul of Greece" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q374655" start="6101" end="6121" title="Pavlos Kountouriotis" label="Pavlos Kountouriotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q367672" start="8953" end="8968" title="Georgios Streit" label="Georgios Streit"/>
<link wikidata="Q782419" start="9956" end="9975" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Greece)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q209529" start="10000" end="10018" title="Dimitrios Gounaris" label="Dimitrios Gounaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q937927" start="10118" end="10131" title="Liberal Party (Greece)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="10420" end="10432" title="Peloponnesus" label="Peloponnesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="10437" end="10445" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="10454" end="10463" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564160" start="10488" end="10498" title="Venizelism" label="Venizelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q209144" start="10751" end="10767" title="Dimitrios Rallis" label="Dimitrios Rallis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="611020" wikidata="Q5184931" url="?curid=611020" title="Crick, Brenner et al. experiment">
<text>The Crick, Brenner et al. experiment (1961) was a scientific experiment performed by Francis Crick, Sydney Brenner, Leslie Barnett and R.J. Watts-Tobin.
It was a key experiment in the development of what is now known as molecular biology and led to a publication entitled &quot;The General Nature of the Genetic Code for Proteins&quot; and according to the historian of Science Horace Judson is &quot;regarded...as a classic of intellectual clarity, precision and rigour&quot;. This study demonstrated that the genetic code is made up of a series of three base pair codons which code for individual amino acids. The experiment also elucidated the nature of gene expression and frame-shift mutations.

==The experiment==

In the experiment, proflavin-induced mutations of the T4 bacteriophage gene, rIIB, were isolated. Proflavin causes mutations by inserting itself between DNA bases, typically resulting in insertion or deletion of a single base pair.

Through the use of proflavin, the experimenters were able to insert or delete base pairs into their sequence of interest. When nucleotides were inserted or deleted, the gene would often be nonfunctional. However, if three base pairs were added or deleted, the gene would remain functional. This proved that the genetic code uses a codon of three nucleotide bases that corresponds to an amino acid. The mutants produced by Crick and Brenner that could not produce functional rIIB protein were the results of frameshift mutations, where the triplet code was disrupted.

Brenner and Crick et al. were also able to correct their frameshift mutations through the use of proflavin. If they had a nonfunctional gene due to a deleted base pair, by inserting a base pair into the general area of the deleted one, they were able to rescue the function of the gene. This is because the bases were shifted back into the correct reading frame. 

In addition to discovering the triplet nature of the codon, this experiment confirmed the non-overlapping structure of the genetic code, identified the presence of &quot;nonsense coding&quot;, and revealed the high degree of degeneracy in codon specification.

==Implications==

This demonstration of the triplet nature of the genetic code, although carried out with bacteriophage, later proved to be universally applicable to all forms of life.

Decades after its execution, the experiment remains a beacon of inspiration for scientists with its eloquent argumentation and straightforward yet impactful experiments, revealing fundamental insights into living organism organization. The results of this experiment inspired many to begin decoding the triplet code discovered by Brenner and Crick et al. Once this paper was published in 1961, researchers knew that there are 64 possible triplet codons, since there are four nitrogenous bases (4 x 4 x 4 = 64). Today, scientists have decoded what all 64 codons encode for, and the assignments have proven to be nearly universal.

==See also==
*Nirenberg and Leder experiment
*Nirenberg and Matthaei experiment

== References ==
==Notes==
*Sydney Brenner (author), Lewis Wolpert (contributor), Errorl C. Friedberg (contributor), Eleanor Lawrence (contributor). 2001. My Life in Science: Sydney Brenner, A Life in Science. Biomed Central Ltd (publisher) 
*Horace Freedland Judson (author). 1979. The Eighth Day of Creation. Johnathan Cape (publisher) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5184931" start="4" end="36" title="Crick, Brenner et al. experiment" label="Crick, Brenner et al. experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="50" end="71" title="scientific experiment" label="scientific experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q123280" start="85" end="98" title="Francis Crick" label="Francis Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q234463" start="100" end="114" title="Sydney Brenner" label="Sydney Brenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435" start="116" end="130" title="Leslie Barnett" label="Leslie Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="511" end="523" title="genetic code" label="genetic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="566" end="571" title="codon" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="599" end="610" title="amino acids" label="amino acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="657" end="672" title="gene expression" label="gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440688" start="677" end="697" title="frame-shift mutation" label="frame-shift mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q420454" start="740" end="749" title="proflavin" label="proflavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="758" end="766" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q913706" start="775" end="777" title="T4 phage" label="T4"/>
<link wikidata="Q165028" start="778" end="791" title="bacteriophage" label="bacteriophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q422960" start="874" end="882" title="DNA base" label="DNA base"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="1285" end="1290" title="codon" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="1340" end="1350" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440688" start="1461" end="1480" title="frameshift mutation" label="frameshift mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="1706" end="1715" title="base pair" label="base pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q923372" start="1870" end="1883" title="reading frame" label="reading frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039953" start="2978" end="3008" title="Nirenberg and Leder experiment" label="Nirenberg and Leder experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102711" start="3010" end="3043" title="Nirenberg and Matthaei experiment" label="Nirenberg and Matthaei experiment"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="611022" wikidata="Q827173" url="?curid=611022" title="Berry Islands">
<text>The Berry Islands are a chain of islands and a district of the Bahamas, covering about of the northwestern part of the Out Islands.

The Berry Islands consist of about thirty islands and over one hundred small islands or cays, often referred to as &quot;The Fish Bowl of the Bahamas.&quot; They have a population of 807 (2010 census), most of whom are on Great Harbour Cay. The islands were settled in 1836 by Governor William Colebrooke with a group of freed slaves.

==Attractions==
The Berry islands are still relatively undeveloped, with two small regional airports and no hotels, but do have townhouses and beach villas for rent for visitors. Most of the islands are uninhabited, but are strikingly beautiful. During the winter season the islands are visited by out-of-town guests and second home residents, but the difficulty of reaching the Berry Islands and the lack of infrastructure keeps things low-key. Due to seasonal residents, the Berry islands can say that they have more resident millionaires per unit area than any other place in the world.

The main attraction is big game fishing. Some of the fish that can be found there are billfish, tuna, grouper, tiger fish, yellowtail snapper, wahoo, king mackerel, and many more. In May, Great Harbour Cay is packed with visitors and fishing captains who go there for the annual fishing tournament. There are also great spots for snorkelling and scuba diving.

===Islands===

Great Harbour Cay is the most northern and the largest of the Berry Islands. It is long and wide. The largest port of the Berries is on Great Harbour Cay. It is served by Great Harbour Cay Airport.

Chub Cay, site of Chub Cay International Airport, is the second largest island in the chain and is known as &quot;the billfish capital of the Bahamas.&quot;

Little Stirrup Cay is leased by Royal Caribbean International, which calls it CocoCay, and acts as a private island for tropical activities engaged in by visitors on its cruise ships of the Royal Caribbean and Celebrity Cruises labels. Great Stirrup Cay is owned by Norwegian Cruise Line and is used for similar purposes.

Cistern Cay is a private island located next to Great Harbour Cay.

Little Whale Cay a private island that was developed as residence by Wallace Groves in the 1930s. It is served by the Lt. Whale Cay Airport.

== Politics ==
For elections to the Parliament of the Bahamas, the district is part of the North Andros and Berry Islands constituency.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q827173" start="4" end="17" title="Berry Islands" label="Berry Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052753" start="47" end="55" title="Districts of the Bahamas" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="63" end="70" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111449" start="119" end="130" title="Out Islands" label="Out Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="175" end="181" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q503481" start="221" end="224" title="cay" label="cay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="302" end="312" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q5672275" start="355" end="372" title="Great Harbour Cay" label="Great Harbour Cay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568806" start="410" end="437" title="William MacBean George Colebrooke" label="Governor William Colebrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="460" end="466" title="slavery" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555979" start="1087" end="1099" title="game fishing" label="game fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620149" start="1146" end="1154" title="billfish" label="billfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="1156" end="1160" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559352" start="1162" end="1169" title="grouper" label="grouper"/>
<link wikidata="Q14606996" start="1171" end="1181" title="tiger fish" label="tiger fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q849160" start="1183" end="1201" title="Lutjanidae" label="yellowtail snapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q614252" start="1203" end="1208" title="wahoo" label="wahoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q311058" start="1210" end="1223" title="king mackerel" label="king mackerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q500834" start="1347" end="1357" title="tournament" label="tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471422" start="1390" end="1401" title="snorkelling" label="snorkelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="1406" end="1418" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q5672275" start="1436" end="1453" title="Great Harbour Cay" label="Great Harbour Cay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914468" start="1607" end="1632" title="Great Harbour Cay Airport" label="Great Harbour Cay Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q14206632" start="1635" end="1643" title="Chub Cay" label="Chub Cay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115240" start="1653" end="1683" title="Chub Cay International Airport" label="Chub Cay International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620149" start="1753" end="1761" title="billfish" label="billfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10645506" start="1793" end="1811" title="Little Stirrup Cay" label="Little Stirrup Cay"/>
<link wikidata="Q929872" start="1825" end="1854" title="Royal Caribbean International" label="Royal Caribbean International"/>
<link wikidata="Q10645506" start="1871" end="1878" title="CocoCay" label="CocoCay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052823" start="2003" end="2020" title="Celebrity Cruises" label="Celebrity Cruises"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600038" start="2029" end="2046" title="Great Stirrup Cay" label="Great Stirrup Cay"/>
<link wikidata="Q130309" start="2059" end="2080" title="Norwegian Cruise Line" label="Norwegian Cruise Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q827173" start="2116" end="2127" title="Cistern Cay" label="Cistern Cay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652471" start="2184" end="2200" title="Little Whale Cay" label="Little Whale Cay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012081" start="2253" end="2267" title="Wallace Groves" label="Wallace Groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q12693635" start="2302" end="2323" title="Lt. Whale Cay Airport" label="Lt. Whale Cay Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572486" start="2362" end="2387" title="Parliament of the Bahamas" label="Parliament of the Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131152359" start="2417" end="2447" title="North Andros and Berry Islands" label="North Andros and Berry Islands"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="611024" wikidata="Q5632763" url="?curid=611024" title="HMS Hermione (F58)">
<text>HMS &quot;Hermione&quot; (F58) was a &quot;Leander&quot;-class frigate of the Royal Navy (RN). She was, like the rest of her class, named after a figure of mythology. &quot;Hermione&quot; was built by Alexander Stephen and Sons, though she was completed by Yarrow Shipbuilders. She was launched on 26 April 1967 and commissioned on 11 July 1969.

==Operational service==
In 1970, &quot;Hermione&quot; deployed to the Far East and Pacific visiting a variety of places and performing a number of duties. &quot;Hermione&quot; became quite used to such warm climates during the 1970s. In 1977 &quot;Hermione&quot;, as leader of the 5th Frigate Squadron, took part in the Fleet Review of the Royal Navy, in celebration of HM the Queen&#x27;s Silver Jubilee.

In January 1980, &quot;Hermione&quot; began her modernisation programme, which included the addition of the Sea Wolf missile and the Exocet anti-ship missile, which forced the removal of &quot;Hermione&#x27;s&quot; twin 4.5 in guns. The modernisation was completed in 1983 at Chatham Naval Dockyard, and &quot;Hermione&quot; was the last ship to leave when the dockyard closed. Upon the completion of her modernisation, &quot;Hermione&quot; joined the 8th Frigate Squadron. &quot;Hermione&quot; saw service in the Middle East, also being involved in the so-called &#x27;Tanker War&#x27; during the Iran–Iraq War. In 1991, &quot;Hermione&quot; returned to the Middle East on an Armilla Patrol deployment, but in the following year &quot;Hermione&quot; was decommissioned and in 1997 she was sold to India for scrap.

The ship also enjoyed fame on BBC TV, through starring as &quot;HMS &quot;Hero&quot;&quot; in the acclaimed drama series &quot;Warship&quot;. All members of the crew were given &quot;HMS &quot;Hero&quot;&quot; cap tallies for filming purposes. The main ship used for filming was, however, HMS &quot;Phoebe&quot;.

==Notable commanders==
Notable commanders of the ship include Robert Squires (1971), Peter Stanford (1974–75) and John McAnally (1989).

==References==
==Publications==
* Marriott, Leo, 1983. &quot;Royal Navy Frigates 1945-1983&quot;, Ian Allan Ltd, Surrey.

==External links==
* HMS Hermione Association website 
* &quot;Warship&quot; Episode Guide
* British Film Institute site on &quot;Warship&quot;
* Royal Navy leaflet on &quot;Warship&quot;, from the HMS Phoebe Association website
* Comments on &quot;Warship&quot; by series Director Michael Briant
* Webpage (at Home &gt; Scriptwriting &gt; Warship) about Michael J Bird&#x27;s scripts for &quot;Warship&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5632763" start="0" end="30" title="HMS Hermione (F58)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Hermione&amp;quot; (F58)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810627" start="37" end="62" title="Leander class frigate" label="&amp;quot;Leander&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="78" end="88" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q658523" start="144" end="165" title="Hermione (mythology)" label="a figure of mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q617597" start="201" end="227" title="Alexander Stephen and Sons" label="Alexander Stephen and Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q932897" start="257" end="276" title="Yarrow Shipbuilders" label="Yarrow Shipbuilders"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="417" end="425" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="430" end="437" title="Pacific" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970280" start="628" end="648" title="5th Frigate Squadron (United Kingdom)" label="5th Frigate Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275749" start="667" end="679" title="Fleet Review" label="Fleet Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="717" end="736" title="Elizabeth II" label="HM the Queen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461272" start="862" end="878" title="Sea Wolf missile" label="Sea Wolf missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q150570" start="887" end="893" title="Exocet" label="Exocet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068204" start="1030" end="1052" title="Chatham Dockyard" label="Chatham Naval Dockyard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1206" end="1226" title="8th Frigate Squadron" label="8th Frigate Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="1268" end="1279" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1324" end="1334" title="Iran–Iraq War#Attacks on shipping" label="Tanker War"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="1352" end="1365" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793449" start="1431" end="1445" title="Armilla Patrol" label="Armilla Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1552" end="1557" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1600" end="1603" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564814" start="1634" end="1654" title="HMS Hero" label="HMS &amp;quot;Hero&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q151370" start="1697" end="1704" title="Warship (1973 TV series)" label="Warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564814" start="1753" end="1773" title="HMS Hero" label="HMS &amp;quot;Hero&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633770" start="1859" end="1881" title="HMS Phoebe (F42)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Phoebe&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349972" start="1946" end="1960" title="Robert Squires" label="Robert Squires"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177075" start="1969" end="1983" title="Peter Stanford (Royal Navy officer)" label="Peter Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247377" start="1998" end="2011" title="John McAnally" label="John McAnally"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="611032" wikidata="Q1191557" url="?curid=611032" title="Ikedaya incident">
<text>The , also known as the Ikedaya affair or Ikedaya riot, was an armed encounter between the &quot;shishi&quot; which included masterless samurai (&quot;rōnin&quot;) formally employed by the Chōshū, Tosa and Higo domains (han), and the Shinsengumi, the Bakufu&#x27;s special police force in Kyoto on July 8, 1864, at the Ikedaya Inn in Sanjō-Kawaramachi, Kyoto, Japan.

==History==
At the end of the Edo period, Kyoto attracted unemployed &quot;rōnin&quot; of varying allegiances. Those from the Chōshū, Tosa and Higo clans were heavily influenced by the sonnō jōi (revere the Emperor, expel the foreign barbarians) philosophy and supported forcibly removing all western influences from Japan. Emperor Kōmei and the Aizu and Satsuma clans preferred a unification of the bakufu and the imperial court. The bakufu tried to retain their centralized power. In this political chaos, ronin from the various factions began to assassinate each other. The bakufu organized groups of ronin including Shinsengumi and charged them with arresting or killing (should they resist arrest) the &quot;sonnō jōi&quot; shishi.

The shishi were using the Ikedaya Inn as a staging point for their forces. The Shinsengumi arrested one of the shishi, Furutaka Shuntarō, for being a member of an anti-Shogunate group, triggering the Ikedaya incident. Furutaka had a strong relationship with the Chōshū clans, and wanted to build trust with Mōri, a member of the court, in order to take power. There are some other theories about the cause of Furutaka&#x27;s arrest. One is that Teshiro Toshisuke resented Furutaka due to a dispute over the inheritance of Masuya, and his report of Furutaka&#x27;s location to the Shinsengumi led to his capture.

The interrogation carried out by Shinsengumi vice-commander Hijikata Toshizō was alleged to be particularly brutal, although there is no proof of this. With the prisoner unresponsive, Hijikata was said to have suspended him by his ankles, restraining his wrists, and driving five-inch spikes into the heels of his feet. Lit candles were placed in the holes, so that hot wax dripped all over his calves. Furutaka eventually claimed that they planned to set fires in Kyoto and Matsudaira Katamori, the &quot;daimyō&quot; of the Aizu clan whose duties included policing Kyoto at the time.

Another version of the confession claims that Furutaka planned to burn Prince Kuni Asahiko with Kawamura Hanzō and Otaka Matajirō. Also, he revealed that many of the Chōshū retainers were hiding out in the Gion district. The urgency of the situation thus revealed, Kondō Isami led a group of Shinsengumi troops to the inn to arrest the shishi; a second group led by Hijikata arrived shortly thereafter.

Historians are divided as to whether the shishi were actually preparing to set fire to Kyoto. The allegations were based on a confession of one prisoner (Furutaka) under torture, and only appear in the records of the bakufu. Because of the arrest, the Chōshū retainers decided to gather at Ikedaya, and they tried to take countermeasures. Some of them thought they should attack a garrison of Shinsengumi and recapture Furutaka. However, almost everyone agreed to exercise prudence. Yoshida Toshimaro and Miyabe Teizō decided to hold a meeting to convince those who wanted to act immediately and change their minds to act prudently. Katsura Kogorō (later Kido Takayoshi) who was at the Ikedaya claimed many years later that they had only met to discuss how to rescue Furukata from the Shinsengumi.

Whether or not Hijikata actually employed such a cruel interrogation method is also in some doubt, as conflicting reports from those in attendance (such as Nagakura Shinpachi) exist. Some feel that if Hijikata had really tortured Furutaka so severely, he would have passed out and would not have been able to make a statement. Some popular fiction, like the account in &quot;Moeyoken&quot; (a novel by Shiba Ryōtarō) seems to ignore Hijikata&#x27;s potential participation.

=== Combat ===
The incident happened the day before the Gion Festival. Shinsengumi knew about 20 hiding places of shishi, and they started the search of shishi around 7 p.m.

A total of 34 people in the Shinsengumi joined this incident. They were divided into two groups. The Kondō group had 10 people and the Hijikata group had 24 people. Further, Hijikata&#x27;s group was separated into two groups. It was designed so that they could act flexibly. Tani, Asano, and Takeda watched the front entrance, and Okuzawa, Andō, and Nitta watched the back entrance. According to Kondo, he entered Ikedaya with Okita, Nagakura, Tōdō, and Shūhei. In contrast, Nagakura mentions that Kondō entered with Okita, Nagakura, and Tōdō. There is a viewpoint that their statements were different because Shūhei was an adopted child of Kondō, and Kondō wanted to emphasize the success of his adopted son. The Kondō group noticed that there were guns and spears in the entrance, so they tied them with a rope. In Ikedaya, there were around 20 people from Chōshū clans.

This incident is commonly portrayed as having unfolded in the dark, but in fact parts of the inn were moderately lit. Kondō tried to induce shishi to come down to the 1st floor because there was a light called &quot;Hachiken&quot; that illuminated 14.5 meters down the hallway. Nagakura got injured on his hand, and his sword was broken, so he robbed the sword of an enemy. Tōdō had difficulty fighting because he was cut in the middle of the forehead and his blood got in his eyes. After a while, Tōdō left from the combat, so Kondō and Nagakura remained in the Ikedaya Inn. Kondō wanted to help Nagakura, but there were many enemies around him, so he could not help. It is commonly believed that more than 20 members of the Hijikata group rushed all at once, but according to Kondō, the members of the Hijikata group arrived at Ikedaya one after another. Kondō wrote that the battle time was about two hours and ended around 12 o&#x27;clock.

There are two theories of Katsura Kogorō regarding where he was or what he did at the time of the incident. One is that he was in Ikedaya when the incident happened. However, he immediately escaped by running down the roof and he entered the Tsushima mansion, so he survived. The second theory is that before the incident happened, he went to Ikedaya, but found that nobody was there. So, he left Ikedaya thinking to come back later. He was staying in the Tsushima mansion when the incident happened.

Sugiyama Matsusuke who was in the Chōshū mansion, worried about Katsura when he heard about the incident, and he tried to go to Ikedaya. However, he encountered with enemies on the way to Ikedaya, and he was seriously injured on his arm, and he came back to the Chōshū mansion.

More than half of the shishi escaped from the back entrance, and people who were killed inside of Ikedaya were Miyabe Teizō, Ōtaka Matajirō, Yoshida Toshimaro and Fukuoka Yūjirō. Miyabe continued fighting, but he committed harakiri in the end. Yoshida committed suicide in front of the entrance of the Chōshū mansion. On the other hand, there is the theory that Yoshida was killed in front of a liquor store near the Kaga mansion.

===Aftermath===
After the incident, the area around Ikedaya was crowded. Many messengers from lords went to visit the Chōshū mansion to nurse injured people back to health. The next morning, the house of Sakamoto Ryōma was attacked. Shinsengumi continued hunting surviving warriors with the Aizu clan. They stayed up all night hunting, and they came back to a garrison at noon, their clothes smeared with blood. A total of eight shishi were killed and twenty-three arrested, Ikedaya Sôbe&#x27;s family and relatives were also arrested. The Shinsengumi lost only one member in the battle, though two more members later died of injuries. Amongst those injured in the battle were Nagakura Shinpachi and Tōdō Heisuke. It was also said that the later captain of the first Shinsengumi unit Okita Sōji coughed up blood and collapsed during the affair (the cause of which is disputed among researchers, some believe it was due to the tuberculosis which eventually killed him, while others believe it was some other ailment). Okita, Tōdō, and Nagakura recovered in a few days.

Sôbe was arrested because he tried to escape captured shishi by unwinding the rope. The Shinsengumi thought that Sôbe supported Chōshū clans. In prison, he could not bear the torture, and he died on July 13. Dead were sent to the Sanryokuji Temple. A few days later, the maid of Ikedaya was asked to examine the dead bodies and identify them. Furutaka thought the incident happened because of his testimony, so he spent his life with a depressing feeling. Katsura did not go back to the Chōshū mansion after the incident. He believed that the incident happened because some people from Chōshū clans revealed a secret meeting in Ikedaya to the shogunate. He was afraid that his secret would be revealed by some people from Chōshū clans.

This incident made it clear to all that the Shinsengumi were a powerful force in Kyoto to be feared by the &quot;sonnō jōi&quot; &quot;rōnin&quot;. Also, the incident proved the ability to collect information, the detective ability, and the combat ability of Shinsengumi. Aizu clans praised Shinsengumi, and they gave around 500 ryō, and the imperial court gave about 100 ryō to Shinsengumi. Since the incident happened, people from Chōshū clans tended to be arrested without investigation of Shinsengumi. According to Nomi, Shinsengumi arrested even though elderly people were from Kii province and did not know about politics and circumstance.

Some historians credit this incident with delaying the eventual Meiji victory by a year or two, whereas others claim it actually hastened the fall of the bakufu by triggering a cascade of bloody retaliations and assassinations. After the Ikedaya incident, the samurai of the Choshu clan retaliated at the Hamaguri Gate of the Imperial Palace on July 19 in the Kinmon incident. Furukata himself was later killed in jail during that incident. The Shogunate followed up with an armed expedition in September 1864.

As for the Ikedaya itself, the inn stopped operating for seven months, after which the inn resumed under one of the owner&#x27;s relatives, but later went out of business. The Ikedaya Inn was later taken over by the new owner.

==Present==
In 1960, the inn was torn down and a two story commercial building was built on its former site. For many years a pachinko parlor sat on the grounds of the Ikedaya, with the only remnant being a stone memorial tablet relating the events that occurred on the site.

In 2009, Chimney Group opened a restaurant named &quot;Ikedaya Hana no Mai&quot; on the site, designed and decorated with an Ikeda-ya Shinsengumi/Bakumatsu theme including extensive exhibits and dioramas.

== Member list of Shinsengumi ==

The Kondō group (10 people)

* Kondō Isami
* Okita Sōji
* Nagakura Shinpachi
* Tōdō Heisuke
* Tani Mantarō
* Asano Tōtarō
* Takeda Kanryūsai
* Okuzawa Eisuke
* Andō Hayatarō
* Nitta Kakuzaemon

The Hijikata group (24 people)

* Hijikata Toshizō
* Inoue Genzaburō
* Harada Sanosuke
* Saitō Hajime
* Sasazuka Minezō
* Hayashi Shintarō
* Shimada Kai
* Kawashima Katsuji
* Katsurayama Takehachirō
* Tani Sanjūrō
* Mishina Chūji
* Aridōshi Kango
* Matsubara Chūji
* Iki Hachirō
* Nakamura Kingo
* Ozeki Yashirō
* Shukuin Ryozō
* Sasaki Kuranosuke
* Kawai Kisaburō
* Sakai Hyōgo
* Kiuchi Mineta
* Matsumoto Kijirō
* Takeuchi Gentarō
* Kōndō Shūhei

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1191557" start="24" end="38" title="Ikedaya incident" label="Ikedaya affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191557" start="42" end="54" title="Ikedaya incident" label="Ikedaya riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279517" start="91" end="109" title="Shishi (organization)" label="&amp;quot;shishi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="136" end="143" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q212418" start="151" end="156" title="rōnin" label="rōnin"/>
<link wikidata="Q876267" start="189" end="195" title="Chōshū Domain" label="Chōshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189704" start="197" end="201" title="Tosa Domain" label="Tosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194248" start="206" end="210" title="Higo Domain" label="Higo"/>
<link wikidata="Q841985" start="220" end="223" title="Han (Japan)" label="han"/>
<link wikidata="Q221031" start="234" end="245" title="Shinsengumi" label="Shinsengumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="251" end="257" title="Bakufu" label="Bakufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8100696" start="265" end="279" title="special police" label="special police"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="289" end="294" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="360" end="365" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="398" end="408" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q876267" start="494" end="500" title="Chōshū Domain" label="Chōshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189704" start="502" end="506" title="Tosa Domain" label="Tosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194248" start="511" end="515" title="Higo Domain" label="Higo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065356" start="553" end="562" title="sonnō jōi" label="sonnō jōi"/>
<link wikidata="Q299179" start="692" end="705" title="Emperor Kōmei" label="Emperor Kōmei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205071" start="714" end="718" title="Aizu" label="Aizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q676187" start="723" end="730" title="Satsuma Domain" label="Satsuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q221031" start="988" end="999" title="Shinsengumi" label="Shinsengumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065356" start="1081" end="1090" title="sonnō jōi" label="sonnō jōi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1225" end="1242" title="Furutaka Shuntarō" label="Furutaka Shuntarō"/>
<link wikidata="Q876267" start="1368" end="1374" title="Chōshū Domain" label="Chōshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q701182" start="1779" end="1795" title="Hijikata Toshizō" label="Hijikata Toshizō"/>
<link wikidata="Q569441" start="2194" end="2213" title="Matsudaira Katamori" label="Matsudaira Katamori"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="2225" end="2231" title="daimyō" label="daimyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205071" start="2245" end="2249" title="Aizu" label="Aizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="2250" end="2254" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370435" start="2384" end="2396" title="Prince Kuni Asahiko" label="Kuni Asahiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q467334" start="2571" end="2582" title="Kondō Isami" label="Kondō Isami"/>
<link wikidata="Q876267" start="2962" end="2968" title="Chōshū Domain" label="Chōshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q221031" start="3103" end="3114" title="Shinsengumi" label="Shinsengumi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3193" end="3210" title="Yoshida Toshimaro" label="Yoshida Toshimaro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3215" end="3227" title="Miyabe Teizō" label="Miyabe Teizō"/>
<link wikidata="Q696402" start="3343" end="3357" title="Katsura Kogorō" label="Katsura Kogorō"/>
<link wikidata="Q701764" start="3665" end="3683" title="Nagakura Shinpachi" label="Nagakura Shinpachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087887" start="3911" end="3924" title="Shiba Ryōtarō" label="Shiba Ryōtarō"/>
<link wikidata="Q979873" start="4040" end="4053" title="Gion Matsuri" label="Gion Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q876267" start="5019" end="5025" title="Chōshū Domain" label="Chōshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q696402" start="6005" end="6019" title="Kido Takayoshi" label="Katsura Kogorō"/>
<link wikidata="Q876267" start="7062" end="7068" title="Chōshū Domain" label="Chōshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q378450" start="7396" end="7410" title="Sakamoto Ryōma" label="Sakamoto Ryōma"/>
<link wikidata="Q701764" start="7869" end="7887" title="Nagakura Shinpachi" label="Nagakura Shinpachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q706316" start="7892" end="7904" title="Tōdō Heisuke" label="Tōdō Heisuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q267549" start="7976" end="7986" title="Okita Sōji" label="Okita Sōji"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="8118" end="8130" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065356" start="9111" end="9120" title="sonnō jōi" label="sonnō jōi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057942" start="9327" end="9330" title="ryō" label="ryō"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057942" start="9370" end="9373" title="ryō" label="ryō"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="9709" end="9714" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q139871" start="10005" end="10020" title="Kinmon incident" label="Kinmon incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093787" start="10117" end="10136" title="First Chōshū expedition" label="an armed expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q836661" start="10511" end="10519" title="pachinko" label="pachinko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375504" start="10598" end="10613" title="memorial tablet" label="memorial tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q467334" start="10933" end="10944" title="Kondō Isami" label="Kondō Isami"/>
<link wikidata="Q267549" start="10947" end="10957" title="Okita Sōji" label="Okita Sōji"/>
<link wikidata="Q701764" start="10960" end="10978" title="Nagakura Shinpachi" label="Nagakura Shinpachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q706316" start="10981" end="10993" title="Tōdō Heisuke" label="Tōdō Heisuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q701182" start="11130" end="11146" title="Hijikata Toshizō" label="Hijikata Toshizō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039195" start="11149" end="11164" title="Inoue Genzaburō" label="Inoue Genzaburō"/>
<link wikidata="Q637568" start="11167" end="11182" title="Harada Sanosuke" label="Harada Sanosuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q138256" start="11185" end="11197" title="Saitō Hajime" label="Saitō Hajime"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="611036" wikidata="Q2637222" url="?curid=611036" title="Aesara">
<text>Aesara of Lucania ( &quot;Aisara&quot;) (&quot;fl.&quot; 400BC - 300BC) was a conjectured Pythagorean philosopher who may have written &quot;On Human Nature&quot;, a fragment of which is preserved by Stobaeus, although the majority of critical scholars follow Holger Thesleff in attributing it to Aresas, a male writer from Lucania who is also mentioned by Iamblichus in his &quot;Life of Pythagoras&quot;. 

== &quot;On Human Nature&quot; ==

The full text of Aesara&#x27;s exposition of the On Human Nature is:

Human nature seems to me to provide a standard of law and justice both for the home and for the city. By following the tracks within himself whoever seeks will make a discovery: law is in him and justice, which is the orderly arrangement of the soul. Being threefold, it is organized in accordance with triple functions: that which effects thoughtfulness is [the mind], that which effects strength and ability is [high spirit], and all that effects love and kindliness is desire. These are all so disposed relatively to one another, that the best part is in command, the most inferior is governed, and the one in between holds a middle place; it both governs and is governed.

The writing asserts that the soul had three parts: the mind, the spirit, and desire. These three forces work in harmony, interacting in different ways for the achievement of different tasks. 

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2637222" start="0" end="17" title="Aesara" label="Aesara of Lucania"/>
<link wikidata="Q191359" start="90" end="101" title="Pythagoreanism" label="Pythagorean"/>
<link wikidata="Q444079" start="200" end="208" title="Stobaeus" label="Stobaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28857172" start="297" end="303" title="Aresas" label="Aresas"/>
<link wikidata="Q310916" start="357" end="367" title="Iamblichus" label="Iamblichus"/>
</links>
</doc>
